American Sign Language III (ASL f311D)
Course Syllabus
Department of Linguistics
University of Texas at Austin
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/linguistics/asl_program/ASL-Program.php
Lecturer: Michael F. Wynne, Jr.                       Class Hours: M/W/F 8:30a – 11:00a
Date: Summer 2020 (Session I)                         Office Location/Hours: By appointment
E-mail: mwynnejr@mac.com                              online
Course Number: 81074
Location: Online (Canvas)
Course Description: In this course we focus on maintaining and building upon a student’s
intermediate ASL skills. We aim to develop intermediate high to advanced low language
proficiency (refer to ACTFL Standards for more information: http://www.actfl.org) in ASL.
Grammar coverage includes complex constructions that involve the signing space, and
vocabulary building includes comparisons between English words and ASL signs in order for the
learner to make appropriate vocabulary choices in their ASL production. Complex questions
facing the contemporary Deaf community are discussed.
Course Goals:
This course is intended to support a student’s ability to achieve the following by the end of the
semester:
    a. manage an advanced vocabulary in ASL, with particular focus on signs for
        communicating information about family life, home life, facts of life, personal health, and
        current events
    b. manage advanced grammatical structures in ASL, including the use of manual (i.e., the
        hands) and non-manual (i.e., the torso, face, etc.) features
    c. comprehend and produce extended dialogues and narratives produced in ASL
    d. manage use of ASL in various situations, from colloquial use to academic use
Expectations of students entering ASL 311D:
Students are expected to enter this course with a working knowledge of:
    • Vocabulary and grammatical knowledge necessary to introduce yourself and exchange
        basic personal information including everyday activities, routines, living situations, home
        life, etc. (Units 1-12)
    • Cardinal numbers 1-100 and numerical incorporation, i.e. money, time of day, etc.
        (various units)
    • Make requests/complaints, offer suggestions/assistance with various tasks (various units)
    • Understand the use of specific grammatical features in ASL including an in-depth
        understanding of signer perspective/signer space and use of Classifiers to depict ideas/
        concepts visually (various units)
    • Recall and be able to correctly implement glossing strategies
If you feel you have weaknesses in any of these areas, it is your responsibility to review your
beginning ASL materials (corresponding to the units and lessons noted above in your Signing
Naturally texts) as soon as possible. Consider working with classmates who feel comfortable
with the material if necessary.


Recommended/Required Materials:
     • Signing Naturally Level 3 (Yellow Book): Dawn Sign Press (2nd edition, 2001) (Optional)
     • Marco Polo Video Chat Application on a mobile device
     • Access to Canvas
Course Requirements and Weights:
     A. Video Projects/Online Learning Activities/Peer Evaluations (5): 30%
     B. Weekly Quizzes (3): 30%
     C. Final Capstone Project (Video & Discussion Board Activity): 30%
     D. Electronic Portfolio: 10%
     No extra credit will be offered.
A. Video Projects/Online Learning Activities
To encourage the development of productive language skills, this course includes having to
develop videos that will allow you to demonstrate appropriate mastery of specific skills through
different topics. These videos will be evaluated through instructor based evaluations as well as
peer evaluations. For more information on when specific video projects are due refer to the
course schedule below. Video projects will also be supported by Online Learning Activities,
these are designed to encourage language practice through means of video technology.
B. Weekly Quizzes (Receptive Listening Skills)
Quizzes in this course will primarily test your comprehension of material covered in class during
that specific week, they may or may not consist of all of the following:
             1. Comprehension: These are based mostly on a student’s ability to understand ASL
                 used in a specific context. Questions might also be based on the understanding
                 of information from the Signing Naturally course materials posted online or
                 videos made by ASL faculty members or linguistic information discussed in
                 class.
             2. Culture: there may be questions that are based on in-class discussions related to
                 Deaf Culture.
Make-ups for quizzes will not be allowed. If you miss a quiz, you will earn zero points for that
assignment. More information on the quiz format will be provided in class, but it is entirely done
on Canvas.
C. Final Capstone Project (Video & Presentation)
The final capstone project for this course consists of a final project discussing a specific current
event that is currently covered in the news. Your goal is to produce a formal video on a current
event topic to share with the class. This project encourages the use of Academic ASL to present
specific content to an audience. More information about this project will be provided in class.
D. Electronic Portfolio
Throughout this course each student will create and maintain an electronic portfolio of select
assignments.     The portfolio will also include self- and peer-evaluations of progress and
descriptions of the portfolio for the instructor. Much of the content will be produced in ASL,
although there will be some written information included. Students are required to create and
maintain a portfolio through which the instructor can monitor their progress. Due dates for
specific parts of the portfolio will be provided as they approach, and the complete portfolio
evaluation will be due at the end of the course semester. Additional details will be provided in
class.


Attendance:
While this course will be conducted entirely online, and class meetings will occur on Mondays as
noted in the course schedule, with the exception of a Friday meeting during the first week of
class. Attendance for any online Zoom sessions with your instructor is required, absences from
any of these sessions equate to a whole letter grade reduction (i.e. from an A to a B). Subsequent
absences will result in a letter grade reduction for each absence thereafter (if you started with an
A the first absence brings you to a B, for each absence after that, B-, C+, C, C- and so on).
After the first 5 minutes of any class session on Zoom and up to the first 15 minutes equates to a
tardy, the same can be said of early departures at the same amount of time at the end of class time.
2 Tardies/Early Departures = 1 Absence, which then results in following the same grade reduction
policy that applies to all unexcused absences.
If an emergency or illness causes a student to be absent, the student must provide the instructor
with appropriate documentation (e.g., a note from a physician in the case of an illness) by the
following class and the instructor will take that into account when calculating participation based
on absences.
Participation in UT-sponsored sporting events: Students must bring an official notification of the
upcoming event to class before the actual event, in order for the absence to be excused.
Observance of Religious Holy Days: students must notify the instructor at least 24 hours prior to
holy days. If you must miss a class, a quiz, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will have an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time before or after the absence. See UT policy on this matter at: http://www.utexas.edu/provost/
policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf
Participation:
It is essential that students make every effort to attend every class on time and be prepared to
participate in class activities. Attention to classroom activities is imperative, behaviors such as
using pagers/cell phones, laptops, or doing work for another purpose other than class will not be
tolerated. Because this is an ASL course, we aim to encourage the development of signing skills,
this also means that talking or voicing during class will not be allowed.
Assignments:
Students will complete a variety of assignments for this course with primary focus on developing
productive language skills. This includes developing and creating video projects as well as
giving presentations in class that demonstrate proficiency in target language skills in ASL. For
more information on when specific assignments are scheduled, please refer to the course
schedule. Late assignments will not be accepted, if you fail to submit assignments on time, they
will not be considered for grade.
At Home
Language learning, in particular, requires continuous practice. Since it is a process that relies on
active participation on the part of the learner, do not expect to master the material simply by
coming to class three times a week.
Studying
You should not limit your work at home only to out of class enrichment activities, which count
for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis, since attempts
to memorize large amounts of material quickly before quizzes are not normally successful. You
should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take not of any items you may
not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions and resolve issues
before quizzes.


Practice
Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as watching videos of vocabulary
and/or studying handouts/slides gone over in class. This type of studying is not usually sufficient
in a language course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t
develop the automaticity necessary to successfully complete quizzes and video compositions
within a limited time frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to
actively engage with course material by producing signs yourself as well as viewing relevant
videos.
In Class
Your class meetings are an important opportunity for you to interact with your classmates and
your instructor. Participation is an essential component of the course and does not refer
exclusively to attendance. Please keep in mind the following elements of our language courses:
Interaction
Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and rely heavily
on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will be pair
work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the facilitator.
All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.
Focus
The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class. Cell Phones,
laptops and outside reading materials are NOT allowed in class, as they limit your participation
and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.
ASL
In order to improve your expressive communication skills, you must practice both receiving and
producing ASL! Therefore, your instructor will communicate almost exclusively in ASL (written
English may be used at the instructor’s discretion), which will not only help you learn new
vocabulary and grammatical structures, but will also increase your comfort level over the course
of the semester. In turn, you are expected to reciprocate and use ASL for activities as well as for
basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom, asking the instructor to
repeat something, etc.) Don’t be shy! You’ll never be graded on the accuracy of your
productions in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.
Course grades will be based on the following total percentages:
A = 93.45% - 100%        A- = 89.45% - 93.44% B+ = 86.45% - 89.44%
B = 83.45% - 86.44% B- = 79.45%-83.44% C+ = 76.45% - 79.44%
C = 73.45% - 76.44% C- = 69.45% - 73.44% D+ = 66.45% - 69.44%
D = 63.45% - 66.44% D- = 59.45% - 63.44% F = 59.44% and below
Notes:
There will be No pass/fail grade; this course is based on letter grade only.
Rounding up to the nearest whole percentage is done at the instructor’s discretion.
University Notices and Policies:
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.


Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students
are responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible to keep the university informed about
changes to your e-mail address. Students should check their email regularly (i.e., daily)
to stay current with class information. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating email addresses at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site at http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Documented Disability Statement:
If a student requires special accommodations, they must contact the Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) within the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement (471-6259 or 471-4641 [TTY] for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
Upon registration with the SSD office, students will be given letters to present to their
instructors in order to discuss appropriate accommodations. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity.ddce/ssd/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If a student is worried about someone who is acting strangely, they may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss their concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), AND the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Students should be
aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
〈        Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of the classroom and the
         building. The nearest exit door may not be the one that was used when a student
         entered the building.
〈        If a student requires assistance to evacuate, please inform the instructor in writing
         during the first week of class.
〈        In the event of an evacuation, students should follow the instructions given be the
instructor.
〈        Students should not re-enter a building unless they have been given instructions by
         the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
         Services office.
Course Schedule:
*Course schedule subject to change, all changes will be communicated in class or on Canvas.


Dates                         Topics                         Assignments
6/5 (Friday, Online Zoom Course introduction                 Set-up course portfolio on
Session at 8:30am)            Review of Syllabus             Google Drive with your ASL
                              Review of Online Course set- 601 and 610 materials.
                              up
6/8-6/12                      Introduction to the following  Video Project #1: Narrating an
                              topics:                        unforgettable moment with a
Mondays: Cohort Zoom          ASL Grammatical Aspects        peer - Wednesday, June 10th
Sessions - review of material Conceptually Accurate
for that week                 Signing                        Q u i z # 1 : U n f o rg e t t a b l e
                              Use of Non-manuals             Moment on Canvas - Friday,
Wednesdays: Peer Projects/    Classifier Use                 June 12th
Evaluations                   (All of the above is what will
                              be addressed on a weekly       Final Video Project #1:
Fridays: Individual Video     basis for each Unit)           Narrating an unforgettable
Project submissions/weekly                                   moment - Friday, June 12th
Quizzes                       Unit 18: Narrating
                              Unforgettable Moments
6/15-6/19                     Unit 19: Sharing Interesting Video Project #2: Sharing
                              Facts                          Interesting Facts with Peers -
                                                             Wednesday, June 17th
                                                             Quiz #2: Sharing Interesting
                                                             Facts about a Deaf
                                                             Organization - Friday, June
                                                             19th
                                                             Final Video Project #2:
                                                             Sharing Interesting Facts
                                                             about a Deaf Organization -
                                                             Friday, June 19th
6/22-6/26                     Unit 20: Explaining Rules      Video Project #3: Explaining
                                                             Rules of a game with a peer -
                                                             Wednesday, June 24th
                                                             Quiz #3: Explaining Rules
                                                             (Expressive Quiz) on Canvas -
                                                             Friday, June 26th


6/29-7/3                 Final Projects: Current Events Complete Video Presentations
                                                        and post on Canvas
                                                        Discussion Boards by Friday,
                                                        July 3rd
7/6-7/9 (Last class day) Final Projects: Current Events Final Project Deadlines:
                         Discussion Board Review            - Final              Video
                                                                Presentation due on
                                                                Canvas July 3rd
                                                            - Peer Evaluations due
                                                                on Monday, July 6th
                                                        Portfolio Evaluations due
                                                        We d n e s d a y, J u l y 9 h a t
                                                        11:00am
