                                                                      EDC 385G
                                                               Writing for Publication1
                                                                   Unique #73465
Instructor: Dr. Katherina A. Payne
(she/her/hers)
Email: kapayne@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Monday, 10:30 – 11:30 *Please email in advance.
Summer, 2020 – 9 week session
June 8 – August 5
Mondays 9:00 – 10:30; Wednesday 9:00 – 12:00
Course description & Goals
This is a course for graduate students who want to study academic writing. The course has three major goals.
     ● First, students will develop their academic writing. We will primarily focus on the genre of a research article, but will also
          attend to writing for practitioner outlets as well. In order to accomplish this goal, students will study academic writing in
          the discipline where their research is focused and work within a community to develop the article. Students will complete
          an article ready for submission to a journal of their choosing.
     ● Second, students will learn to become reviewers of academic writing, another part of being in a professional community.
          To do so, students will study how reviewers write peer reviews and then write a review of another student’s draft as that
          draft moves towards submission for publication.
     ● Third, students will reflect and plan toward the development of work habits that make writing productivity a part of their
          ongoing lives. They will accomplish this goal by tracking and setting goals for writing and engaging in writing practices.
The course is designed to support emerging scholars in their work with writing.
1
  I would like to acknowledge Dr. Melissa Wetzel and Dr. Tia Madkins who offered resources and/or versions of previous syllabi for similar courses. I would
also like to acknowledge Kel Weinhold who was my writing coach for years and whose work deeply influences my attempt at a humane approach to
academic writing.
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                                                 1


Course Assignments
Evaluating Your Writing Life Activities. We will engage in exercises that help us home in on our writing life and develop writing
habits that are sustainable. These will support our Monday check-in/planning meetings.
Across the 9 weeks you will also track your writing time. This practice helps you get a sense for how long different activities take
in your writing process. Each person differs. During a typical week (Monday-Sunday) log the hours you spend on writing-related
activities. Keep track of the number of minutes you spend and the activity you did. Total the minutes per activity across each day
and total for the week. You might want to create a chart like this:
Activities                  M              T            W            Th           F           Sa           Su           Total
Reading mentor texts
Working with data
Pre-Writing Activities
(brainstorming, mind-
mapping, free writing)
Composing
Revising
Other
Please continue to keep your writing log throughout the summer (until you have completed the article.) You do not need to turn
in the log but we will discuss it in class. We will also discuss the small exercises we do that help us identify the best practices for
our writing life. We will share out about these during our Monday check-in/planning calls. (20 points)
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                               2


Developing Your Academic Circles: Each student will create a GoogleDoc that documents their development of an academic
circle. This includes identifying your intellectual community, the journals that align with your work, and then identifying mentor
texts. A template for this will be on Canvas. (20 points)
Review of peer manuscript. Each student will submit a draft of the manuscript to a peer on July 20. The peer assigned to the
manuscript will write a comprehensive review of the article and post that review to Canvas by July 22. The expectations for the
review will be provided and discussed in class. (20 points)
Engaging with the Scholarly Community. Most weeks we will have a guest scholar join us on Wednesday. They will provide us
with 1-2 articles. These articles will supplement our individual mentor text engagement and will serve as a way to talk with
scholars about their writerly lives. When you read these texts, pay attention to the writing craft. Consider the following:
    • How does the author set up their argument?
    • How does the author use literature and/or theory to further their argument?
    • How does the author keep the reader engaged throughout the piece?
    • How does the author communicate the “so what” of the piece?
Each Wednesday, you will be prepared with at least one question for our visiting author. Please post your question on the
Canvas Discussion board. This way, we might build on each other’s wonderings as we prepare to talk with the scholar.
After class, please post what your key take-away or moment of gratitude is for the scholar. One class member will be in charge
each week of compiling these bits of gratitude and sending them to the scholar (15 points).
One completed article ready for submission. Students must turn in the completed article by Please note that because of the
quick turn-around for grades being due, you will not receive feedback on this paper, the points assigned are for completion (25
points).
Course Materials
All Course Materials will be provided through Canvas.
We will read chapters from the following books, all of which are available via UT online library:
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                          3


    •   Becker, H. S. (2008). Writing for social scientists: How to start and finish your thesis, book, or article. University of Chicago
        Press. Available through UT online library.
    •   Belcher, W. L. (2019). Writing your journal article in twelve weeks: A guide to academic publishing success. University of
        Chicago Press.
    •   Booth, W. C., Colomb, G. C., Williams, J. M., Bizup, J., & FitzGerald, W. T. (2016). The craft of research. The University of
        Chicago Press. Available through UT online library.
    •   Sword, H. (2012). Stylish academic writing. Harvard University Press.
There are many other books that you might be interested in as you develop your academic writing life. Here are a few that Dr.
Melissa Wetzel & Dr. Tia Madkins recommend in addition to the ones above:
    •   Davis, J. P. (2011). The Rowman & Littlefield guide to writing with sources. Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
    •   Goodson, P. (2016). Becoming an academic writer: 50 exercises for paced, productive, and powerful writing. Sage
        Publications.
    •   King, S. (2000). On writing: A memoir of the craft. Scribner.
    •   Maimon, E. P., Peritz, J. H., & Yancy, K. B. (2007). A writer’s resource: A handbook for writing and research (2nd ed.).
        McGraw-Hill.
    •   Strunk, W. (2017). R. De A’Morelli (Ed.), The elements of style (Classic Edition). Spectrum Ink Publishing.
    •   Stilman, A. (2010). Grammatically correct: The essential guide to spelling, style, usage, grammar, and
        punctuation (2nd edition). Writer’s Digest Books.
    •   Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. B. (2012). Academic writing for graduate students: Essential Tasks and Skills (3rd ed.). University
        of Michigan Press.
                                                            Course Guidelines
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of
race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the
instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor your request to address you by
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                                4


a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc).
Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937(Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations.
At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations should notify the instructor by
presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) Office. To ensure that the most appropriate
accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471- 6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
Course Participation / Absences
● Participation is required for all course sessions. Due to the current pandemic, please alert me if you need to miss a class or if
    circumstances arise that require you to complete coursework outside of our scheduled meeting times.
    o Course assignments will feed our group discussion and development of practice as writers. Please make every effort to
        complete assignments on time. Please contact me if you have any hurdles in making this happen.
● Children in Class – I recognize that you are most likely participating in this class from home. I welcome all children into our
    space as needed.
● Religious holy days - A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
    a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be
    made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
● Absence for military service - In accordance with section 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code, a student is excused from
    attending classes or engaging in other required activities, including exams, if he or she is called to active military service of a
    reasonably brief duration. The maximum time for which the student may be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher
    Education Coordinating Board as “no more than 25 percent of the total number of class meetings or the contact hour
    equivalent (not including the final examination period) for the specific course or courses in which the student is currently
    enrolled at the beginning of the period of active military service.” The student will be allowed a reasonable time after the
    absence to complete assignments and take exams.
Grading Policies
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                               5


All formal written assignments will be graded according to the following criteria:
     • The degree to which the assignment has been completed thoroughly, i.e. addressed the topic.
     • The degree to which the assignment has been proofread and edited carefully. Remember, this
        is different than spell-check. Tip: Read your paper aloud – it helps you catch phrasing and punctuation issues. Also, check
        out Grammarly. It is a free online resource that catches quite a few writing errors (I used it ALL THE TIME). But it will not
        catch if you write, “We need to attend to children’s agents in the classroom”...when we really meant “agency.”
     • The degree to which the assignment shows insight or thoughtfulness with respect to the topic, other course readings, and
        other classroom/teaching or reading experiences.
The grade scale is: 93-100% A; 90-92% A-; 83-89% B; 80-82% B-; 73-79 C; 70-72% C-; 63-69% D; 60-62% D-; below 60% F
Academic Integrity Familiarize yourself with important information on academic integrity and academic dishonesty from the
Dean of Students office:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php You will find a link to UT-Austin Academic Integrity: A Brief Guide to
Avoiding Plagiarism (PDF)
Student Honor Code - As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.
University Code of Conduct - The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
     •  Policy on scholastic dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
        penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from The University. Since such dishonesty
        harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of The University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
        enforced. Please see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadmeicintegrity.html for more information on issues of
        scholastic dishonesty, and plagiarism particularly.
     •  Students should carefully and thoroughly cite any information they use from published materials. Failure to do so could
        have serious consequences, including failing an assignment, failing the course, or suspension from the University.
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                             6


Weekly Schedule
*This is a DRAFT of our schedule that may change dependent on course participant goals and needs.
 Date        Topic             Readings & Guest                                           Exercises / Due
 M 6/8       Introductions
 W 6/10 Planning Your             Payne, Falkner & Adair, In Press                          Summer Months Mark Up
             Writing Life         Falkner & Payne, In Press                                 Tracking Ideal Writing Time (start it)
                                  Listen to Cathy Mazak podcast, Episode 2                  Planning My Week (start it)
                                                                                            Logging Writing Activities (ongoing)
                               Dr. Payne – Thinking about one topic for varied audiences.
 M 6/14 What                   Beck (1986) – Ch. 1                                          Start your Academic Circle Exercise
             conversation do   Revuluri (2018) – Imposter Syndrome                          Logging Writing Activities (ongoing)
             you want to       https://www.chronicle.com/article/How-to-Overcome-
             join?             Impostor/244700
 W 6/17      Choosing Mentor      Gatti, 2014                                               Academic Circle Exercise
             Scholars & Texts     Gatti, 2015                                               Choosing a Mentor Text
                                                                                            Reverse Outline of Mentor Text (start,
                               Guest: Dr. Lauren Gatti, Associate Professor of Teaching,    have done by Monday, 6/22)
                               Learning & Teacher Education (affiliate in English),
                               University of Nebraska – Lincoln
                               https://cehs.unl.edu/tlte/faculty/lauren-gatti/
 M 6/22      Identifying Why      MacPhail (2017) The ‘So What?’ Question                   Reverse Outline of Mentor Text
             & So What            https://community.chronicle.com/news/1855-the-so-         Logging Writing Activities (ongoing)
                                  what-question
                                  Sword, Ch. 5 (Smart Sentencing)
 W 6/24      Argument (at         Ch. 7 of Craft of Research                                Abstract Exercise
             least for now…)
                                  Shear & Krutka, 2019
                               Guest: Dr. Sarah Shear, Assistant Professor of Social
                               Studies Education, UW-Bothell
                               https://sarahshearphd.com/
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                          7


 Date    Topic            Readings & Guest                                          Exercises / Due
 M 6/29  Big Overview         Perfectionism & Writing                                 Draft outline (this week’s work)
         Outlining            https://www.insidehighered.com/advice/2012/11/21/e      Logging Writing Activities (ongoing)
                              ssay-issues-perfectionism-writing-and-procrastination
                          Choose a TED talk:
                          https://www.scribendi.com/advice/best_ted_talks_for_wri
                          ters.en.html
                              Optional: Beck, Ch. 8
                          Optional: https://drkakali.weebly.com/literature-
                          review.html
 W 7/1   Literature          Belcher, Ch. 5                                           Draft outline (this week’s work) – Add in
         Review                                                                       Literature Review (if that’s part of your
                             Friedrich (piece TBD – we have two options!)             genre)
                          Guest: Dr. Dani Friedrich, Associate Professor of
                          Curriculum, Teachers College Columbia University
                          https://www.tc.columbia.edu/faculty/df2412/
 M 7/6   Methods &        TBD – Let’s see what we need in terms of supporting our     Return to your Mentor Text – How does
         Theory           challenges and questions about writing                      your genre approach these two sections?
 W 7/8   Methods &            Rodriguez + Kim, 2018
         Theory
                          Guest: Dr. Noreen Naseem Rodríguez, Assistant Professor
                          of Social Studies, Iowa State University
                          http://www.naseemrdz.com/about/
 M 7/13  Findings &       Revisit “So what?”                                          Return to your Mentor Text – How does
         Discussion                                                                   your genre approach these two sections?
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                                       8


 Date    Topic            Readings & Guest                                             Exercises / Due
 W 7/15  Findings &           López López, L. (2020)
         Discussion           Chapter 2 from book (available electronically through
                              UT)
                          Guest: Dr. Ligia “Licho” López López, Lecturer in Curriculum
                          Policy, University of Melbourne
                          https://findanexpert.unimelb.edu.au/profile/785644-ligia-
                          (licho)-lopez-lopez
 7/20    Introduction &   TBD – Let’s see what we need.
         Conclusion
 7/22    Reviewing Your   Guest TBD
         Work
 7/27    Reviewing Other      Lubienski, S. T. (2020). How to Review Conference
         People’s Work        Proposals (and Why You Should Bother). Educational
                              Researcher, 49(1), 64-67.
                              https://scholarlykitchen.sspnet.org/2019/09/17/how-
                              to-be-a-good-peer-reviewer/
 7/29    What to do with  Guest TBD
         revisions
 8/3     Editing             Belcher, Ch. 11 – Editing Your Sentences
 8/5     When to let go…                                                               Final manuscript.
DRAFT – Subject to Change                                                                                9
