                                                                                  	  
                                                                                  	  
                                                  DEPARTMENT	  OF	  ART	  AND	  ART	  HISTORY	  
                                                         UNIVERSITY	  OF	  TEXAS	  AT	  AUSTIN	  
                                                                                  	  
                                 ARH	  339N/AMS	  325:	  PAINTING	  IN	  AMERICA	  TO	  1860	  
                                                                         SPRING	  2019	  
                                                                                  	  
Professor	  Susan	  Rather	                      	                                                                            Office:	  DFA	  2.116	  
rather@austin.utexas.edu	                                                                   Office	  Hours:	  	  T	  1:45-­‐2:45,	  Th	  2:30-­‐3:30	  
prefer	  mail	  via	  Canvas;	  ARH	  339N	  in	  subject	  line	  	                                                             	  	  &	  by	  appt.	  
	  
Class	  times:	  TTh	  12:30-­‐1:45	  (DFA	  2.506)	  
                                                                                  	  
                                The	  syllabus	  is	  your	  contract	  with	  me.	  	  Read	  it	  carefully.	  
	  
COURSE	  DESCRIPTION	  
	  
This	  course	  considers	  American	  painting—and	  the	  cultural	  work	  that	  paintings	  perform—from	  
the	  seventeenth	  through	  the	  mid-­‐nineteenth	  centuries.	  	  During	  the	  first	  half	  of	  the	  semester,	  
we’ll	  focus	  on	  portraits,	  the	  dominant	  subject	  in	  our	  geographical	  locus,	  British	  colonial	  North	  
America.	  	  Portraits	  have	  a	  great	  deal	  to	  tell	  us	  about	  social,	  economic,	  political,	  and	  gender	  and	  
race	  relations,	  and	  excavating	  those	  meanings	  will	  be	  our	  aim.	  	  In	  the	  early	  United	  States,	  a	  
newly	  expanded	  conception	  of	  “artist”	  facilitated	  greater	  diversity	  of	  painting	  subjects,	  from	  
grand	  historical	  tableaux	  to	  seemingly	  modest	  still	  lifes,	  both	  seen	  as	  having	  roles	  to	  play	  in	  
shaping	  the	  body	  politic.	  	  By	  the	  later	  1820s,	  landscape	  and	  genre	  (scenes	  of	  everyday	  life)	  had	  
emerged	  as	  the	  clearest	  and	  most	  popular	  expressions	  of	  national	  identity.	  	  Among	  the	  shifting	  
identities	  we	  engage	  during	  the	  semester,	  those	  attached	  to	  artists,	  and	  specifically	  American	  
artists,	  loom	  largest	  and	  constitute	  a	  sustained	  focus	  throughout	  this	  course.	  
	  
My	  goal	  in	  this	  course	  is	  to	  help	  you	  to	  expand	  your	  capacity	  to	  analyze	  both	  visual	  and	  written	  
materials,	  a	  time-­‐consuming	  process	  that	  precludes	  survey	  comprehensiveness.	  	  Analytical	  skills	  
require	  and	  reward	  careful	  cultivation,	  having	  much	  wider	  application	  than	  knowing	  artists’	  
names,	  dates,	  and	  so	  on.	  	  We	  will	  aim	  for	  depth	  and	  quality	  of	  knowledge,	  rather	  than	  mere	  
breadth	  of	  “information.”	  	  The	  course	  depends	  on	  the	  participation	  of	  active,	  engaged	  learners,	  
who	  take	  responsibility	  for	  themselves.	  
	  
VISUAL	  AND	  PERFORMING	  ARTS	  CREDIT	  (VAPA)	  
	  
This	  course	  fulfills	  the	  visual	  and	  performing	  arts	  component	  of	  the	  university	  core	  curriculum,	  
addressing	  four	  core	  objectives	  established	  by	  the	  Texas	  Higher	  Education	  Coordinating	  Board:	  
communication	  skills,	  critical	  thinking	  skills,	  teamwork,	  and	  social	  responsibility.	  
	  
	                                                  	  


READINGS	  
	  
Much	  has	  been	  written	  about	  American	  art	  of	  the	  period,	  but	  no	  single	  text	  adequately	  covers	  
the	  range	  of	  material	  we’ll	  engage	  this	  semester	  or	  offers	  a	  sufficiently	  rich	  basis	  for	  discussion.	  	  
So	  your	  readings	  comprise	  primary	  sources	  and	  essays	  from	  periodicals,	  books,	  and	  exhibition	  
catalogues,	  available	  online	  through	  Canvas,	  via	  various	  other	  online	  resources,	  and	  in	  the	  Fine	  
Arts	  Library.	  
	  
The	  only	  book	  I	  ask	  you	  to	  acquire	  for	  the	  class	  is	  Sylvan	  Barnet's	  A	  Short	  Guide	  to	  Writing	  
About	  Art,	  useful	  beyond	  its	  nominal	  subject.	  	  The	  University	  Co-­‐op	  Bookstore	  should	  have	  the	  
most	  recent	  (11th)	  edition	  on	  hand,	  but	  I	  will	  accept	  your	  use	  of	  any	  edition,	  which	  you	  may	  be	  
able	  to	  find	  used	  locally	  and	  can	  certainly	  find	  online.	  	  Beyond	  its	  guidance	  on	  paper	  writing	  
(helpful	  for	  anyone	  taking	  humanities	  courses),	  Barnet	  offers	  tips	  for	  organizing	  your	  thoughts	  
about	  art	  in	  ways	  generally	  appropriate	  to	  all	  of	  your	  work	  in	  this	  class.	  	  Henry	  M.	  Sayre’s	  
Writing	  About	  Art	  addresses	  the	  subject	  at	  a	  somewhat	  more	  rudimentary	  level	  but	  is	  also	  
excellent	  and	  recommended	  if	  you	  feel	  at	  all	  insecure	  about	  visual	  analysis.	  	  Again,	  you	  may	  be	  
able	  to	  find	  copies	  around	  town	  and,	  without	  doubt,	  from	  online	  sellers.	  
	  
I	  also	  expect	  you	  to	  use	  a	  superb	  and	  extensive	  online	  writing	  resource,	  which	  the	  author	  has	  
offered	  for	  fair	  use:	  "Reading,	  Writing,	  and	  Researching	  for	  History:	  A	  Guide	  for	  College	  
Students,"	  by	  Patrick	  Rael,	  Bowdoin	  College	  http://www.bowdoin.edu/writing-­‐guides/	  
	  
GRADED	  WORK	  
	  
Exams	  would	  not	  be	  pedagogically	  useful	  in	  this	  class;	  therefore,	  there	  are	  none.	  	  	  	  
	  
I’ve	  designed	  reading/writing	  assignments	  for	  most	  weeks,	  though	  you’ll	  have	  options	  and	  need	  
not	  do	  them	  all.	  	  This	  arrangement	  is	  to	  your	  advantage—assuming	  you	  have	  the	  discipline	  to	  
avoid	  leaving	  everything	  to	  the	  last	  minute—because	  it	  gives	  you	  considerable	  control	  of	  your	  
time.	  	  Please	  be	  aware	  that	  it	  is	  your	  responsibility	  to	  be	  on	  top	  of	  what	  you	  have	  or	  have	  not	  
done	  in	  fulfillment	  of	  the	  course	  requirements.	  	  Details	  follow.	  	  (N.B.,	  assignments	  in	  this	  course	  
do	  not	  meet	  the	  specific	  criteria	  for	  a	  Writing	  Flag.)	  
	  
SHORT	  READING/WRITING	  ASSIGNMENTS	  (45%)	  
	  
To	  promote	  class	  discussion	  and	  to	  ensure	  that	  you	  make	  a	  solid	  effort	  to	  engage	  with	  assigned	  
(usually	  primary)	  texts,	  the	  course	  presents	  a	  steady	  sequence	  of	  short	  (300-­‐600	  word)	  	  
reading/writing	  assignments,	  each	  with	  a	  well-­‐defined	  prompt.	  	  The	  fundamental	  criteria	  of	  
good	  to	  very	  good	  (B	  range)	  work	  is	  that	  it:	  follows	  the	  prompt,	  clearly	  indicates	  completion	  of	  
and	  careful	  consideration	  of	  the	  assigned	  text,	  is	  plainly	  written	  with	  a	  minimum	  of	  errors	  (in	  
grammar,	  punctuation,	  spelling,	  etc.),	  and	  is	  submitted	  on	  time.	  
	  
Work	  cannot	  be	  accepted	  after	  the	  class	  date	  to	  which	  it	  is	  relevant,	  since	  we’ll	  talk	  about	  your	  
findings	  in	  class.	  	  If	  you	  haven’t	  managed	  to	  complete	  an	  assignment	  on	  time,	  you	  should	  still	  
come	  to	  class	  to	  benefit	  from	  discussion	  and	  because	  I	  keep	  track	  of	  attendance,	  so	  you	  can’t	  
afford	  to	  be	  cavalier	  about	  that.	  	  
	  


OPTIONS:	  While	  I	  offer	  eight	  of	  these	  short	  assignments,	  only	  six	  count	  in	  your	  final	  grade.	  	  Five	  
of	  those	  are	  required	  but	  you	  may	  omit	  two	  from	  among	  three	  marked	  “option”	  on	  the	  
schedule	  and	  prompts.	  (You	  may	  not	  skip	  the	  associated	  class	  meeting,	  however.)	  	  I	  strongly	  
caution	  you	  against	  eliminating	  any	  assignment	  without	  a	  really	  good	  reason	  (“I	  don’t	  feel	  like	  
it”	  is	  not	  a	  good	  reason);	  reserve	  the	  option	  for	  when	  expect	  to	  really	  need	  it,	  as	  when	  you	  have	  
an	  excess	  of	  exams/projects	  that	  week,	  are	  preparing	  for	  a	  job	  interview,	  etc.	  	  Better	  yet,	  do	  
more	  assignments	  than	  you	  must;	  I’ll	  drop	  lowest	  grades	  assuming	  six	  are	  fulfilled.	  	  
	  
LONGER	  READING/WRITING	  ASSIGNMENTS	  (30%)	  
	  
These	  serve	  the	  same	  end	  as	  the	  preceding	  group	  of	  assignments—to	  stimulate	  thought	  and	  
discussion—but	  they	  carry	  somewhat	  greater	  weight.	  	  That’s	  because	  most	  engage	  scholarly	  
writings,	  which	  are	  longer	  and	  more	  obviously	  challenging	  than	  readings	  for	  the	  short	  
assignments	  (though	  I	  urge	  you	  not	  to	  underestimate	  those).	  
	  
OPTIONS:	  From	  among	  four	  longer	  assignments,	  you	  need	  only	  do	  three.	  	  In	  each	  half	  of	  the	  
semester,	  one	  is	  required	  and	  one	  optional	  (among	  those	  two,	  you	  must	  pick	  one).	  	  The	  options	  
are	  clearly	  indicated	  in	  three	  places:	  under	  Assignments	  in	  Canvas,	  on	  the	  assignment	  rubrics,	  
and	  on	  the	  course	  schedule.	  
	  
TEAMWORK	  (15%)	  
	  
In	  fulfillment	  of	  university	  requirements	  for	  VAPA,	  there	  will	  be	  four	  occasions	  for	  structured	  
teamwork,	  each	  with	  some	  individual	  advance	  prep	  in	  the	  form	  of	  a	  reading/writing	  
assignment.	  	  For	  the	  first	  team	  exercise,	  you’ll	  practice	  skills	  of	  visual	  and	  primary	  source	  
textual	  analysis	  that	  are	  absolutely	  critical	  to	  this	  course.	  	  The	  second	  engages	  secondary	  texts	  
and	  unfolds	  over	  two	  days,	  with	  an	  informal	  team	  presentation	  at	  the	  end.	  	  For	  the	  third,	  you’ll	  
take	  on	  the	  personae	  of	  historical	  artists	  to	  debate	  art	  world	  issues	  of	  the	  1830s	  (informed	  by	  
previously	  completed	  scholarly	  readings),	  anchored	  by	  a	  notable	  pair	  of	  paintings.	  	  The	  fourth	  
will	  take	  place	  in	  the	  Blanton	  Museum.	  	  	  
	  
SPEAKING	  IN	  CLASS/PARTICIPATION	  (10%)	  
	  
Each	  and	  every	  class	  meeting	  affords	  opportunities	  to	  speak.	  	  Completed	  assignments	  will	  
prepare	  you	  for	  some	  of	  that,	  though	  our	  conversations	  will	  not	  be	  limited	  to	  them.	  	  If	  you	  
speak	  readily	  and	  often,	  be	  aware	  that	  I	  will	  likely	  ask	  you	  to	  hold	  back	  to	  allow	  others	  to	  enter	  
the	  discussion;	  you’re	  on	  my	  radar	  as	  a	  participant,	  so	  don’t	  worry.	  	  And	  note:	  quality	  of	  
participation	  counts	  more	  than	  quantity.	  	  “Quality”	  does	  not	  mean	  being	  “right”;	  it	  means	  being	  
thoughtful	  and	  willing	  to	  stretch	  your	  thinking,	  especially	  when	  encouraged	  to	  do	  so.	  
	  
CANVAS	  SET	  UP	  
              Announcements	  –	  check	  regularly	  
              Syllabus	  –	  syllabus	  &	  class	  schedule	  READ!	  +	  course	  summary	  (due	  dates	  in	  order)	  
              Assignments	  –	  prompts	  for	  all	  graded	  work	  
              Modules	  –	  class	  schedule,	  various	  writing	  guidelines	  
              People	  –	  all	  class	  members	  &	  teams	  once	  constituted	  
	  


	  
IMAGE	  SOURCES/LIBRARY	  RESOURCES	  
	  
Class	  discussion	  will	  center	  on	  works	  of	  art.	  Key	  images	  are	  available	  online,	  though	  DASE	  
(Digital	  Archive	  Services).	  	  DASE	  is	  a	  UT-­‐generated	  resource	  accessible	  through	  the	  Databases	  
heading	  on	  the	  UT	  Library	  home	  page	  and	  it	  requires	  your	  UT	  EID	  and	  password.	  	  I	  suggest	  you	  
bookmark	  the	  site.	  
	  
I	  have	  set	  up	  an	  image	  bank	  for	  this	  class.	  	  While	  it	  won’t	  include	  all	  the	  works	  I	  show,	  it	  does	  
provide	  easy	  access	  to	  some	  of	  the	  most	  important	  examples.	   From	  the	  DASE	  homepage,	  click	  
on	  “Public/Shared	  Sets”	  from	  the	  menu	  at	  the	  side.	  	  You	  then	  have	  two	  ways	  to	  look	  at	  the	  
images.	  	  Selecting	  the	  set	  labeled	  "Rather-­‐American	  Painting	  to	  1860"	  takes	  you	  to	  key	  works	  
with	  their	  data	  (artist,	  title,	  date,	  collection,	  size,	  medium,	  etc.);	  you	  can	  see	  them	  altogether	  or	  
click	  on	  the	  first	  image	  to	  isolate	  it	  and	  data	  on	  your	  screen	  (from	  there,	  "next"	  advances	  
through	  the	  group).	  	  Or,	  from	  the	  first	  page	  for	  the	  set,	  clicking	  slideshow	  at	  the	  top	  will	  isolate	  
the	  image	  against	  a	  black	  background.	  
	  
You	  can	  also	  search	  DASE	  yourself.	  You	  might	  want	  to	  do	  this	  if	  you	  wish	  to	  see	  other	  works	  by	  
the	  same	  artist	  or	  to	  gain	  more	  information	  about	  a	  work	  for	  our	  class	  than	  I	  have	  provided	  in	  
the	  caption	  (e.g.,	  dimensions,	  collection,	  etc.).	  	  Your	  search	  will	  yield	  the	  best	  quality	  images	  if	  
you	  limit	  it	  to	  the	  “Art	  &	  Art	  History	  Visual	  Resources	  Collection”	  or	  the	  “Classics	  Collection,”	  
which	  are	  also	  two	  of	  the	  largest.	  
	  
Oxford	  Art	  Online	  (via	  UT	  Library	  online)	  is	  a	  terrific	  resource	  that	  consolidates	  multiple	  
websites	  for	  the	  history	  of	  art—notably	  the	  formidable	  scholarly	  encyclopedia	  Grove	  Art	  Online.	  	  
In	  addition,	  I	  recommend	  the	  Metropolitan	  Museum	  of	  Art’s	  Heilbrunn	  Timeline	  of	  Art	  History	  
for	  its	  maps,	  art-­‐historical	  timelines,	  numerous	  image	  slideshows,	  and	  thematic	  essays.’	  
	  
ATTENDANCE	  AND	  CLASS	  CONDUCT	  
	  
Having	  relief	  from	  exams	  and	  being	  able	  to	  manage	  your	  work	  time	  is	  a	  privilege,	  but	  it	  can	  
have	  a	  negative	  effect	  on	  attendance	  and	  a	  related	  drag	  on	  the	  dynamic	  of	  a	  class	  that	  depends	  
on	  your	  presence,	  attention,	  and	  participation.	  Therefore,	  attendance	  will	  be	  taken	  starting	  the	  
second	  week	  of	  the	  semester.	  
	  
From	  that	  point,	  we	  have	  28	  classes.	  	  If	  you	  reach	  4	  absences	  (15%	  of	  class	  meetings)	  during	  the	  
semester,	  you’ll	  loose	  five	  points	  on	  your	  final	  grade;	  at	  6	  (more	  than	  20%),	  you’ll	  sacrifice	  10.	  	  
With	  8	  absences,	  you	  fail	  the	  class,	  regardless	  of	  grades	  posted.	  	  This	  policy	  is	  more	  generous	  
than	  some	  because	  I’m	  don’t	  want	  to	  have	  to	  make	  distinctions	  between	  “excused”	  and	  
unexcused	  absences.	  
	  
If	  you	  have	  ongoing	  personal	  or	  family	  emergencies,	  do	  yourself	  a	  favor	  and	  consult	  Student	  
Services	  in	  your	  College—who	  will	  notify	  all	  of	  your	  instructors	  of	  any	  legitimate	  extenuating	  
circumstances.	  	  A	  considerable	  amount	  of	  flexibility	  is	  authorized	  and	  warranted	  in	  such	  cases.	  
	  
Class	  conduct:	  Arrive	  on	  time,	  turn	  off	  cell	  phones	  and	  other	  devices.	  	  Computers	  and	  other	  
devices	  are	  acceptable	  if	  used	  for	  class	  purposes.	  


	  
ACADEMIC	  ACCOMMODATION	  
	  
Students	  may	  request	  appropriate	  academic	  accommodations	  from	  the	  Division	  of	  Diversity	  
and	  Community	  Engagement,	  Services	  for	  Students	  with	  Disabilities:	  	  512-­‐471-­‐6259	  
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/	  
	  
ACADEMIC	  HONESTY	  
	  
The	  ready	  availability	  of	  online	  information	  has	  contributed	  to	  an	  epidemic	  of	  plagiarism	  on	  
college	  campuses	  and	  elsewhere,	  some	  of	  it	  perhaps	  unintended—which	  is	  not	  the	  same	  as	  
"innocent"	  (ignorance	  is	  no	  excuse).	  	  The	  University	  of	  Texas	  has	  clear	  policies	  on	  Academic	  
Integrity,	  including	  a	  concise	  statement	  of	  what	  constitutes	  plagiarism	  
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php)	  and	  a	  more	  detailed	  
characterization:	  http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/cwgs/_files/pdf-­‐4/ai2012.pdf	  
	  
GRADING	  
	  
Short	  Reading/Writing	  Assignments	  (6	  required	  from	  8	  options):	  45%	  
Longer	  Reading/Writing	  Assignments	  (3	  from	  4	  options):	  30%	  
Teamwork:	  15%	  
Participation:	  10%	  
	  
No	  single	  grade	  will	  make	  or	  break	  you,	  which	  is	  good.	  	  But	  do	  not	  underestimate	  the	  
cumulative	  effect	  of	  activities	  that	  may	  seem	  small	  on	  their	  own.	  	  Constant	  and	  conscientious	  
application	  are	  major	  virtues	  in	  this	  class.	  	  Without	  them,	  you	  cannot	  do	  well;	  with	  them,	  you	  
have	  a	  firm	  basis	  for	  success.	  
	  
Final	  letter	  grades	  for	  the	  course	  follow	  this	  rubric:	  
	            A	  =	  93-­‐100	  (UT	  does	  not	  recognize	  A+);	  A-­‐	  =	  90-­‐92	  	  
	            B+	  =	  87-­‐89;	  B	  =	  83-­‐86;	  B-­‐	  =	  80-­‐82	  
	            C+	  =	  77-­‐79;	  C	  =	  73-­‐76;	  C-­‐	  =	  70-­‐72	  
	            D+	  =	  67-­‐69;	  D	  =	  63-­‐66;	  D-­‐	  =	  60-­‐62	  
	            F	  =	  0-­‐59	  
	  
For	  a	  B,	  your	  work	  must	  (1)	  demonstrate	  that	  that	  you	  have	  applied	  yourself	  seriously	  to	  
assignments	  and	  have	  a	  good	  to	  very	  good	  understanding	  of	  the	  material;	  (2)	  participate	  in	  
class	  discussions;	  (3)	  produce	  clearly	  written	  and	  argued	  written	  assignments	  or	  show	  a	  
pronounced	  upward	  trajectory	  from	  weaker	  work	  early	  in	  the	  semester.	  
	  
To	  merit	  an	  A,	  you	  must	  be	  more	  intellectually	  adventurous	  and	  academically	  rigorous,	  
performing	  beyond	  the	  level	  required	  for	  B.	  	  Thus,	  (1)	  demonstrate	  that	  that	  you	  have	  applied	  
yourself	  seriously	  to	  assignments	  and	  exams	  and	  have	  an	  excellent	  understanding	  of	  the	  
material;	  (2)	  contribute	  substantially	  and	  responsibly	  to	  class	  discussions;	  (3)	  write	  with	  
conviction	  and	  flair.	  
	  
C	  grades	  fall	  below	  the	  B	  standard	  (Ds	  and	  Fs	  are	  not	  off	  the	  table)	  
