                                 UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                           DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
                              ADVANCED GRAMMAR & WRITING IN CONTEXT
                                        SPN 327C – UNIQUE # 84180
                               SUMMER 2019 – MTWTHF 10-11:30 – B0.302
                                **This course will be taught in Spanish**
1. PREREQUISITES: SPN 611D, 612, or 312L
2. REQUIRED TEXTS
    1. Course Packet (located on Canvas). Please bring full-size printed copies to class. Digital copies
          are not acceptable.
3. COURSE OBJECTIVES
 The objectives of the Spanish language program address the basic tenet of a liberal arts education: the
 development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language in society. This
 objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic internationalization
 and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.
 The Spanish Language Program promotes the development of multilingual literacies through the
 analysis and use of Spanish as a second language. The program focuses on three major types of
 competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):
    •   linguistic competence: phonetics and phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon, discourse, etc.
    •   communicative / interactional competence: sociocultural uses of the language, pragmatics,
        cultural backgrounds, perspectives, etc.
    •   metalinguistic competence: language as a conceptual, symbolic system
 Within the language program, SPN 327C is a bridge course between lower-division language courses
 and upper-division courses in culture, literature and linguistics. It is designed to:
    •   help you inductively master grammar points of particular concern to speakers of English,
    •   perfect your grammar skills through a variety of tasks designed to clarify grammatical points,
        including reading, writing, listening and speaking activities,
    •   strengthen the clarity and organization of your writing, and
    •   promote critical and integrative thinking skills.
4. EXPECTATIONS
 This is an advanced language course and, as such, students are expected to:
    •   have mastered basic grammatical concepts such as agreement (subject-verb, noun-adjective),
        verb conjugations of tense (present, past, future), pronouns, etc.
    •   understand the indicative, imperative, subjunctive, and conditional moods
    •   read and write at high-intermediate level
 If you are weak in any of these skills, it is your responsibility to (a) study them independently, using
 textbooks from 1 and 2 -year courses, (b) visit your instructor at the beginning of the semester to
                    st     nd
 discuss your concerns, and (c) work with a tutor in order to reach the expected basic level that is
 necessary for you to understand and master advanced notions.


5. METHODOLOGY
 This course, unlike lecture-style courses, is highly student centered. Following a guided inductive
 approach, you will analyze selected samples of both native and non-native discourse in order to gain a
 deeper understanding of various linguistic features and communicative functions. The majority of in-
 class and at-home activities will go beyond rote memorization and will require you to think critically
 about written texts, as well as grammatical forms/constructions found in authentic discourse in order to
 identify patterns and draw your own conclusions. This approach is fundamental to our program, so
 please keep this in mind and be prepared to play an active role in the learning process.
6. COURSE FLAGS
 SPN 327C carries a Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
 familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
 portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
 one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
 SPN 327C carries a Writing Flag. You will have frequent writing assignments in this course, including
 both low-stakes and high-stakes assignments. You will have the opportunity to submit drafts and
 rewrites and will receive feedback both from your instructor and your classmates. The writing
 assignments constitute at least one third of your final grade in the course.
7. ATTENDANCE POLICY
 Regular class attendance is required. All absences and tardies (arriving after the start of class) will be
 recorded on Canvas. Arriving 20 minutes after the start of class or leaving 20 minutes before the end of
 class will be counted as an absence. You are allowed 2 absences (for any reason) before your final
 grade will be negatively affected. After 2 absences your final grade will be lowered 1% on a scale of
 100 for each additional absence. Similarly, 3 tardies will be counted as 1 absence.
 Late work is not accepted and there are no make-ups for missed work. However, a student who is
 absent from a class or examination for the observance of a religious holy day or a university-sponsored
 activity may complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence, if proper notice of
 the planned absence has been given at least two weeks in advance. Students who will be absent for a
 university-sponsored activity must present a letter from the department or office sponsoring the event,
 containing the student’s name, the dates of the expected absence(s), and the reason for the absence(s).
8. GRADE DISTRIBUTION AND COURSE ASSESSMENTS
Below is the grade distribution for SPN 327C. There is no curve or extra credit. No negotiation.
 Homework                                                                        7.5%
 Quizzes                                                                         15%
 Writing Assignments (3)                                                         35%
 Portfolio (3)                                                                   12.5%
 Participation                                                                   5%
 Final project                                                                   25%
HOMEWORK: You will have frequent reading assignments from the packet. You will also have daily
 assignments such as written grammar exercises, text analysis, translations, section summaries, etc.
 Make sure to dedicate a substantial amount of time outside of class in order to keep up with the course
 material and, more importantly, to identify and prepare questions for class discussions. The general
 university policy expects 2 hours of work outside class for each hour in class. The lowest homework
 grade will be dropped.
                                                     –2–


QUIZZES: There will be a variety of announced and unannounced quizzes throughout the semester. They
 will relate to either material covered in the previous class session(s) and/or material assigned for
 homework the night prior to the quiz. Quizzes will help you determine your strengths and weaknesses
 in order to improve for major assignments and exams.
WRITING ASSIGNMENTS: There will be three graded writing assignments (WA) in this course, each
 focusing on a particular style of writing: descriptive, narrative and expository. They will be assessed
 based on content, organization, and vocabulary, as well as your ability to accurately include grammar
 topics from the course. For each assignment, you will turn in a first carefully edited draft (borrador)
 worth 70% of the grade and a carefully corrected and re-edited final draft (versión final) worth 30% of
 the grade. Detailed instructions with clearly defined rubrics will be given in class and posted on
 Canvas. Please check on the syllabus for the due dates.
PORTFOLIO: After each writing assignment you will complete an analysis and reflection regarding the
 content, grammar and progress made between the first and final drafts. The purpose of the portfolio is
 to promote a continued detailed-oriented awareness of your abilities.
PARTICIPATION: Although this is a grammar and composition class, you will be encouraged to practice
 developing your oral Spanish skills. Your class participation, which also includes preparation,
 punctuality and attentiveness, will be graded according to two self-evaluations.
FINAL PROJECT: The final class assessment is a multifaceted, culture-based project. It will include
 independent bibliographical research as well as an interview with a native speaker. You will use your
 improved grammar and writing knowledge to develop and clearly defend and original thesis on a
 cultural topic of your choice. Detailed instructions will be given in class and posted on Canvas.
9. GRADING SCALE
 The following scale will be used to determine your final grade in the course:
         93-100 = A               83-86.99 = B                73-76.99 = C              63-66.99 = D
       90-92.99 = A-             80-82.99 = B-               70-72.99 = C-             60-62.99 = D-
       87-89.99 = B+             77-79.99 = C+               67-69.99 = D+               0-59.99 = F
10. ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
 This course contains a significant writing component and much of this writing will be done outside of
 class in order to give you the time and the space to develop your ideas and carefully edit your work.
 Note that all work done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing that appears to:
     •  be the work of a friend more proficient in Spanish
     •  come from a Web or print source
     •  have been written in English and then translated by an online translation program
 will not be accepted and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on the particular assignment. It
 is essential that you allow yourself to make mistakes so that those mistakes can be identified and
 corrected and so that this course can be of value and you can progress in your mastery of Spanish. For
 this reason, the only permissible reference sources are wordreference.com and print dictionaries.
                                                    –3–


 Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
 including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. For more
 information, consult the university’s General Information Catalog, in particular Chapter 11. Student
 Discipline and Conduct.
11. CONTACT INFORMATION
 Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any problems, questions, or suggestions you have
 relating to the class. However, if you have a concern about the class that you wish to discuss with
 someone other than your instructor, feel free to contact the Language Program Director.
                       Course Instructor                                    Program Director
  Name: Dr. Sean Manning                                         Name: Dr. Melissa D. Murphy
  Office: BEN 3.106                                              Office: BEN 4.136
  Office hours: MTWTHF 11:30-12:30, or by appointment            Office hours: By appointment
  E-mail: s.manning@utexas.edu                                   E-mail: mmurphy@mail.utexas.edu
12. ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATIONS
 I will be available to discuss appropriate academic accommodations that you may require as a student
 with a disability. Before I can make course accommodations, you must provide documentation from the
 Office of the Dean of Students-Services for Students with Disabilities. (This is in compliance with the
 Rehabilitation Act of 1973-Section 504 and the Americans with Disabilities Act/ADA.)
13. EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
 Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
 when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
 outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
 Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students
 requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
 building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
 Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Information regarding emergency
 evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                    –4–


    WRITING ASSIGNMENT #1              WRITING ASSIGNMENT #2                 WRITING ASSIGNMENT #3                  FINAL PROJECT -PART 1
                                                              TIPO DE TEXTO
             DESCRIPTIVO                       NARRATIVO                             EXPOSITIVO                        ARGUMENTATIVO
                                                    OBJETIVOS DE LA ESCRITURA
La descripción de una imagen       La creación de una historia original La explicación de un tema              La argumentación de una tesis
La organización secuencial de los  La organización simétrica de los      La objetividad en la presentación     La investigación y análisis de
  detalles                           detalles                              de los detalles                       fuentes bibliográficas
                                                                         El uso de vocabulario
El uso de frases largas y eficaces El uso del ritmo en la narración                                            El uso de citas y la paráfrasis
                                                                         especializado
                                                            GRAMÁTICA CLAVE
1. Ser, estar, haber               1. Los tiempos pasados                1. Las estructuras activas, pasivas e 1. Los recursos fundamentales de
                                                                            impersonales                          gramática para desarrollar y
2. La posición del adjetivo        2. Las preposiciones                                                           apoyar la tesis
                                                                         2. Los infinitivos, gerundios y
3. Los pronombres relativos        3. La acentuación: los hiatos            participios
4. La acentuación: las palabras                                          3. La acentuación: los diacríticos
   agudas, llanas y esdrújulas
                                                                      –5–


                      SPN 327C: CALENDARIO DEL CURSO
                                        CAPÍTULO 1
                                                —
         LA DESCRIPCIÓN: EL ARTE A TRAVÉS DEL TIEMPO Y DE LAS CULTURAS
              • Introducción al curso
 6 de junio                                                   •
              • Introducción al Capítulo 1
              • Entender el pasado a través del arte, pp. 2-3
 7 de junio   • Ser, estar, haber, pp. 3-5                    •
              • La acentuación y el uso de la tilde, pp. 5-6
              • Lo que es arte y lo que no, pp.9-12
10 de junio                                                   •
              • La posición del adjetivo, pp.12-16
              • El Museo Guggenheim de Bilbao, pp.17-21
                                                              • Proyecto final:
11 de junio   • Los pronombres relativos I
                                                                Propuesta
                 • Las cláusulas restrictivas, pp. 21-30
              • Entregar Proyecto Final: Propuesta
12 de junio   • Los pronombres relativos II                   •
                 • Las cláusulas explicativas, pp. 30-36
              • Objetivos de la escritura, p. 37
13 de junio                                                   • WA#1: Pre-borrador
              • Introducción a WA#1: El texto descriptivo
14 de junio   • Edición del WA#1: Pre-borrador                • WA#1: Borrador
                                                –6–


                                       CAPÍTULO 2
                                               —
            LA NARRACIÓN: LOS VIAJES, DE PROPÓSITO A CONSECUENCIA
             • Entregar WA#1: Borrador
             • Introducción al Capítulo 2                         • Proyecto final:
17 de junio
             • Introducción a “El sur” de Jorge Luis Borges, p. 2   Cuestionario
             • Los tiempos pasados, pp. 10-11
             • Entregar Proyecto final: Cuestionario
18 de junio  • “El sur” (Sección 1), pp. 2-3, 7                   • WA#1: Versión final
             • Las preposiciones I, pp. 13-16
             • Entregar WA#1: Versión final
19 de junio  • “El sur” (Sección 2), pp. 3-5, 8                   •
             • Las preposiciones II, pp. 17-20
             • “El sur” (Sección 3), pp. 5-6, 9
             • La acentuación: los hiatos, pp. 24-26              • Autoevaluación #1
20 de junio
             • Objetivos de la escritura, pp. 27-28               • WA#2: Pre-borrador
             • Introducción a WA#2: El texto narrativo
             • Autoevaluación #1                                  • WA#2: Borrador
21 de junio
             • Edición del WA#2: Pre-borrador                     • Portafolio #1
                                         CAPÍTULO 3
                                                —
                         LA EXPOSICIÓN: SOBRE LA IDENTIDAD
             • Entregar Portafolio #1
             • Entregar WA#2: Borrador
24 de junio  • Introducción al Capítulo 3                         •
             • Sobre la identidad y la discriminación, pp.3-24
             • Estructuras activas, pasivas e impersonales I
             • Frida Kahlo y la expresión simbólica, pp.25-40
25 de junio                                                        • WA#2: Versión final
             • Usos del infinitivo, participio y gerundio I
                                               –7–


            • Entregar WA#2: Versión final                      • Proyecto final:
26 de junio
            • Usos del infinitivo, participio y gerundio II       Parte 1 (Introducción)
            • Entregar Proyecto final: Parte 1 (Introducción)
            • Sobre la identidad indígena, pp.56-66
27 de junio                                                    • WA#3: Pre-Borrador
            • Acentuación: el acento diacrítico
            • Introducción a WA#3: El texto expositivo
                                                               • Portafolio #2
28 de junio • Edición del WA#3: Pre-borrador
                                                               • WA#3: Borrador
                                        CAPÍTULO 4
                                                —
                      LA ARGUMENTACIÓN: SOBRE LA JUSTICIA
            • Entregar Portafolio #2
            • Entregar WA#3: Borrador
 1 de julio                                                   •
            • Introducción al Capítulo 4
            • Subjuntivo I
            • Ejemplo de Investigación #1
 2 de julio                                                   • WA#3: Versión final
            • Subjuntivo I
            • Entregar WA#3: Versión final
 3 de julio
            • Subjuntivo II
 4 de julio • DÍA DE INDEPENDENCIA (NO HAY CLASE)
            • Ejemplo de Investigación #2
 5 de julio                                                   • Portafolio #3
            • Subjuntivo II
            • Entregar Portafolio #3                          • Proyecto final:
 8 de julio
            • Ejemplo de Investigación #3                         Parte 2
                                              –8–


  9 de julio   • Entregar Proyecto final: Parte 2      •
                                                       • Proyecto final:
 10 de julio   • Trabajo independiente (NO HAY CLASE)    Presentación oral
                                                       • Autoevaluación #2
               • Autoevaluación #2
                                                       • Proyecto final:
 11 de julio   • Proyecto final: Presentaciones orales
                                                         Partes 1 y 3
               • Evaluación del curso
12-13 de julio • Entregar Proyecto Final: Partes 1 y 3
                                              –9–
