KIN 627J Off-Campus Fieldwork Syllabus & Instructions
Faculty Advisor: Rachel Watson
r.watson@utexas.edu
Office Ph: 512-471-3728 /Cell: 580-467-4016/Office: BEL 942b
Enrollment in this class means you have been approved to earn KIN/HED Fieldwork credit by working at
an agency considered off-campus. Below you will find the assignments and deadlines for successful
completion of this course; all of this material is provided for you electronically on the Canvas site. You
must register for this class for a letter grade; pass/fail is not an option.
Remember: The internship is a chance for students to gain new skills and competencies. As such, it is
NOT to provide academic credit for continuing an existing job. If you already work for the organization,
you are not eligible to obtain fieldwork credit at this work site.
Course Documents: The KIN 627J materials are available online under KHE Internships (Canvas), the
Student Advising Office in SZB 216, and on the KIN 627J class Canvas page.
USE OF CANVAS:
Communication, distribution of materials and submission of assignments is managed through Canvas —
a Web-based course management system with password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu.
You can find support at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. Due to
the nature of this course, all materials will be updated by semester and posted for you on that site. All
materials need to be submitted either electronically by email directly to Rachel ( r.watson@utexas.edu)
and/or posted to Canvas.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
This is an independent study class. As the faculty member assigned to this class I am here to facilitate
you receiving credit for your fieldwork experience. You must read the directions below and follow them
carefully to maximize your working towards the best possible grade. Here are the minimum
requirements:
1) Hours: Put in a minimum of 270 hours of work during the semester at the fieldwork site (approx. 27
    hours per week).
2) Weekly log/reflections: Keep a weekly log of your activities and thoughts related to your fieldwork
    experience. Post your weekly logs to Canvas directly each week by the due date. The weekly logs
    contribute 15% to your final grade. Weekly logs must be received each week by the due date and
    time listed for each log. There is a 5% deduction per day for each late submission/posting.
3) Read TWO of the recommended books: Regular reading is part of continued professional
    development. Two of your weekly reflections are thoughts about books you read as part of this
    course. You may choose any non-textbook books that are pertinent to your professional growth and
    development. Your report that week must indicate that you actually read the book: “flyleaf”
    reflections are not acceptable and will be subject to a 5 point penalty with an opportunity for
    resubmission. There is a list of “great reads” on the Announcement page of Canvas, but consider
    asking your supervisor for suggestions as well, as they may be more connected to your work
    performance.


4) Final Project: Because fieldwork opportunities vary dramatically in the nature of the work performed,
   there is no set “standard” for the outside project. In the past we've had students do such diverse
   things as:
           a. run a competitive tournament
           b. create a website
           c. create a business plan
           d. redo the marketing materials for a particular ad campaign
           e. create an internship manual for the business
           f. organize a trip for residents
           g. provide specialized care for one or more individuals in a clinical setting
           h. develop social media tools for their site
   Students are expected to come up with several ideas for this outside project in consultation with both
   the site supervisor and faculty advisor. The project is NOT the same as work performed for
   internship hours; you must develop an idea, pitch it to your supervisor, refine it with his/her feedback
   along with input from Rachel and then “do” the project. There must be identifiable “work product”
   associated with your project: simply leading a workout, for example, would be something you should
   do in the normal course of your internship. Designing a new exercise program, which you develop,
   strategically market/advertise, and then lead, followed by assessing effectiveness would be a project
   associated with exercise leadership. Please see the Project Approval/Plan Your Work/Work Your Plan
   materials on Canvas for more details. There is a 5% deduction per day for each late
   posting/submission. Since this course is associated with an Independent Inquiry flag, this material is
   reflected in 35% of your grade, including supervisor evaluations and final presentation.
   Due dates are as follows…
               Proposed Project/Project Approval paperwork - No later than Wednesday, June 17th,
                2020 at 5pm
               Plan Your Work - No later than Wednesday, June 24th, 2020 at 5pm
               Work Your Plan 1 - No later than Thursday, July 2nd, 2020 at 5pm
               Work Your Plan 2 - No later than Friday, July 17th, 2020 at 5pm
               Work Your Plan 3 - No later than Friday, August 7th, 2020 at 5pm
5) Final Presentation: Create a PowerPoint presentation of your fieldwork experience that includes a
   description of your internship, and highlights your semester project. The final presentation is
   scheduled for a time at the end of the semester and will be announced in July. Your PowerPoint
   presentation will become part of a library of internship and fieldwork sites that other students can
   view to help them find an internship site. The Presentation should be between 8-10 slides. Slide 1 is
   to be a Title slide with the name of your project, semester of completion, and your name. NOTE:
   Previous semester project/presentations are located on the KHE Internship Group found at the
   bottom of your home Canvas page.
           6) Supervisor Evaluations: Make sure your site supervisor completes both midterm and final
                evaluation forms. The evaluations are done electronically and directions will be posted
                on Canvas.
                Midterm evaluations are due by Friday, July 10th, 2020 by 5 pm.
                Final evaluations are due by Friday, August 14th, 2020 by 5 pm.


7) Submission of final documents: Before your presentation, please e-mail the following below to
    r.watson@utexas.edu.
     Your PPT of the internship presentation
     Your evaluation of the fieldwork site (see Canvas for the evaluation form)
The University sets the deadline for reporting all fieldwork grades. Projects turned in after the
deadline will receive an “F”.
Grading:
     60% based on attendance and evaluation of work by supervisor [60% = 30% for midterm
       evaluation, 30% for final evaluation; 5% of each of these evaluations includes the semester
       project]
     15% based on punctuality and quality of weekly logs [5% deduction/day for late submissions;
       written warning for non-compliance with further penalties as warranted]
     25% based on semester project including PowerPoint, project and final submissions of all
       materials
Please read the following as it contains essential information about how to communicate well.
Think about how you communicate this semester, especially with your internship site and UT: the
quality of your communication will drive perceptions of who you are and your overall work
quality. Consider:
  1. If you are sending an email, make sure that you use appropriate grammar and minimize
      abbreviations. Write in complete sentences and be as clear as possible, using lists or bullet points
      when appropriate. The Subject Line should identify what the email is about: if you are sending in
      a weekly report, include the same name as your file, i.e., Weekly Report 6 or Work Your Plan 1 &
      2.
  2. If you are sending/attaching a document to an electronic communication, you should:
             a. Make sure the document is saved with your initials, the date, and a meaningful file
                 name. The person you are sending material to may be handling hundreds of documents
                 each day, and receiving one from you that is saved by Acrobat to a default file name of
                 1005467.pdf is meaningless. If I were to save this document to attach in an email to you,
                 I would save it as: Stanforth ProfTips 02-05-14 prior to sending.
             b. Type all submissions, rather than writing by hand. If necessary, you can generally save a
                 .pdf as a word document, add your info, and then resave as a .pdf; if it originates as a
                 word document, type directly on the document, regardless of how beautiful your
                 handwriting is. All submitted forms must be typewritten.
             c. If the person receiving the document is reading it, or needs to be able to add
                 information, save the file a .docx. or .pdf. Do not snap a photo with your phone or send
                 as a .tiff, .jpg, etc. If all you are doing is sending a “picture” of your work, where the
                 receiver needs to “see” something (not read words) then picture files are appropriate,
                 but none of your submissions this semester should be sent as pictures.
             d. If you are scanning and sending a document, check to make sure the format is readable
                 and complete prior to sending; too dark, streaky, etc. means a do-over. Be sure to check


                   the orientation of the page – having to do a side plank while reading .pdf files is not fun
                   for most!
              e. Create a single .pdf file from multiple page scans: every available program I am aware of
                   has the option to scan into a single .pdf file. Do not attach 10 separate pages and expect
                   the person on the receiving end to assemble them into a readable document, or fix any
                   positional issues, i.e., rotating pages. Send a single file (.pdf or .doc) that you have
                   confirmed is complete and readable upon receipt, saved with an appropriate file name.
  3. What if you aren’t the most tech savvy person on the planet? Do a google search and you will be
       offered a selection from literally hundreds of choices of potential solutions. Try to solve your
       “problem” before you send an email saying “it doesn’t work,” or “I can’t do it that way,” or “How
       do I…?” Part of your professional development is learning how to figure things out. Most people
       are willing to help you if they know you have tried to find a solution first; it becomes less likely
       they will continue to invest their time if you rely on them to fix your problem or answer all your
       questions…particularly ones that are easily answered by you doing a little investigation. Take some
       initiative and surprise your supervisor with excellence.
GENERAL POLICIES:
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check
your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions
for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
Honor Code & Code of Conduct:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.”
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
http://www.utexas.edu/about-ut/mission-core-purpose-honor-code
Plagiarism:
Any student engaging in academic dishonesty (e.g., cheating, fabrication, facilitating academic
dishonesty, plagiarism) is subject to discipline, which may include a failing grade in the course, and may
also be subject to more severe discipline by the University. For more information about plagiarism and
the consequences of plagiarizing visit
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php


Religious Holy Days:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me and your fieldwork supervisor of your pending absence at least
5 days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. Deadlines affected by observance of a
religious holiday will be adjusted to accommodate your needs as long as you have provided timely
notice.
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Your success in this class is important to us. If there are aspects of this course that prevent
you from learning or exclude you, please let us know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are
also a range of resources on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in
case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an
effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your
needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these
discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259
(voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of
struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an
important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support
sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic
stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you
to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
CARE Counseling
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to
need support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE
Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to
your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White,
LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an
appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a
voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also
available on Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM. You will check-in at the College of
Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let Danie know you’re waiting. All
services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without your written consent.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist
appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different
subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512- 471-
3614 (JES A332).


Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
• If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors,
call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
• The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
• Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires
exiting and assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
