The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | Department of AET
SENIOR DESIGN PROJECTS I Fall 2019 Syllabus
AET 372 Senior Design Projects I
DFA 4.112
Visualization Laboratory (Vislab) https://www.tacc.utexas.edu/vislab
TTH 02:00 p.m. - 03:15 p.m
  Instructor: Yuliya Lanina (Vis Lab)               Instructor: Chris Ozley (DFA, PLAI)
  yuliya.lanina@utexas.edu                          chris.ozley@utexas.edu
                                                    Office Hour: Thursday, 3:30-4:20 pm, AV
  Office Hour: Tuesday, 5-5:50 pm, DFA
                                                    Studio
  TA: Austin Theriot
  austinmtheriot@gmail.com
COURSE DETAILS
Prerequisites: Completion of all core AET coursework. That includes AET 101, 102, 103, 304,
310 and three lower division courses.
Course Objectives and Outcomes
This experience is meant to build on your acquired knowledge and skills to facilitate the creation
of a collaborative team project that would serve as a calling card to future employers or graduate
schools.
Course Overview
Students will work on a project in teams of 3-4 people, bringing the skills they have acquired in
previous years. Each team proposes their project in writing. Once the project is approved, the
team is responsible for the concept, technical drawings/prototypes, design, testing,
implementation and presentation of their project. In addition, each team will create an online
version of their project showcasing their research, development, documentation and outcomes of
their project. Students may elect to complete a solo project, but the guidelines and approval
process for this option will be a great deal more stringent. Students are advised to treat the course


as a collaborative effort and only propose a solo project should it meet the criteria outlined later
in this document. Occasionally, faculty members may propose an idea for the project.
Objectives and Assessment Instruments
By the end of the course, students should be able to:
   •     Utilize experience and knowledge in the creation of original works
   •     Gain experience in the design process from start to finish
   •     Demonstrate effective collaboration and effective communication with team members
   •     Conduct independent research
   •     Present your completed projects in a professional manner
Independent Inquiry
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your
major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the
independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
Course Structure
1. We will be meeting twice a week. Class time will be spent mostly on in-class presentations of
your work in progress, class lectures and group project work. For each class hour you are
required to spend 2-3 hours working on your projects outside of class.
2. Project groups will be formed at our first meeting. If you already have a group in mind that
you would like to work with, that’s great! We will conduct a “speed networking” event which
will provide an opportunity for each person in the class to meet everyone else. By the end of our
first class meeting, all of the project groups will be confirmed.
3. The groups will meet for 30-40 minutes each week to discuss their projects outside of class
meetings. The day, time and location of these meetings will be decided upon and entered into the
group proposal at the end of the first class meeting.


TEAM PROJECT GUIDELINES
Each group, once formed, must decide collectively on the project topic during the first week.
Project ideas must be original, and they should not replicate any existing ideas or products. You
will have two weeks to organize and submit the project idea. During your third week you will
present your proposal to Chris Ozley and Yuliya Lanina. Both Chris and Yuliya must approve
your idea before you move on to the next step. Your project must be locked in by the fourth week
(unless you were granted an extension). The final draft of your proposal must be dated and
signed by all of your team members, Chris, and Yuliya, and will serve as an official contract.
By our fourth meeting each group must submit a rough draft of your proposal which
should include the following:
  •     Project summary (100 words or less), briefly and concisely describing your proposed
        project and its key components.
  •     Project description (500 words or less), providing an extended summary of your work.
  •     Context (inspiration, problem, space, big idea)
  •     If creating a game, your group must generate and prototype 3 ideas. (Consider team
        resources, time, and technological constraints.)
  •     Project Goals (500 words or less)
  •     Assigned roles
  •     Target audience. Identify the audience(s) for which this project is intended.
  •     Location and equipment
  •     Outcomes. Your outcomes should reflect on what the expected results of your project are.
Once both Chris and Yuliya approve your project idea, you will need to submit a final written
draft of your proposal to both instructors.
The final written draft of your proposal should include:
1) Project title
2) Project description
3) Project goals
4) A clear production plan, which would include detailed timeline with weekly deliverables for
each team member.


5) Assigned roles and outcomes
6) Your meeting schedule
7) Prototype/3D representation of the environment/virtual representation for interactive
experience/pre-visualization (Hog4 PC and Lightconverse software)/system diagram/ground plan
8) Original concept art examples (2-3)
9) Original concept music composition.
Discuss planned instrumentation, approximate length, possible stylistic characteristics, etc., and
write a 1-minute snippet of musical material to accompany/clarify your description.
10) Specific location for your project presentation (Visualization Lab, The Foundry, PLAI Lab,
Classroom)
11) Budget. Provide the total cost for the entire project with the breakdown for specific needs.
12) A clear plan of attack and strategy on how, when, and where you are going to test the
individual elements that make up your project.
13) Create a list of deliverables for Mid-semester review (and other reviews).
Team Roles
Each group must have the following:
1-creative lead
1-project manager/producer
1-2 production artist(s)/content creator(s)
1-technical lead/engineer
1-documentation photographer/videographer
1-publishing producer
*Each group member is required to have more than one role
Research and Production
Your project should show a significant amount of research related to the concept and execution
of your idea. You must document all of your research and include it in your final report (online).
During the course of the semester, each team needs to show an understanding of the individual
elements that make up the whole project. Every team must be able to demonstrate any tests or
prototypes of the main elements thoroughly enough to show that you will be able to complete
your project.


Deadlines for the required reports and oral presentations will be posted on Canvas. Your grade
will be lowered if your work is received after the deadline. No extensions!
SOLO PROJECT GUIDELINES
Students will have the option to choose a solo project if they have a concept that will require a
substantial amount of research and individualized growth to complete it. If you choose to
work on a solo project, your idea is approved, and your work falls outside of the class instructor's
expertise, you are required to have a Faculty Advisor who will mentor the project throughout the
semester. You must choose and contact the Faculty Advisor prior to our third meeting.
You are required to meet at least five times with your advisor over the semester:
  •     First time to approve your project.
  •     Other times 3-7 days before each review.
  •     Yuliya and Chris will contact your advisors directly for their feedback from each meeting.
By our fourth meeting solo students must submit a rough draft of your proposal which
includes:
  •     Project summary (100 words or less), briefly and concisely describing your proposed
        project and its key components.
  •     Project description (500 words or less), providing an extended summary of your work.
  •     Context (inspiration, problem, space, big idea)
  •     If creating a game, generate and prototype 3 ideas. (Consider resources, time, and
        technological constraints.)
  •     Project Goals (500 words or less)
  •     Target audience. Identify the audience(s) for which this project is intended.
  •     Location and equipment
  •     Reason for choosing a particular advisor for your solo project.
  •     Outcomes. Your outcomes should reflect on what the expected results of your project are.
Once both Chris and Yuliya approve your project idea, you will need to submit a final written
draft of your solo project proposal to both instructors.


The final written draft of your proposal should include:
1) Project title
2) Project description
3) Project goals
4) A clear production plan, which would include detailed timeline with weekly deliverables.
5) Outcomes
6) Reason for choosing your advisor and your advisor meeting schedule
7) Prototype/3D representation of the environment/virtual representation for interactive
experience/pre-visualization (Hog4 PC and Lightconverse software)/system diagram/ground plan
8) Original concept art examples (2-3)
9) Original concept music composition.
Discuss planned instrumentation, approximate length, possible stylistic characteristics, etc., and
write a 1-minute snippet of musical material to accompany/clarify your description.
10) Specific location for your project presentation (Visualization Lab, The Foundry, PLAI Lab,
Classroom)
11) Budget. Provide the total cost for the entire project with the breakdown for specific needs.
12) A clear plan of attack and strategy on how, when, and where you are going to test the
individual elements that make up your project.
13) Create a list of deliverables for Mid-semester review (and other reviews).
Research and Production
Solo projects must demonstrate a significant amount of research related to the concept and
execution of your idea. You must document all of your research and include it in your final report
(online) and in your scholarly research and reflection paper, detailed below.
During the course of the semester, solo project students need to show an understanding of the
individual elements that make up the whole project. Every solo student must be able to
demonstrate any tests or prototypes of the main elements thoroughly enough to show that you
will be able to complete your solo project.


Deadlines for the required reports and oral presentations will be posted on Canvas. Your grade
will be lowered if your work is received after the deadline. No extensions!
REVIEWS, PRESENTATIONS, PAPERS, AND WEBSITE
Reviews
Each group or solo student will have 15 minutes to present their progress for the first four
semester reviews. Each member of the group will present their contribution to the project
separately, 2-3 minutes each. (Solo students: you will need to prepare substantial presentations
that will equate to 15 minutes for your reviews.) Teams and solo students need to show a clear
understanding of what they need to accomplish in order to implement the final product and show
awareness on how your product has had to alter/change given what testing/prototyping has
shown. Each team project review will also be peer-reviewed. The 5th Review is the final
presentation and showcase. (Solo students: you will also need to discuss your research findings
as it develops throughout the semester in your reviews.)
First Review (Week 4) - Each team and solo student will present their project proposals. This
should be approached from the standpoint of “pitching” your idea. Provide us with the most
salient and engaging details of your project’s experience, and give us a glimpse into the visual
and musical content. Team project groups only: Provide written peer reviews for each of your
group members.
2nd Review (Week 6) - Each team and solo student will present their projects in progress. Your
2nd Review presentation should include the following:
• A preliminary prototype with some functionality
• A small portion of the research you have gathered for your project
• 2-3 minutes of musical work scored in a DAW
• Visual examples that have developed beyond the conceptual stage
-Solo projects only: Advisor’s feedback on the current state of your project.
-Team project groups only: Provide written peer reviews for each of your group members.


3rd Review or Mid-semester Review (Week 8) - this will take the form of group presentations
of the project. You must show a significant project development during this presentation.
Deliverables should include:
-Updated title/concept of your project
-Updated timeline
-Explanation of the future application of your project
-Updated development of your project, which would include:
• A working prototype on the device you are using
• Half of the musical work scored in a DAW
• Half of visual material you will use in your project
• Each, or most of the elements tested to a prototype stage
• For interactivity, or interaction, the concept tested on a miniature or iterative scale.
• Half of anything else that is going to be a part of your project. (Solo projects only: This would
be determined together with your advisor during the first 3 weeks of this class.)
-Solo projects only: Advisor’s feedback on the current state of your project.
-Solo projects only: Show how your research is developing toward your scholarly paper.
-Team project groups only: Provide written peer reviews for each of your group members.
4th Review (Week 11) - Each team and solo student will present their projects in progress. At
this point your projects should be in a very high-functioning state and nearing completion. Your
4th Review presentation should include the following:
• A high-functioning device, nearing the completion stage
• A draft of nearly all musical material
• All visual elements nearing completion
• Audio and visual elements working in cohesion to create strong narrative
• Demonstrate that all elements are on time toward completion within the following week. (Dry
runs begin in week 13.
-Solo projects only: Advisor’s feedback on the current state of your project.
-Team project groups only: Provide written peer reviews for each of your group members.
5th Review (Week 15) - Final presentation and Showcase


Self- / Peer-Reflection (Team Projects ONLY)
At the end of the semester, you are required to write a reflection paper which should include
your strategies for capitalizing on your strengths and overcoming your weaknesses in order to
become a successful team member, and it should include your reflection on your growth because
of this class. In addition, you will discuss the results of your efforts regarding the quality of the
project and/or your part of the project.
Similarly, you will evaluate each of your team member’s contributions and assign them and
yourself a grade. Each team member’s final peer-review grade will be calculated using the
following percentages:
-50% is determined by averaging all of the peer-review grades given by their teammates
throughout the semester.
-50% is determined by averaging all of the peer-reflection paper grades from your teammates at
the end of the semester.
Scholarly Research and Reflection Paper (Solo Projects ONLY)
Should you choose to produce a solo project, you will be required to complete a 10-15 page
research paper detailing the research that you conducted under the supervision of your advisor
throughout the semester. This paper must include a full bibliography of at least ten scholarly
sources. (Only scholarly journal articles, acknowledged authoritative books on the topic, or
interviews with experts will be accepted.) Additionally, your paper must include either properly-
formatted parenthetical citations or footnote citations. You will be graded on the formatting of
your paper and content of your research. Your faculty advisor will aid in the grading of the
content and substance of your research paper.
In addition, you must include a section in your paper to discuss the resulting quality of your
project, and you must assign yourself a grade. This grade will be used to help determine your
grade for the final presentations.


Stand-up Student Progress Reports
Every other week we will have a 5-minute stand-up per team during which each team member
will have 1 minute each to update the class on what they’ve done over the week. Solo students
will deliver a 5-minute stand-up to the class.
In addition, each team will periodically report on the project, culminating in a final exhibition
and oral presentation (see below).
Final Presentations and Showcase
The final presentation of your project will be graded based on quality, state of completion, and
effort. Industry people, advisors and other faculty may be invited to these presentations for
additional feedback.
The final presentation and exhibition of your work will take the place of a final exam.
Each team is responsible for presenting their project physically and online.
Final Report / Project Website
As a part of this class, you are required to create an online presentation of your project.
Your online report must include the following:
  •      Name of your project
  •      Project summary
  •      Project description
  •      Team projects only: Info about your team members and their role
  •      Documentation of the process and progress with images and descriptions
  •      Demo of your final product
  •      Explanation of the future application of your project
  •      Documentation of your accumulated research (solo projects must provide significant
         documentation and citations of your research!)
  •      Solo projects only: Your faculty advisor will help you determine additional sites where
         you must publish your project


GRADING DETAILS
TEAM PROJECT GRADES
Assignments and Stand-up Progress Reports 10%
Written Project Proposal/First Review 10%
Second Review 10%
Mid-semester Presentation (Third Review) 15%
Fourth Review 10%
Final Project Presentation and Showcase (Visual, Oral and Online) 20%
Peer Review 15%
 (50% - average of the peer-reflection paper grades // 50% - peer-review averages from across the
semester)
Self- / Peer-Reflection paper 10%
SOLO PROJECT GRADES
Assignments and Stand-up Progress Reports 10%
Written Project Proposal/First Review 10%
Second Review 10%
Mid-semester Presentation (Third Review) 15%
Fourth Review 10%
Final Project Presentation and Showcase (Visual, Oral and Online) 20%
Faculty Advisor Grade 15%
Solo Scholarly Research and Reflection Paper 10%
The following considerations may result in grade adjustments:
1. INDIVIDUAL STUDENT GRADES may be adjusted based on your individual performance
within the team.
2. ABSENCES will result in modification of an individual student’s final grade.
3. FAILURE TO COMPLETE ASSIGNMENTS by deadlines will result in deductions to your
grade.
4. FAILURE TO PARTICIPATE in bi-weekly stand-up student progress reports will result in
deductions to your final grade.


Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
grade of A+.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
F = 0-60
COURSE POLICIES
Course materials
Required: HD or Flash Drive for backing up your projects
There is no required text or readings. Some days we will be posting material related to the topics
we cover. You are encouraged to look deeper into the subjects that pertain to your interests.
Safety Training
In accordance with regulations from UT’s Department of Environmental Health and Safety, all
undergraduate students are required to receive training in order to use the equipment in the art
and design labs. First, students must successfully pass the online training for general machine
shop safety upon successful completion of this module, students will then receive hands-on


training for specific equipment. Time will be allotted during the first week of classes to complete
the online portion.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (email) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
students. Students are expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that email be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
in his or her official email address
(do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable
excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full
inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the
University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
Use of Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the
instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic
dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things,
uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other
current or future students.
(see https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Attendance


You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss
points for in-class assignments or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up.
However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.)
impacts your attendance, please inform us as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception
below for religious holy days.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class
without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy.
Three tardies equals an absence. Four absences will lower your course grade by one letter grade.
Religious Holidays
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior
to the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
Classroom Etiquette
Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and instructors:
1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the
beginning of class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as
possible. And please don’t hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an
announced break, since often the second part of the class period is when we will engage in group
activities.
2) Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the classroom. If you forget to do
so, and your phone rings, chirps, or vibrates loudly during class, turn it off immediately and
discreetly. We reserve the right to penalize repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s
assignment.
3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen
to loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom
during breaks.


4) Consider bringing earphones and/or earplugs to class for work sessions. If you like to listen to
music while you work, you are welcome to do so, so long as no one else can hear it. And if you
are easily distracted by noise/conversation, please bring earplugs to wear so that the conversation
from desk critiques will not bother you.
CALENDAR
Visualization Lab TA
Austin Theriot - lab hours one or two evenings a week
Austin is in charge of the Vis. Lab schedule.
Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be
altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design
program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be
announced in class, via email and/or on Canvas. You are responsible for keeping up with any
changes in the syllabus.
Schedule:
    Week 1               08/29/2019             Meet in Visualization Lab
                                                -Tour of the facility and equipment
                                                -Form groups; “speed networking”
    Week 2               09/03/2019             Meet in DFA
                                                -Brainstorming ideas
                         09/05/2019             Present a compelling project that resonates
                                                with your group
    Week 3               09/10/2019             -Rough Draft of Project Proposal DUE
                                                Final Draft of Project Proposal DUE
                         09/12/2019             Decide how your group will document and present
                                                your project online


Week 4 09/17/2019 Tentative: Meet in DFA
                  1st Review - Project Proposal Presentations
                  Instructors and advisor approval
       09/19/2019
                  Tentative: Meet in Visualization Lab
                  1st Review - Project Proposal Presentations
Week 5 09/24/2019 Production phase 1
                  Production phase 1
       09/26/2019
                  Students report on progress
Week 6 10/01/2019 Tentative: Meet in DFA
                  2nd Review
                  Tentative: Meet in Visualization Lab
       10/03/2019
                  2nd Review
Week 7 10/08/2019 Production phase 1
       10/10/2019 Production phase 1
                  Students report on progress
Week 8 10/15/2019 Tentative: Meet in DFA
                  3rd (Mid-semester) Review
       10/17/2019
                  Tentative: Meet in Visualization Lab
                  3rd (Mid-semester) Review
Week 9 10/22/2019 Tentative: Meet in Visualization Lab
                  (Yuliya Lanina is away)
       10/24/2019
                  Production Phase 2


Week 10 10/29/2019 Production Phase 2
        10/31/2019
                   Production Phase 2
                   Students report on progress
Week 11 11/05/2019 Tentative: Meet in DFA
                   4th Review
                   Tentative: Meet in Visualization Lab
        11/07/2019
                   4th Review
Week 12 11/12/2019 Production Phase 2
                   Students report on progress
        11/14/2019
                   Publishing and presentation preparations
                   Assignments due
Week 13 11/19/2019 Tentative: Meet in DFA Lab
                   Final project in-class presentations (dry run)
        11/21/2019 Tentative: Meet in Vis. Lab
                   Final project in-class presentations (dry run)
Week 14 11/26/2019 Tentative: Meet in PLAI Lab
                   Final project in-class presentations (dry run)
        11/28/2019
                   Thanksgiving
                   ALL ONLINE MATERIAL DUE


   Week 15               12/03/2019            FINAL PRESENTATION / SHOWCASE (Vis. Lab)
                                               FINAL PRESENTATION / SHOWCASE (Foundry,
                         12/05/2019
                                               PLAI Lab)
                                               Recap
                                               Reflection paper DUE
                                               SOLO PROJECT: Research/Reflection paper
                                               DUE
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected
to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work
undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and
other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
   •    acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
   •    complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
        assistance in preparing them;
   •    follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
        academic discipline; and
   •    avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
        student.
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
such as:
   •    Cheating
   •    Plagiarism
   •    Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
   •    Falsifying Academic Records


   •    Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
        extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
   •    Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
        without authorization to do so)
   •    Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: https://ugs.utexas.edu/vick/academic/adddrop/qdrop
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you,
please let us know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs
and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with us, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let us know. We are committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but we can only do so if you discuss your needs with us as
early as possible. We promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).


STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
include (but are not limited to) the following:
Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
of services and resources to support students and alumni.
The Undergraduate Writing Center
(512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
their courses.
The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
time-management, and note-taking courses.
University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and
health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
officially enrolled in certain University programs.
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students
with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Emergency Procedures
Mass emails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide
students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security
of the campus community. Emails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff
of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have
the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of
users subscribed to the service.
Campus Carry
The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well
as buildings and spaces that are accessible to the public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in
classrooms. It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on
or about their person at all times while on campus. “About” the person means that a license


holder may carry a holstered handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag
must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing position.
The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in
place if jostled. A license holder may not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus
premises or on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage,
or other parking area. The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees
an openly carried gun on campus should immediately call 911.
Useful Links:
Portfolio
6 steps for creating a knock-out portfolio
Essential Steps to Making a Killer Portfolio
How to Put Together Your First Professional Portfolio
3 Digital Portfolio Best Practices: How to Make a Portfolio that Pops
Posting Work Online
How to Set Up Your Profile & Upload Your Work - Video
Posting your work online
Resume
Resume and Career Essentials
8 Tips for Writing a Resume
Linkedin
Building a Linkedin profile
LinkedIn Recommendations and Endorsements: 5 Do's and 4 Don'ts
Interview
Interviewing for Opportunities
Interview Questions for Creative Professionals: How to Answer the Usual Suspects
5 Interview Tips to Help You Nail Your Creative Job Interview


Getting a Job
Networking
How to Get Your First Job: 5 Job Search Tips for Creative Grads
3 Must-Have Soft Skills in the Workplace
Build Your Business
