 ADV 318J: INTRODUCTION TO ADVERTISING & INTEGRATED BRAND PROMOTION
    2020 Spring Semester          Mon & Wed 12:00 – 1:15 pm             BMC 2.106
  Professor:                                                Teaching Assistants:
  Anthony Dudo, Ph.D.                                       Rani Chan*
  Office: BMC 4.364                                         E-mail: rdrchan@utexas.edu
  E-mail: through Canvas                                    Office: BMC Floor 4, Station 13
  Office Hours: M 1:30-2:30pm & W 11-11:50am                Office Hours: T 10:00am – 12:00pm
                                                            * first point of contact for ALL email inquiries.
                                                            TBD
                                                            E-mail:
                                                            Office:
                                                            Office Hours:
            “People DO judge a book by its cover. We may have the best products, the highest quality …
            etc. If we present them in a slipshod manner, they will be perceived as slipshod. If we present
            them in a creative, professional manner, we will impute desired qualities.”
                                                                 Mike Markkula, Jr., former Apple executive
            “It has taken more than a hundred scientists two years to find out how to make the product
            in question; I have been given thirty days to create its personality and plan its launching. If
            I do my job well, I shall contribute as much as the hundred scientists to the success of this
            product.”
                                                                   David Ogilvy, Ad icon
   REQUIRED TEXT & MATERIALS
                                                     th
1. Advertising and Integrated Brand Promotion, 8 Edition. O’Guinn, Allen, Semenik, & Close. Cengage
                                 th
   Learning, 2018. Must be 8 Edition.
2. The text is available through the Canvas under the “IA Bookshelf” tab on the left hand side of Canvas.
3. All exams will be administered through Canvas with an online proctoring service called Proctorio. It is a
   Chrome extension that uses your computer’s camera to record any instances of academic integrity violations.
   Further instructions on using Proctorio will be available in our class Canvas course page.
4. Additional materials will be distributed during class, through email, or posted to our class Canvas course
   page (http://canvas.utexas.edu). These materials are mandatory unless specified otherwise.


                                                                                                              2
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Advertising represents an incredibly dynamic, fun, and challenging field. It’s hard to look anywhere
today without seeing the influence of advertising—from the clothes you’re wearing right now to the
media system that serves you unlimited information and entertainment. Advertising’s prolific role in
society— which can be both beneficial and harmful—constantly changes and, as such, requires its
practitioners to be creative, attentive, energetic, analytical, ethical, logical, and highly skilled. Perhaps
more than any other traits, being successful in this field requires astute communication abilities and
innovative thinking.
The primary objective of the course is to help you cultivate your own basic understanding of the
foundational concepts, skills, and perspectives in contemporary integrated brand promotion (IBP). We
will examine IBP efforts as (1) an element in our social system, (2) a business function, (3) an art and
communication form, and (4) a science. Your goal is to leave this class feeling equipped and excited to
continue your education in this stimulating and rewarding field.
NOTE: Read through this syllabus carefully. This document serves as a contract between you and me;
it defines our mutual expectations and responsibilities as student and instructor. While I will seek to
adhere to the schedule set forth below, I reserve the right to make any changes to this syllabus that I
deem necessary.
STUDENT LEARNING OBJECTIVES
         v You will learn principles, issues, and concepts that are foundational to advertising and
             integrated brand promotion
         v You will understand the broader structure, context, and societal dimensions of advertising
             and IBP
         v You will recognize that advertising and IBP are in a state of constant flux
         v You will begin to develop the habits of mind necessary to excel in advertising and IBP.
             Some of these habits include:
             o The need to constantly monitor the field
             o The need to develop effective verbal, written, and interpersonal communication skills
             o The need to develop critical thinking skills
         v You will gain experience working in small teams to critically assess IBP issues
STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
         v Complete assigned readings prior to the first class for which they are listed, and attend and
             participate in class as required.
         v In addition to the readings from your textbook, you are responsible for understanding all
             content from in-class lectures, exercises, discussions, and assigned videos.
         v Examinations test conceptual understanding of information from the aforementioned
             sources. To do well on the exams, study your assigned readings, lecture notes, and class
             exercises.
         v You should develop an awareness of the trends and issues concerning advertising and
             public relations. I encourage you to begin developing a weekly habit of monitoring
             Advertising Age, PR Week and AdWeek.


                                                                                                           3
METHOD OF EVALUATION
Overall letter grades are based on point totals calculated by adding:
      Assignment                          Points per Assignment            Points Total
      4 Exams                             200                              800
      2 Papers                            50                               100
      10 MindTap Quizzes                  10                               100
      TOTAL POINTS POSSIBLE                                                1,000
      1000
The points necessary to earn a letter grade are as follows:
                                      Letter Grade      Point Total
                                      A                 910 and above
                                      A-                870-909.9
                                      B+                850-869.9
                                      B***              795-849.9
                                      C+                766.7-794.9
                                      C                 733.4-766.6
                                      C-                695-733.3
                                      D+                666.7-694.9
                                      D                 633.4-666.6
                                      D-                595-633.3
                                                        594.9 and
                                      F                 below
***NOTE: Students must earn at least a B in this class to apply or continue as an advertising/PR major.
GRADE QUESTIONS
You should check Canvas to confirm that your grades on exams, papers, and quizzes are recorded
correctly. Report any errors to the TAs immediately; do not wait until the end of the semester.
EXTRA CREDIT
There are no extra credit assignments. All missed assignments and/or late assignments earn zeros;
there are no exceptions.
EXAMS
Exams will be administered online through Canvas.
    v Each exam consists of 40 multiple choice and true/false questions.
    v Exams 1-4 are not cumulative. I will not provide study guides for any of the exams but encourage you
         to form groups—either in-person or via online social networks—to aid studying. There are no make-
         up exams.
    v The exams will only be available during our class time (12:00pm – 1:15pm). You must finish it in one


                                                                                                                    4
           sitting, meaning you cannot start the test, log off for a while and come back to resume taking the test.
      v If you have a question about your exam, you must contact the TA immediately. Exam grades will be
           discussed only during the week immediately following when the grades are posted to Canvas. After
           that, exam grade changes will not be discussed; there are no exceptions.
      v The final exam is optional; you may choose to take the comprehensive final exam (worth 200 points).
           If the final exam score is higher than the lowest exam score, it will be substituted in place of the
           exam score. If you miss an exam during the semester for any reason whatsoever, you must take
           the comprehensive final exam.
 PAPERS
 Grades on the papers have a significant impact on your final course grade. The specific instructions for
 these assignments will be provided to you in class or during the semester and posted on our class Canvas
 website. You may only turn in your own, original work. The TAs will grade these projects.
 If you have a question about your grade on any of these assignments, you must contact the TAs
 immediately. These grades will be discussed only during the week (i.e., 7 days) immediately following when
 the grades are posted to Canvas. After that, grade changes will not be discussed; there are no exceptions.
 Finally, following instructions is an important part of these assignments and no late submissions will be
 accepted for any reason whatsoever—assignments must be uploaded to our Canvas website before the
 beginning of class (12:00 pm). Assignments submitted after the deadline will earn an automatic grade of 0.
 Papers may be submitted early.
 MINDTAP QUIZZES
 Grades on the MindTap portion of the class are worth a total of 100 points. MindTap is a digital learning tool offered
 by the book publisher Cengage and is a part of your textbook purchase. You will be taking 14 chapter quizzes, one
 for each chapter we will cover in this class (media quizzes will NOT be counted towards your grade). We will drop 4
 of your lowest quiz scores; thus, your grade will consist of 10 chapter quizzes available through Canvas. Each
 chapter quiz will count 10 points. You have 20 mins to complete each quiz and you get one attempt at each quiz to
 earn your best score. They may be completed any time before the due dates on Canvas. Your scores are
 automatically calculated by Canvas and entered in the gradebook following your completion of the quizzes. This is a
 learning tool that you should use to help assess your knowledge of the textbook material prior to the in-class exams.
 Access the exams by MODULES>ADV318J>Load ADV318J in a new window> Chapter>Chapter Quiz.
MY EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY FOR THIS COURSE
 Congratulations! … You’ve made it to the big leagues. You’re a student at one of the best public universities
 in the world. You’re bright and have ample promise as a student and citizen. As such, I regard each of you
 with high expectations. This course is the gateway course into the Advertising / PR major and is, therefore,
 challenging. Make no mistake: you will need to work diligently to earn the B or better that is required to apply
 or continue in this major. The TAs and I want you to succeed, but view you as a responsible adult who is
 capable of continually giving us your best work. We are here to push you to be at your best. We expect you
 to engage with the material, be present in class, and participate as required. In short, we expect you to be
 committed to learning—from us and from your peers.


                                                                                                                       5
HOW YOU CAN MAXIMIZE YOUR RELATIONSHIPS WITH CLASSMATES & BE RESPECTFUL
          v I encourage you to find a section of the lecture hall that you like and to sit in that section
              throughout the semester. Get to know your neighbor – they may be the person you start a
              successful company with some day.
          v Latecomers aggravate me. I’m sure none of you will ever be late, but if you are late please enter
              the lecture hall quietly. If you enter loudly after class has started you will evoke snarls and
              disapproving stares from your classmates.
          v The same goes for leaving class early; don’t do it.
          v Technology is cool. But when you’re here, use your tech—laptops, smartphones—only for class
              activities. It’s that simple. If your phone rings during class, I reserve the right to answer it. If you
              cannot use your devices appropriately during class time (what amounts to a little more than 2
              hours per week), I encourage you to re-evaluate your relationship with technology as it may be
              bordering on an attachment disorder.
E-MAIL POLICY
The TA (not the professor) is your first point of contact for this course. As such, your email inquiries should be
sent to the TA and he/she will get me involved with your inquiries as needed. E-mail has become a favored
way to communicate in academia and industry, but you must learn to use it appropriately. In other words,
keep your emails formal; write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss at work, not to your friend. We
will not respond to emails that are unprofessional or unclear.
POLICY ON RECOMMENDATION LETTERS
As you begin your college career, which might eventually involve asking professors to recommend you for graduate
programs, jobs, or internships, please be aware that professors are not obligated to write references for any student
who asks us. I do not serve as a reference for a student unless I know the student well and can be positive about
his/her accomplishments and potential. Therefore, your job as a college student is to become the kind of student
professors can celebrate in recommendations — hardworking, inquisitive, kind, and honest. Consider maintaining
relationships with professors, so that they know you well enough to write for you. Many juniors and seniors tell me
they wish they had thought about this during their first year.
COPYRIGHT NOTICE
All materials presented in lectures in this class are copyrighted by Dr. Anthony Dudo. No materials may be directly or
indirectly published, posted to Internet and intranet distribution channels, broadcast, rewritten for broadcast or
publication or redistribution in any medium. Neither these materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a
computer except for personal and non-commercial use. Further, only University of Texas students who are officially
registered for ADV 318J this semester may use these materials.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted
by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student's own work. I encourage you to
collaborate with your fellow students by studying together and discussing information and concepts covered
in lecture, but all tests, quizzes and assignments must be done independently.
Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave


                                                                                                                    6
material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this
Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the
examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative
behavior during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course and
University disciplinary action.
Understand that the online course format allows for multiple methods of identity verification, collusion,
collaboration and plagiarism monitoring and detection. A violation of the course policy may include (but is
not limited to) the following:
    v Providing your UT EID to any other person
    v Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the material on any activity,
        assessment or assignment, before, during and/or after any activity, assessment or assignment
    v Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format
    v The public (such that it can be viewed by more than one person) posting of any form of a test bank or
        group of questions from any assignment
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-
related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office in order that
the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus
through Services for Students with Disabilities.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ for more.
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAY OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from
attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not
be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from
which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance for more information.
COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
 • Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |
      cmhc.utexas.edu
 • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication
 • Abby Simpson, LCSW | M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC
 • Brief assessments and referral services
 • Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
 • MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html


                                                                                                                        7
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs, or professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right –
it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating
     2.   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
          involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-
one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for supporter remedies without making
an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options
and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such misbehavior.
Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age,
disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression
can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
The following are helpful links to report these misbehaviors:
     •    Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual misconduct
          and discrimination.
                 o    File a report of discrimination via online form
                 o    Call to report discrimination: 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
     •    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
          The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing federal civil
          rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance from
          the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the office for Civil
          Rights: 214-661-9600
     •    Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOC)
          The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that make
          it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected class, including
          discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission: 800-669-4000.


                                                                                                            8
COURSE SCHEDULE
  The tentative schedule below indicates the approximate dates when selected topics will be discussed. You
  are expected to complete the chapter readings before class on the day indicated. If changes in the schedule
  are necessary, you will be held responsible for such changes that will be announced in class and on Canvas.
                                    O’Guinn
  Week      Day       Date     Chapter Reading                     Lecture / Discussion Topic
    1      Wed        1/22                            Introduction & Overview
           Mon        1/27   1                        Advertising Basics
    2
           Wed        1/29   2                        Organization of the Advertising Industry
           Mon         2/3   Video*                   “Not Business as Usual”
    3
           Wed         2/5                            In-class Workshop
           Mon        2/10   3                        History of Advertising
    4
           Wed        2/12   Video*                    “Advertising at the Edge of the Apocalypse”
           Mon        2/17   4                        Social & Ethical Dimensions of Advertising
    5                        EXAM 1                   Chapters 1-4
           Wed        2/19
                             MindTap Quizzes          Quizzes for Chs 1-4 due before 12:00pm
           Mon        2/24   5                        Consumer Behavior
    6
           Wed        2/26   6                        Segmentation, Positioning, Value Proposition
           Mon         3/2   Video*                   “Stan Richard’s Guest Lecture”
    7                        7,8                      IBP Research & The IBP Plan
           Wed         3/4
                             PAPER #1                 Due via upload to Canvas before 12:00pm
           Mon         3/9                            In-class Workshop
    8                        EXAM 2                   Chapters 5-8
           Wed        3/11
                             MindTap Quizzes          Quizzes for Chs 5-8 due before 12:00pm
           Mon        3/16
    9                                                     *** Spring Break ***
           Wed        3/18
           Mon        3/23    9                       Managing Creativity in ADV and IBP
   10
           Wed        3/25   10                       Creative Message Strategy
           Mon        3/30   Video*                   “Art & Copy”
   11
           Wed         4/1                            Guest Speaker
           Mon         4/6    12                      Media Planning
   12                         EXAM 3                  Chapters 9, 10, 12
           Wed         4/8
                              MindTap Quizzes         Quizzes for Chs 9, 10, 12 due before 12:00pm
           Mon         4/13  18                       Public Relations
   13
           Wed         4/15                           In-class Workshop
                             18                       Public Relations (cont.)
           Mon         4/20
   14                        PAPER #2                 Due via upload to Canvas before 12:00pm
           Wed        4/22   16                       Event Sponsorship & Branded Entertainment
           Mon        4/27   Video*                   “The Greatest Movie Ever Sold”
   15
           Wed        4/29   15                       Sales Promotion, P-O-P, Support Media
           Mon         5/4                            Study Day
   16                        EXAM 4                   Chapters 15, 16, 18
           Wed         5/6
                             MindTap Quizzes          Quizzes for Chs 15, 16, 18 due before 12:00pm
   OPTIONAL FINAL EXAM                                Time and Location TBA
 *No in-class lecture. An announcement will be sent with the video link and guide questions.
