      Black Box
                      ARC W694
                   Vertical Studio
University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                    Summer 2020
     Martin Haettasch - First Summer Session
       Dean Almy - Second Summer Session


                                                                                        ARC w694
                                                                                        Vertical Studio
                                                                                        University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                        Summer 2020
                                                                                        Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                                        Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                        office hours by appointment
Studio Description
This Vertical Studio will be taught over two summer sessions; the first one is taught by Martin Haettasch, the second by Dean
Almy. Both sessions are conceived as a conceptual whole, while each session (“Part 1 / Part 2”) may temporarily isolate relevant
issues into discrete assignments to serve as building blocks towards a comprehensive project.
Course Work
Students will typically work individually over the course of the summer session. Specific assignments may require work in groups
of two students or more, and will be introduced accordingly.
Studio Project – Black Box
This summer 2020 vertical studio will work towards a final project through a series of discrete steps and assignments. Temporarily
isolating issues such as operational thinking/formal logic, spatial production, program and site, each assignment will culminate in
a “final” deliverable. Each deliverable is meant to both stand as an artifact in its own right, communicating a set of ideas, values
and processes and at the same time be the starting point for the next set of explorations. The final project for a small public
building in the city will therefore not be preconceived as being defined by its program (as is far too often the case, if we think of
designing “a school,” “a courthouse,” or “a hotel”…), but rather as the result of a multifaceted series of inquiries across scales.
Studio Structure -
A Collection of Architectural Artifacts
The studio will consist of a series of discrete one-week assignments. Each assignment will temporarily isolate specific areas of
inquiry and typically result in a single deliverable. Each deliverable is considered an artifact in its own right and is to be treated as
a finite and refined piece of architectural representation. The process by which each artifact is generated may vary; generally, all
artifacts will be considered “slow” drawings/models to be repeatedly revised and adjusted, possibly generating several versions
and work steps along the way. The body of work produced throughout the studio will add up to outline the architecture of the
given studio project without questioning the agency of each artifact to stand as a temporary conclusion of a set of interdependent
ideas.
First Session (Martin Haettasch)
1.        Box – Inside Out (Physical/Digital Model)
          This assignment will address design process, formal and spatial logic through a series of explorations through both
          physical and digital models.
2.        Box – Projection (2d Drawings)
          Students will move from using the drawing as a descriptive tool towards using parallel projection as a speculative
          device.
                                                                                                                                               2


                                                                                     ARC w694
                                                                                     Vertical Studio
                                                                                     University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                     Summer 2020
                                                                                     Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                                     Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                     office hours by appointment
3.        Unpacking the Box (Precedent Study, Exploded Axon)
          Students will familiarize themselves with strategies for the project at hand through the study of selected precedents.
4.        Box – Content (Diagram/Drawing)
          Combining knowledge from all previous assignments this assignment will move towards a coherent organizational
          strategy for movement and program of the given studio project.
5.        Box – Conditions (Projective Drawing – Interior)
          Through a single “slow” drawing student will study key relationships (spatial/material/structural) between interior spaces
          of their project.
Second Session (Dean Almy)
6.        A Void In the City (Figure Ground Plan, Site Sections)
          Urban Context will be introduced as a factor impacting the emergent project.
7.        A Box in the City - Projective Analysis (Perspective/Axon)
          Students will study latent relationships between their intervention and the city through a single “slow” drawing.
8.        Box Cut – Transformation (Section)
          The project will find its temporary conclusion in response to internal and external morphogenic pressures in a series of
          sectional drawings.
9.        Affect Drawing (Exterior Perspective)
          A study of the project’s presence in the public realm of the city.
10.       Box – Inside/Outside (Progression Drawing)
          A single large-format drawing will conclude the project with a focus on the transition from the public realm of the city
          to the public space(s) of the interior.
Studio Logistics
The studio will be taught as a remote studio through a variety of means of online instruction. The processes outlined below
applies to the first summer session taught by Martin Haettasch and may differ for the second summer session.
Weekly Structure
All assignments are designed as week-long exercises and will largely follow the same structure. Each one week assignment
cycle will typically start and end on a Wednesday with a group review of the previous assignment and the handout of the next
(see calendar).
Crit Days
Remote crits will happen as “Individual Crits” or “Group Crits” as specified in the calendar. During individual crits each student
will have the opportunity to discuss their work via shared screen with the instructor. Group crits will be informal review sessions
in which a dialogue between both students and instructor and students among each other will be encouraged. These small group
                                                                                                                                            3


                                                                                       ARC w694
                                                                                       Vertical Studio
                                                                                       University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                       Summer 2020
                                                                                       Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                                       Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                       office hours by appointment
sessions will typically be limited to four students/projects, and information will – as in individual crits – be presented via shared
screen. Digital signup sheets for crit sessions will typically be available about a week in advance or at the beginning of each new
assignment via CANVAS.
All in-person crits will happen via ZOOM. One single link will be sent out for each studio crit session regardless of format, and
students will either be asked to join in during their assigned/chosen time(s), or – if a studio session starts with an all-studio-
meeting – will be assigned to breakout rooms.
Additional formats for discussing student work (miro.com, slack, etc..) may be integrated into the studio as needed. Specific
instructions will be given in advance.
Work Days
Days specified in the calendar as “Work Days” will typically begin with an all studio meeting at 9.00 am via zoom (unless
otherwise specified) to clarify assignments or address general questions. After the initial meeting, students will be free to work
on their assignments/projects individually, or collectively via Zoom.
On work days the instructor will be available on demand for student questions during studio hours.
Work days may also be structured as needed
-         to accommodate additional crits session (group or individual),
-         for instructor presentations and lectures
-         for the instructor to review and comment in written format on uploaded student
          work (see more under “Uploads”)
Announcements will be made by the instructor depending on need.
Uploads
Students will have access to a shared studio folder on Box. All completed assignments are to be uploaded in this folder no later
than 9.00 am on the assignment due date. In addition, the studio will use the folder to upload work in progress for review and/or
markup by the instructor as needed.
Reviews
One “final” review (with external reviewers) is scheduled for the end of the first summer session. In analogy to the spring
semester’s final reviews this review will be structured as synchronous presentations and feedback from a panel of reviewers.
Review requirements and modalities will be communicated in advance.
Class Recordings
Class recordings are reserved only for the use of members of this class (students, TAs, and the instructor) and only for educational
purposes. Recordings should not be shared outside the class in any form. Violation of this restriction could lead to Student
Misconduct proceedings.
                                                                                                                                              4


                                                                                          ARC w694
                                                                                          Vertical Studio
                                                                                          University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                          Summer 2020
                                                                                          Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                                          Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                          office hours by appointment
Evaluation Criteria
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is derived from broader
and more subjective criteria. Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are
subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor. Grading for an
assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
Pursuit:
the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
         -         The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of inquiry
         -         The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and models,
                   etc.) in the development of the design
         -         Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is asked; direct
                   their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
Grasp:
the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in companion courses.
         -         A strong and clearly stated design objective
         -         Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements and
                   sectional development
         -         Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through creative
                   engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and environmental system
                   integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
         -         Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and assembly
Resolution:
of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final design presentation.
         -         Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill displayed
                   through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
Engagement:
the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
Students work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions for
absences, late work, and late arrivals at the discretion of each instructor.
                                                                                                                                                 5


                                                                                        ARC w694
                                                                                        Vertical Studio
                                                                                        University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                        Summer 2020
                                                                                        Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                                        Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                        office hours by appointment
Grade Descriptions
A/A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal
development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- : above average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented
in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete in
one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not
demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F : fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when
students have excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate cause
for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a
new completion date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling, according to
School of Architecture policy.
Methodology
The primary subjects of the studio are the design potentials of techniques of building and siting. While students will be expected to
produce exquisitely crafted documents of their design proposals at the site, building, and detail scales, specific software tools will not be
dictated. General material and format considerations will be suggested by the instructor throughout the course, however, investigation
and experimentation is strongly encouraged at all stages of production and design. In addition to digital production methods, portions of
the studio process will include hand sketches and drawings as well as physical models.
Attendance
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade
for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family
                                                                                                                                               6


                                                                                         ARC w694
                                                                                         Vertical Studio
                                                                                         University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                         Summer 2020
                                                                                         Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                                         Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                         office hours by appointment
emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with
the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students
should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly
regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
Religious Observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be
penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far
in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious
holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will
be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
University Code of Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Mental Health and Support Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts,
feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
•         In-house CARE counselor (see below)
•         For immediate support
          o         Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                    M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
          o         CMHC Crisis Line:
                    24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
•         Free services at CMHC:
          o         Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
          o         Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
          o         MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
                                                                                                                                                7


                                                                                       ARC w694
                                                                                       Vertical Studio
                                                                                       University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                                       Summer 2020
                                                                                       Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                                       Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                                       office hours by appointment
           o         Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Care Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools
they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or
academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the
CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the
Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be reported to the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                                                                                                                                              8


                                                                           ARC w694
                                                                           Vertical Studio
                                                                           University of Texas at Austin / School of Architecture
                                                                           Summer 2020
                                                                           Mon / Tue / Wed / Thurs / Fri 9-12
                                                                           Martin Haettasch m.haettasch@utexas.edu.edu
                                                                           office hours by appointment
Calendar
Week 01          Thurs    6/4     Studio Intro / Handout “Assignment 1”     Box - Inside Out                  Physical Study Models
                 Fri      6/5     Group Crits
                                                                                                              3d Model
Week 02          Mon      6/8     Group Crits
                 Tue      6/9     Work Day                                                                    Operation Diagrams
                 Wed      6/10    “Assignment 1” review,
                                  Handout “Assignment 2”                                                      Projection Drawings
                                                                            Box - Projection
                 Thurs    6/11    Work Day                                                                    Plans / Axonometric
                 Fri      6/12    Individual Crits
Week 03          Mon      6/15    Group Crits
                 Tue      6/16    Work Day
                 Wed      6/17    “Assignment 2” review,
                                  Handout “Assignment 3”
                                                                            Unpacking the Box                 Precedent Study
                 Thurs    6/18    Work Day
                 Fri      6/19    Individual Crits
Week 04          Mon      6/22    Group Crits
                 Tue      6/23    Work Day
                 Wed      6/24    “Assignment 3” review,
                                                                                                              Performance / Program
                                  Handout “Assignment 4”                    Box - Content
                                                                                                              Diagrams
                 Thurs    6/25    Work Day
                 Fri      6/26    Individual Crits
                                                                                                              Re-Draw Plan/Section
Week 05          Mon      6/29    Group Crits
                 Tue      6/30    Work Day
                 Wed      7/1     “Assignment 4” review,
                                  Handout “Assignment 5”                    Box - Conditions                  Analytical Axon, Affect,
                 Thurs    7/2     Work Day                                                                    Material
                 Fri      7/3     Individual Crits
Week 06          Mon      7/6     Group Crits                                                                 Re-Draw
                 Tue      7/7     Work Day
                 Wed      7/8     Individual Crits
                 Thurs    7/9     Final Review (all assignments)
note:
This schedule is subject to change, and adjustments may be made during the
semester. Please be available during class time throughout the semester.
Requirements for reviews and Pinups will be announced.
                                                                                                                                  9
