            The University of Texas at Austin
            McCombs School of Business
            Foundations of Accounting (ACC 310F)
  Course Syllabus                                                                      Spring 2020
Course Information
    Section      Time                              Location
     02160       T/Th from 12:30-2pm               JES A121A
     02165       T/Th from 9:30am-11am             UTC 2.112A
     02170       T/Th from 11-12:30pm              UTC 2.112A
Course Description and Objective
Foundations of Accounting (ACC 310F) is an introduction to financial and managerial
accounting. The course will focus on the content, interpretation and uses of accounting
information including financial statements, budgets, performance reports as well as other
accounting information used for planning and control purposes within a business. The objective
of the class is to help you develop a better understanding of these concepts and learn how to
apply them to your life.
Contact Information
Instructor              David Verduzco
Email                   David.Verduzco@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office                  GSB 5.126B
Contact information for the teaching assistants (TAs) as well as details on office hours will be
posted to the Course Documents module of the class website as soon as possible.
Course Resources and Materials
 Website          canvas.utexas.edu
 Textbook         Survey of Accounting, 8th edition by Carl Warren. To help reduce its cost, the
                  textbook along with an access code for CengageNOW (CNOW) have been
                  bundled together and should be available at local area textbook stores.
                  Although not required, CNOW is an online resource (including things such as
                  an e-textbook, interactive practice problems, flashcards, etc.), which should
                  help you prepare for the class. Setup and other instructions for CNOW will be
                  discussed in class and posted to Canvas.
 Other            #2 pencil, calculator, reliable internet connection and internet connected
                  device, Microsoft Office compatible software
                                                                                               Page 1


Course Components
 Participation Exercises
 During the semester you will be asked to complete a variety of short practice exercises that
 relate to course concepts; some exercises will be completion based (usually if related to new
 material) while others will be graded for accuracy (usually if related to material already
 covered in class). You will get three attempts at each exercise and your highest score will be
 used to determine your grade for each exercise.
 Your lowest three participation exercise grades will be dropped before determining your
 overall course average; see attendance policies below for related information.
 Practice Problems and CNOW Assignments
 Practice problems should help you to review the material and evaluate how well you
 understand the concepts introduced in class and the assigned readings. Several practice
 problems will be worked in class and additional practice problems are included with the
 tentative class schedule as well as through CNOW. These practice problems and CNOW
 assignments will not be turned in nor graded; for reference the answers to the practice
 problems from the textbook will be posted to the class website while the answers to the
 CNOW assignments will be available in CNOW.
 Group Assignments
 Group assignments will be assigned throughout the semester to challenge students to apply
 the concepts of the course to real-world situations. Generally, class time will be made
 available to help complete group assignments in self-assigned groups of 3-5 students per
 group. In total, there will be approximately six group assignments during the semester and
 they will be announced at least one class period in advance.
 Your lowest group assignment grade will be dropped before determining your overall course
 average; see attendance policies below for related information.
 Quizzes
 Periodic quizzes will be given to ensure that students are engaged in class activities and have
 a thorough understanding of the material. Quizzes will generally contain a combination of ten
 multiple choice and fill in the blank style questions and have a time limit. Some quizzes will be
 turned in online via the class website, while other quizzes will be given in class as either an
 announced or unannounced quiz.
 For online quizzes taken outside of class, you are allowed to use your written and digital
 materials, a calculator as well as a self-created note sheet. Giving or receiving any direct or
 indirect assistance to/from any individual is strictly prohibited and is an unequivocal violation of
 the McCombs School of Business Code of Ethics and University’s policy on Academic
 Dishonesty and Cheating.
 A bad internet connection or other technical problems with your system are not justification for
 a missed or incomplete quiz. You should confirm your connection and start each quiz with
 ample time to address connection issues before the deadline. This is especially important if
 you are not using a familiar and proven connection.
 Unless specified otherwise, you will not be allowed to use your notes or other resources for an
 in class quiz.
 In total, there will be approximately seven quizzes during the semester. Your lowest two quiz
 grades will be dropped before determining your overall course average; see attendance
                                                                                                Page 2


 policies below for related information. The teaching assistants and I cannot provide any
 assistance to students on a quiz.
 Exams
 There will be three exams throughout the semester, which will contain a combination of
 multiple-choice and fill in the blank style questions. Exam 1 will cover concepts from Chapters
 1, 2, 10, 11 and 13 of the textbook. Exam 2 will cover concepts from Chapters 3, 7, 9, 13, 14
 and 15 of the textbook. Exam 3 will cover concepts from the entire class. Exam 1 and Exam 2
 will take place during our regular class time on the dates noted in the tentative course
 schedule that is included later in the syllabus. Exam 3 will be scheduled by the Registrar as a
 uniform exam. The exact date and time will not be known until scheduling is complete which
 should be by late March; as soon as those details are available, they will be announced in
 class. You should not plan any travel or other obligations during the entire final exam period.
 Your lowest exam grade will be dropped before determining your overall course average; see
 attendance policies below for related information. If you are satisfied with your first two exam
 grades you do not have to take Exam 3. If you do intend to take Exam 3, you are required to
 take it on the uniform exam date and time provided by the Registrar unless you have a conflict
 with another uniform exam scheduled on the same date and time. If so, you must contact the
 instructor (and provide related documentation) at least five days before the regularly
 scheduled Exam 3 date to arrange for a makeup exam which may be in a different format than
 the regular exam.
 The exams will be administered online using Canvas, in a physical location, with a device and
 an internet connection of your choosing. A reliable device and internet connection are
 required as time begins the moment you start an exam and runs continuously; there is no way
 to pause it, including loss of connectivity or logging out, so please plan accordingly. Delays
 due to a connection failure are not an excuse for missing or retaking an exam.
 You are allowed to use your personal written and digital materials as well as a calculator for
 each exam. Direct or indirect assistance from any individual is STRICTLY PROHIBITED and
 is an unequivocal violation of the McCombs School of Business Code of Ethics and
 University’s policy on Academic Dishonesty and Cheating.
Course Grades
 Your final course grade will be based on the following:
    Grade Component and Weight                      Letter Grade      Course Average
    Participation                      10%          A                 100% - 94.00%
    Quizzes                            15%          A-              < 94.00% - 90.00%
    Group Assignments                  15%          B+              < 90.00% - 87.00%
    Exams (two highest grades)         60%          B               < 87.00% - 84.00%
                                     100%           B-              < 84.00% - 80.00%
                                                    C+              < 80.00% - 77.00%
                                                    C               < 77.00% - 74.00%
                                                    C-              < 74.00% - 70.00%
                                                    D+              < 70.00% - 67.00%
                                                    D               < 67.00% - 64.00%
                                                    D-              < 64.00% - 61.00%
                                                    F                    < 61.00%
                                                                                              Page 3


   Students should check the grades section of the class website frequently to confirm that all
   grades have been recorded correctly. Any potential discrepancy should be discussed with the
   instructor or TA immediately. Questions or issues related to grades should be raised during
   office hours and must be resolved within fourteen calendar days from the date the grade was
   posted; otherwise, the grade will not be changed.
   Course averages will be rounded to the nearest one hundredth of a percent, but no further
   (e.g. a course average of 86.95% would be assigned a grade of “B”). Furthermore, once
   assigned, the final course grade is final and not open to discussion or negotiation and any
   lobbying efforts (i.e. asking for a higher grade because you want one, need one, etc.) will not
   be tolerated. No additional extra credit assignments or re-takes will be offered to individual
   students.
   The McCombs School of Business has set grading guidelines for this class such that the
   overall grade point average (GPA) for the class will be in the range of 3.0 – 3.2 at the end of
   the semester. If the overall GPA is below 3.0, the final class grades will be adjusted up.
   Conversely, if the overall GPA is above 3.2, the final class grades will be adjusted down,
   although that is unlikely. In addition, individual exam grades may (or may not) be
   independently curved based on their results and other factors.
Attendance and Lecture Guidelines
Attendance is a significant contributing factor to your success in the course given the nature of
material as well as the periodic in class quizzes. You should bring a #2 pencil, a valid student
ID as well as a calculator to each class. You must attend the section in which you are officially
enrolled because in class quizzes may be given on different days for each section.
If you miss a quiz, assignment or exam because of an emergency, you should notify the
instructor as soon as possible; examples of issues that would constitute an emergency include
     • Medical concern that requires hospitalization for multiple days
     • Death in the family
     • Other life-threatening problem
Otherwise, the drop(s) available for participation, quizzes, assignments and exams are intended
to cover all other issues such as
     • General illness or outpatient medical care
     • Job interview or career fair
     • School related trip
     • Technical issue
     • Transportation problem
The instructor has final authority to determine if your absence is a justified emergency. To that
end, you may be asked to discuss your situation and provide related documentation with
Student Emergency Services; for more information you can call (512) 471-5017 or visit their
website (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). Alternate arrangements will be made
for those with an excused absence due to a justified emergency.
In an effort to create a classroom environment that remains conducive to learning, please
remember to follow these guidelines every day:
• Please do not take any calls or text in the classroom; if you are expecting an important call,
     sit by a rear exit and step outside to take it.
• Laptops and tablets may be used during class to take notes, but should not be used to
     check email, social media websites or any other activity that is not directly related to class.
                                                                                                 Page 4


    Keeping your attention on activities in the classroom helps all of us stay engaged and
    maximizes the value of our limited class time together.
•   Avoid side conversations since these are very distracting for your fellow students and
    instructor.
•   When asking questions or working with your classmates, treat everyone with respect by
    being polite and considerate.
•   Certain rows in the classroom may be closed to student seating and assigned seating may
    be introduced as needed.
Office Hours and Communication
The instructor and TAs will have regularly scheduled office hours; students are encouraged to
take advantage of this time to discuss any course related issues and to get additional help as
needed throughout the semester. If you are unable to stop by scheduled office hours, you
should contact the instructor or a TA to set an appointment. Outside of class and office hours,
email is the preferred means of communication, but please keep in mind that given the number
of students in the class it may take some time to get a response; furthermore, please note that
grades cannot be discussed over email.
Access to the class website as well as your email is required for this class. It is your
responsibility to regularly check both the class website and your related email account for
updates, additional information and policies related to the class.
Collaborative Learning
This course is supported by the Peer-Led Undergraduate Studying (PLUS) program. PLUS
study groups provide weekly opportunities to collaboratively practice skills and apply knowledge
you need for success in this course. Attending study groups regularly is a great way to ensure
that you are keeping up with the material so you don’t fall behind. Feel free to attend any study
group at any point in the semester; more information on times and locations will be available
through Canvas and announced in class. More on PLUS may be found at
https://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/support/plus.
Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than half of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.
For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc, JES A332, or call 512-471-
3614.
Flag Information
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are
designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative
arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze
real-world problems.
                                                                                             Page 5


Scholastic Integrity
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty
at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code--of--Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, I
have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in
this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in that
document. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its
assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University,
and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and procedures on
scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Although you may collaborate with other students for participation exercises, group assignments
and class in general, you must turn in your own work; otherwise, attempting to share information
or collaborating on quizzes or exams will warrant a severe academic penalty and also be
reported to Student Judicial Services.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. If you receive academic accommodations, which
include extended time on exams, you must contact the instructor ten days before each exam to
make the necessary arrangements; otherwise, such accommodations may not be possible.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending absence at least ten days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a quiz, assignment or
exam in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete
makeup work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Campus Safety
In addition to signage in the classroom, please note the following resources regarding campus
safety:
•   Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767 or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
•   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
•   Emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
    www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                                                                 Page 6


Tentative Course Schedule
Date             Day       Chapter Topic                                                    Practice Problems from the textbook
Jan. 21            T                 Course Introduction
Jan. 23           Th          1      The Role of Accounting in Business                     E1-3, E1-5, E1-9, E1-14
Jan. 28            T          2      Basic Accounting Systems: Cash Basis                   E2-17, E2-18, E2-19, E2-20, E2-21
Jan. 30           Th                   continued
Feb. 4             T                   continued
Feb. 6            Th         10      Accounting Systems for Manufacturing Operations        E10-1, E10-4
Feb. 11            T         11      Cost-Volume-Profit Analysis                            E11-1, E11-6, E11-12
Feb. 13           Th                   continued
Feb. 18            T                   continued
Feb. 20           Th         13      Budgeting and Standard Costs                           E13-4, E13-13
Feb. 25            T                   continued
Feb. 27           Th                   continued
March 3            T                 Catch-up and Review for Exam 1
March 5           Th                 Exam 1
March 10           T          7      Fixed Assets                                           E7-1, E7-9 (a), E7-10, E7-13
March 12          Th          3      Basic Accounting Systems: Accrual Basis                E3-1, E3-2, E3-5, E3-8, E3-15
March 17           T
                                     Spring Break
March 19          Th
March 24           T                   continued
March 26          Th                   continued
March 31           T         14      Decentralized Operations                               E14-1
April 2           Th         13      Budgeting and Standard Costs                           E13-20, E13-23
April 7            T                   continued
April 9           Th          9      Metric-Analysis of Financial Statements                E9-5, E9-7, E9-11
April 14           T                   continued
April 16          Th                   continued
April 21           T         15      Capital Investment Analysis                            E15-5, E15-7, E15-9
April 23          Th                   continued
April 28           T                   continued
April 30          Th                   continued
May 5              T                 Catch-up and Review for Exam 2
May 7             Th                 Exam 2
May 13-19                            Exam 3
NOTE: Exam 3 will take place at some point during the final exam period; the exact date and time will be scheduled by the
Registrar and will be announced in class as soon as those details are available. You should not plan any travel or other obligations
during the entire final exam period.
                                                                                                                              Page 7
