M E 334 MATERIALS ENGINEERING
17615 Tues, Thu, Fri: 11:00 am - 1 pm
ON-LINE
INSTRUCTOR: David Mitlin, Department of Mechanical Engineering
FANCY TITLES AND WEBSITES:
David Allen Cockrell Endowed Professor
Walker Department of Mechanical Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78712-1591
Associate Editor, Sustainable Energy and Fuels - RSC
https://www.me.utexas.edu/faculty/faculty-directory/mitlin
Office Hours: Directly After Class, or by appointment (email me).
Emails are the best way to reach me since it allows me to work off my calendar.
*If you email me and don’t hear the same day, feel free to ping again, I won’t be offended!
I get over 100 non-spam emails per day, so occasionally some get missed.
Texbook: William D. Callister, Jr. and David G. Rethwisch. Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, 10th Ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.) 2018. Students may purchase the E-Text
version from www.wiley.com ($76.00, ISBN 978-1-119-40549-8). The E-Text is also available with an
abridged print version of the text ($97.95, ISBN 978-1-119- 46315-3). The Kindle Edition is available from
Amazon.com for $76.00.
ATTENDANCE AND ABSENCES
Refer to the General Information Catalog, available on-line, for University policy on attendance and
absences.
RESTRICTIONS:
PLEASE OUT OF RESPECT FOR YOU FELLOW STUDENTS AND THE INSTRUCTOR, DO NOT TALK
IN CLASS. IF THERE IS SOMETHING URGENT, FEEL FREE TO EXCUSE YOURSELF FROM THE
CLASSROOM AND COME BACK ONCE YOU ARE DONE. REFER TO THE GENERAL INFORMATION
CATALOG, AVAILABLE ON-LINE, FOR UNIVERSITY POLICY ON OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSABILITIES:
You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness;
You have a right to respect;
You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly;
You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression;
You have a right to privacy and confidentiality;
You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
learning environment;
You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching
team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming;
You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. Your
experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences;
You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded;
You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                                                                                         1


Personal pronoun preference:
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly
honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this
preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student
of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that
are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you
will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You
are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be
found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
COURSE-INSTRUCTOR SURVEY:
The course and instructor will be evaluated using standard evaluation forms at the end of the course.
Students are encouraged to provide continuous feedback to the instructor throughout the course.
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS:
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please
let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to
maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with
Disabilities,        512-471-6259         (voice)        or       1-866-329-3986         (video        phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences
any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/                                      2


IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building;
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class;
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
OTHER ITEMS:
Web-based, password-protected class sites are associated with all academic courses taught at the
University. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict
their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on
restricting directory information, see: http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/records/restrictmyinfo .
Engineers are required to meet the highest levels of professional conduct and to responsibly handle
complicated and often dangerous equipment and technical tasks. You will be held to those same
expectations by your instructor during your studies and training. You are expected to obtain all pertinent
safety training and to follow all safety procedures for equipment you handle and tasks you conduct.
Failure to do so will result in a penalty on your course grade, a penalty completely at the discretion of the
instructor. For example, explosive launching of any projectile in an inappropriate location or direction will
result in a failing grade in this course. This is set as course policy so that it will be administered by the
University for the instructor posthumously, if required.
 COURSE OUTLINE AND REQUIRED READINGS FROM THE COURSE TEXT:
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
schedule.
Changes: to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
receive the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
COURSE GOALS: Learn to explain the observed properties of engineering materials on the basis of an
understanding of fundamental concepts: chemical bonding, crystal structures, defects, diffusion, phase
diagrams, solidification, and development of microstructures;
Develop an understanding of the mechanical properties of metals and alloys, ceramics and polymers;
Learn to tailor the mechanical properties of metals and alloys by mechanical processing, heat treatment,
and alteration of microstructures;
Develop an understanding of the differences in the structure and properties of metals, ceramics and
polymers.
KNOWLEDGE, ABILITIES AND SKILLS NEEDED FOR THIS COURSE: Knowledge of introductory
chemistry; Ability to follow detailed instructions, definitions, and specifications; Ability to quickly absorb
and comprehend new concepts and information; Ability to read, write, and speak clearly and effectively in
English; Ability to allocate resources towards the completion of homework assignments on schedule;
Ability to pay consistent attention to the course material daily throughout the semester.                      3


KNOWLEDGE, ABILITIES AND SKILLS TO BE GAINED FROM THIS COURSE
Knowledge of the basic concepts that control the properties of engineering materials and the structure-
property relationships of materials;
Understanding of the mechanical properties of materials and the various ways by which the
mechanical properties of materials can be altered;
Ability to consider the selection of metal alloys for various applications based on mechanical properties;
Ability to correlate materials theory to experimental data collected in the laboratory in a separate
laboratory course ME 134L on materials properties and processing;
Ability to apply a basic knowledge of chemistry, physics, and mathematics to understand the properties of
real- world materials;
Recognition and appreciation of the interdisciplinary nature of subjects at higher levels of science
and engineering.
IMPACT ON SUBSEQUENT COURSES IN THE CURRICULUM COURSE
The knowledge gained in ME 334 is utilized to understand the experimental data collected in the ME 134L
Materials Engineering Laboratory course;
ME 334 is a prerequisite for ME 338 Machine Elements and all the elective courses in the
“Materials Engineering” area of the Mechanical Engineering curriculum.
OUTCOMES
ABET EC 2000 outcomes are: 1. knowledge of and ability to apply engineering and science fundamentals
to real problems; and 8. ability and desire to lay a foundation for continued learning beyond the
baccalaureate degree. ASME outcomes are: a) knowledge of chemistry and calculus-based physics with
in-depth knowledge of at least one; and b) the ability to apply advanced mathematics through multivariate
calculus and differential equations.
Course Objectives: The properties and performance of engineering materials are controlled by crystal
structure, bonding, composition, and microstructure. The overall objective of this course is that students
learn to explain the observed properties of engineering materials on the basis of an understanding of
fundamental concepts such as crystal structures, defects, diffusion and phase equilibria. To obtain this
objective, the course establishes first the fundamentals of atomic structure and bonding, crystal
structures, imperfections (defects), diffusion, phase diagrams and solidification. These ideas are then
applied to the mechanical properties of the major classes of materials: metals and alloys, ceramics,
polymers, and composites. The course concludes with a brief overview of the electrical, magnetic, and
optical properties of materials. Some of the above concepts will also be demonstrated through laboratory
experiments taught in a separate laboratory course, ME 134L Materials Engineering Laboratory.
* Exams will be scheduled to correspond to appropriate break points in the subject matter. You
will be informed of the exact date no later than one week before the exam.
Final Exam: Date and location assigned by UT. The final exam must be taken at the time and on the
date given in the Course Schedule. All exams are closed book and closed notes, and no personal scratch
paper may be used. You may use a calculator (or a slide rule), a straight edge may be useful.
Homework Assignments will be due approximately once per week. Completed assignments must be
turned in at the beginning of lecture on the assigned due dates. Late homework assignments will not be
accepted since it is unfair to everyone else. Solutions to assignments will be provided at the end of lecture
on the assigned due dates. Students are encouraged to discuss the homework exercises and work
together to understand solution strategies, but the solutions turned in by each student must be the final
work of the individual student. At the end, you really are just cheating yourself by copying homework from
others.
                                                                                                            4


All Exams, except the final exam, will be conducted during normal lecture periods in the assigned
classroom on dates specified by the instructor. Each in-class exam will be timed for fifty (50)
minutes. The final exam is cumulative and will be conducted only at the assigned time and location
scheduled by the University. All exams are closed book and closed notes. The only items allowed for use
during exams are calculators, pencils, pens, straight edges and drafting triangles. The memory of any
programmable calculator must be cleared prior to its use for exam.
Regrades: Refer to the General Information Catalog, available on-line, for University policy on regrades.
PREREQUISITES:
Completion of CH 301, ME 302, PHY 303K and PHY 103M with a grade of at least C− in each; credit or
registration for ME 134L, PHY303L, PHY 103N and EM 319; admission to an appropriate major sequence
in engineering.
NOTES:
Skeletal Lecture Notes will be Available on Canvas. It is the students’ responsibility to come to
class to fill out the necessary details. The post-lecture filled-in notes will NOT be posted on
Canvas. So if you don’t come to class, it’s your responsibility to obtain the notes from other
students or to learn the content from the textbook.
Lecture Philosophy: Out of respect for your fellow students and for the professor please do not
hold private conversations during the lecture portion of the class. The professor takes this very
seriously. If you have something urgent to say, please feel free to leave the classroom.
Course Content Philosophy: My philosophy is that you might as well learn the fundamentals of
corrosion properly now, rather than having to continuously struggle with this throughout your
career. However, for most of us it is the practical examples that make the material sink in. So what
we will do is to go back and fourth between basic theory and engineering applications. Initially
the material will start out heavy on the theory side since without the fundamental understanding
the applications are meaningless. Please note that this is a high-level engineering course, not a
survey of technologies and methods.
Grading:
Course grades will be calculated using scores from three in-class exams, a final exam, homework
assignments and quizzes/class participation, with weights given in the table below on the left. Letter
grades will be assigned based on these scores, as given in the table below on the right. Plus/minus
designations will be used for grades near the boundaries of the letter-grade transitions shown in the table.
Exam 1: 25%
Exam 2: 25%
Final Exam: 40%
Homework: 10%
                                                                                                           5


Topic Topics                                                                     Reading
/Week (approximate outline, see Course Notes for Key Concepts)
      Introduction, Elasticity, Stress – Strain, Stress – Strain Diagrams, Course Notes 1,
1     Hardness                                                                   Callister Ch 6
      Exams 1 - 2 NOT Cumulative, Final Exam – YES Cumulative
2     Atomic Bonding                                                             Course Notes 2,
                                                                                 Callister Ch 2
3     Crystallography and Crystal Structures                                     Course Notes 3
      Exam 1 on Topics 1 - 3                                                     Callister Ch 3,4
4     Basics of Phase Transformations, Diffusion and Phase Diagrams              Course Notes 4
                                                                                 Callister Ch 5, 9
5     Crystal Defects - Dislocations, Grain Boundaries,                          Course Notes 5
      Deformation Mechanisms including Creep                                     Callister 7, 10
      Exam 2 on Topics 4 - 5
6     Kinetics of phase transformations and solidification,                      Course Notes 6
      Solid-state transformation kinetics, the Fe-C system                       Callister 9, 10
7     Steels structure, heat treatment of ferrous and non-ferrous alloys, creep, Course     Notes  7
      sensitization and other bad things that happen at high temperatures        Callister 10,
8     Ceramics                                                                   Course Notes 8
                                                                                 Callister 13,
                                                                                      6


                                   COURSE ROADMAP
   Section 1        Elastic and Plastic Flow: Metals and Polymers
Topics covered:
1) Elastic stress-strain relations
2) Understanding the stress-strain curve of steels and other metals.
3) Plastic flow: ductility, toughness and failure
4) Deformation and simplified structure of polymers
Significance: To align well with the 134L Mat Sci Laboratory, we start with mechanical properties
of metals and polymers. Some of you have had this content in other courses. This section is not
meant to be mathematically difficult, but rather to set the stage for understand what happens
“inside” the material when it is deformed and why some metals are brittle while others are ductile.
By the time this class is over, you should be able to look at a stress-strain curve and go “hey, I
understand why this steel fails early, or why this aluminum alloy is really deformable.” Viewed this
way, this section sets the stage for the resto of the course.
Required Reading: Course Notes #1
Recommended Reading: Callister Ch 6, 15
                                                                                                   7


          Section 2          Atomic Bonding
Topics covered:
1) Bonding in covalent, ionic and metallic materials
2) How elastic properties scale with bonding and with melting point.
Significance: Since this is a materials science and not a chemistry course, this section will be fairly short.
Its purpose is primarily to give a background on why certain materials are very elastically stiff, e.g.
tungsten, while others are elastically soft, e.g. lead or lithium metal.
Required Reading: Course Notes #2
Recommended Reading: Callister Ch 2
           Section 3          Materials Science Crystallography
  Topics covered:
  1) Definition of a crystal and of a unit cell, atom locations
  2) Crystallographic directions and planes (Miller Indices)
  3) Linear, planar and volumetric atomic density
  4) Angles between planes and between directions in cubic crystals
  5) Working with HCP crystals.
  6) Bravais lattices
  Significance: Crystallography is the language materials engineers use to communicate
  what is happening in their materials. For example, during the ductile-to-brittle transition, Fe
  cleaves on the (001) planes; (001) Si is the standard substrate for semiconductors;
  deformation in aluminum alloys occurs on the <110> (111) system; and extruded wire
  usually displays a <111> or <110> type of texture. It is thus critical for you to become fluent
  in crystallographic notation.
  Required Reading: Course Notes #3
  Recommended Reading: Callister Ch 3,4
                                                                                                             8


         Section 4   Phase Diagrams and Thermodynamics
Topics covered:
1) Overview of phase diagrams
2) The Phase Rule, the Lever Rule
3) Solid solution basics
4) Eutectic microstructures
5) Basic solution thermodynamics
Significance: Phase diagrams are the meat-and-potatoes of materials science and being fluent in them
will give you a major edge in the workplace. Phase diagrams are a map of what exists at what
temperature and metallurgical composition. Armed with that understanding, you should be able to predict
basic metallurgical properties of industrial alloys. We will also cover some solution thermodynamics to put
what you measure into the proper theoretical context. That portion will be relatively brief, mostly it’s about
being able to fluently read and predict the phases present and their compositions.
Required Reading: Course Notes #4
Recommended Reading: Callister 5, 9
                                                                                                               9


        Section 5         Crystal Defects - Dislocations, Grain Boundaries,
                          Deformation Mechanisms including Creep
Topics covered:
1) Vacancies in crystalline materials.
2) General definition of a dislocation; Burgers vector, line direction, slip plane
3) Perfect dislocations in fcc metals and balancing dislocation reactions.
4) Stacking faults and partial dislocations in fcc metals.
5) Perfect dislocations in bcc metals and hcp metals.
6) Dislocation Slip and Dislocation Creep
Significance: Defects in materials can be either very beneficial or very detrimental, and the ability to
manipulate them is the bread-and-butter of a materials engineer. No other discipline knows how to do
this, though physicists and electrical engineers often try without much success. By developing a
fundamental quantitative understanding of the nature defects in materials, you will be able to make a
tremendous impact in a company’s bottom line, with the associated material rewards coming your way.
In this chapter you will become familiar with the only defect that is always present in materials - a
vacancy, and a defect almost solely responsible for deformation (or lack of it) in metals, ceramics and
semiconductors - the dislocation.
In the Al alloy industry (Alcan, etc.) control of vacancies is critical for processing of strong alloys. It is the
vacancies retained from hot processing (400°C and above) of Al alloys that aid the low temperature
precipitation hardening that gives commercial alloys their high strength.
Required Reading: Course Notes # 5
Recommended Reading: Callister 7, 10
                                                                                                                   10


         Section 6    Kinetics of Phase Transformations and Solidification
Topics covered:
1) Temperature Time Transformation (TTT) Diagrams
2) Martensite, Bainite, Pearlite
3) Solidification Structures
4) Cast Iron and Steel Structures
Significance
This is an “applied”, “industrially relevant” section where you will get your first taste of real solid-state phase
transformations as applied to real commercial processes. The seemingly abstract diffusional reactions constitute
the absolute core of commercial metallurgy.
This section covers the key topic of diffusion and martensite formation, but does it from an applied rather than an
abstract vantage point. Without these there would literally be no structural alloys since non-heat treated metals
both soft and brittle. Now that you know thermodynamics of solid phase transformations and crystallography and
defects, you can start to integrate this knowledge to understand these important topics. If I taught you diffusional
phase transformations before you learned sections 1 and 2 it would have been a confusing mess.
Practically speaking few commercial alloys are purely martensitic, since this phase in its untempered state is very
brittle. So most often martensite formation is something to be avoided at all costs or at least neutralized with a
post heat treatment.
Required Reading: Course Notes 6
Recommended Reading: Callister Ch 9, 10
                                                                                                                     11


          Section 7     Applied Phase Transformations: Heat treatment of alloys (includes diffusion
                        and martensite formation)
Topics covered:
1) Heat treating of nonferrous alloys (includes basics of precipitation hardening and diffusion)
2) Heat treating of steel (includes section on basics of martensite and bainite formation)
Significance
This is an “applied”, “industrially relevant” section where you will get your first taste of real solid-state phase
transformations as applied to real commercial processes. The seemingly abstract diffusional reactions constitute
the absolute core of commercial metallurgy.
This section covers the key topic of diffusion and martensite formation, but does it from an applied rather than an
abstract vantage point. Without these there would literally be no structural alloys since non-heat treated metals
both soft and brittle. Now that you know thermodynamics of solid phase transformations and crystallography and
defects, you can start to integrate this knowledge to understand these important topics. If I taught you diffusional
phase transformations before you learned sections 1 and 2 it would have been a confusing mess.
Practically speaking few commercial alloys are purely martensitic, since this phase in its untempered state is very
brittle. So most often martensite formation is something to be avoided at all costs or at least neutralized with a
post heat treatment.
Required Reading: Course Notes 7
Recommended Reading: Callister Ch 10
                                                                                                                     12


       Section 8   Ceramics
Topics covered:
1) Chemistry,
2) Structure,
3) Vacancies,
4) Mechanical Properties
5) Processing
Significance
Ceramics are part of this course, although not a primary focus. Here we will cover the basics.
Required Reading: Course Notes 8
Recommended Reading: Callister Ch 12, 13
                                                                                               13
