                       Accounting 326 - Financial Reporting and Analysis – Spring 2020
Professor: Lale Guler
E-mail: Lale.Guler@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Location: CBA 4M.258
Office Hours: Tuesday 3:00pm-4:00pm or by appointment
Web: https://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/Directory/Profiles/Guler-Lale
Course Unique No, Meeting Time, Meeting Place:
02290, MW 9:30am-11:00pm, GSB 2.122
02300, MW 11:00pm-12:30pm, GSB 2.122
02305, MW 2:00pm-3:30pm, UTC 1.132
Introduction
This is a very demanding course. You should expect to study a minimum of 6 hours per week (outside of class) to
pass the course.
Course Objectives
The course examines issues in financial reporting from both preparer and user perspectives. The basic objectives
of the course are:
(1) to learn about current U.S. GAAP.
(2) to understand the economics of transactions and events, and comprehend whether and how financial reporting
captures those economics. This way of thinking lays the foundation for understanding how equity and credit
analysts use financial reports and allows you to learn about business.
(3) to learn how to analyze financial reporting problems in a forward direction, similar to what financial
statement preparers normally do (i.e., work forward from the financial data to financial statements) and to learn
how to reason about financial reporting problems in a backward direction, similar to what financial report users
do (i.e., work backward from the financial statements to the financial data).
Required Materials
(1) Intermediate Accounting, by Kieso, Weygandt, and Warfield, 17th edition with WileyPLUS access.
(2) Incomplete class slides -- available at UT Document Solutions or Canvas (required every class day).
Prerequisites
Accounting 311 or 311H, and 312 or 312H, with a grade of at least C- in each; and Finance 357 or 357H.
Communication Channels
Please check the class webpage at Canvas weekly for announcements, presentation materials, articles,
assignments, solutions to practice problems and other relevant information.
E-mail communication is the way to reach out to the professor and the TAs. If you have not received a response to
your e-mail within two business days, check this syllabus or Canvas for the answer to your question. No phone
calls.


Course Format
Class sessions will be a combination of lecture and discussion. Students should bring to each class session a printed
copy of that day’s PowerPoint slides (available at UT Document Solutions or at Canvas). The material covered in-
class will follow the PowerPoint slides, which are designed to clarify and complement the text material. I suggest
that you work all of the recommended questions for each chapter which will be posted on Canvas. While there will
be no points allocated to solving recommended questions, there is a direct relation between working problems and
performing successfully on examinations. I will post the solutions to the recommended questions at Canvas as the
semester progresses, but not immediately (with a 10-day time lag). Students are expected to solve the recommended
questions, search for the answers on their own, reflect on their solutions, check and correct their mistakes during
the TA office hours before accessing the solutions online.
Expectations on Professionalism & Participation
I expect that you will at all times exhibit high standards of professionalism in this course. Professionalism is an
important part of your training. Therefore:
(1) I expect you to read this syllabus and follow the policies detailed in this syllabus.
(2) I expect you to attend class. In the business world, attendance is mandatory unless illness or an emergency
prohibits it. Scheduling interviews and other appointments during class sessions is unacceptable. Please note that
performance is positively correlated with attendance. You do not need to notify me unless your absence will be for
an extended time (more than two weeks). Office hours are not a substitute for coming to class; accordingly, I will
not go over the entire set of missed material covered in class during office hours if you have missed class. I expect
you to attend the section in which you are officially enrolled.
(3) I expect students to arrive to class on time. It is disruptive to the class when a student enters the classroom
after class has begun, as it interrupts the flow of the lecture/discussion and distracts the other students.
(4) I expect that you will turn off all electronic devices (other than any note-taking device that lays flat on the
desk) once class begins. Laptops, cell phones, smart phones, pagers, and other communication devices are to be
turned completely off (including turning off “cell phone vibrate mode” during class time.) I also expect that
reading of non-class materials will stop once class starts. Please see the next page for more information.
(5) I expect students not to take personal breaks during class. Students leaving and returning during class is
disruptive, so please keep these disturbances to an absolute minimum.
(6) I expect you to bring your nameplate to the class.
(7) I expect that you will not have conversations or write notes back and forth with other students during class.
(8) I expect that you will be respectful of me, the TAs, and of the other students in class and in office hours.
I expect you to communicate in a professional manner when composing e-mails to me and the TAs.
(9) I expect you to be diligent in studying for the course and participate in class discussions in a professional
and constructive way. You should come to class prepared, which means that you should have read the material.
(10) I expect you to be responsible for getting the course notes and in-class handouts on any day that you must
miss class. It is not my responsibility to secure any missed material for you.
                                                                                                                    2


You can expect me and the TAs to:
(1) Be in class and office hours on time.
(2) Be respectful of your need to learn the material in this class. Thus, we will provide timely and full responses to
questions made in person or on Canvas and keep you up to date on changes in the syllabus or homework solutions,
again on a timely basis. You can expect us to return homework and exams in a timely fashion to enhance your
learning experience.
(3) Be courteous to you in our interactions with you in and outside of class.
(4) Provide you with an education that will prepare you well for the long-term.
No Laptop Computer or Smartphone Use during the Class
No open laptop computers will be permitted during our class. You are welcome to use iPads, Surface or any note-
taking device that lays flat on the table during class, but no laptop computers or other devices with a screen that
rises above the desk. This policy is based on a body of research showing that students have a better learning
experience and higher satisfaction when they do not use laptop computers in class.
This policy is based on my experience comparing classes with and without laptop computers and a body of academic
research which shows that students have a better learning experience and higher satisfaction when they do not use
laptop computers in class.
The following New York Times article dated November 17, 2017 and titled "Laptops Are Great. But Not During a
Lecture or a Meeting" summarizes the problem with laptops:
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/11/22/business/laptops-not-during-lecture-or-meeting.html
Some of the research findings about laptops and smartphones in the classroom:
(1) Laptop users retain less classroom learning than those who take notes by hand.
Summary: http://www.vox.com/2014/6/4/5776804/note-taking-by-hand-versus-laptop
Study: http://pss.sagepub.com/content/early/2014/04/22/0956797614524581.abstract
(2) Laptop multitasking hinders academic learning.
Study: http://blog.reyjunco.com/wp-content/uploads/2010/03/JuncoCottenMultitaskingFBTextCAE2012.pdf
(3) Laptop use hinders learning for nearby peers who don’t use laptops.
Study: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0360131512002254
(4) Honors students with laptops reported significantly less satisfaction with their education compared to honors
students with no laptops.
Study: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1405481
(5) In recently published research, Professor Adrian Ward (McCombs), a cognitive psychologist and marketing
professor, found evidence that using a smartphone, or even hearing one ring or vibrate, produces distractions making
it harder to concentrate. Subjects whose phones were in view posted the worst scores, while those who left their
                                                                                                                    3


phones in a different room did the best. The students who kept their phones in their pockets or bags came out in the
middle.
"How Smartphones Hijack Our Minds," The Wall Street Journal, October 6, 2017
https://www.wsj.com/articles/how-smartphones-hijack-our-minds-1507307811
If you find notetaking a struggle, here are a few tips: http://mashable.com/2014/12/11/taking-notes-at-work/
Grading Policy
Your overall course grade will be comprised of the following:
Exam 1                                    20%
Exam 2                                    25%
Exam 3                                    30%
Team project                              10%
WileyPLUS homework assignments            10%
Unannounced in-class quizzes               5%
Total points                             100%
Final grades will be assigned on the basis of the following rubric:
   Total Points      Letter
   94-100            A
   90-93             A-
   87-89             B+
   84-86             B
   80-83             B-
   77-79             C+
   74-76             C
   70-73             C-
   67-69             D+
   64-66             D
   60-63             D-
   Less than 60      F
While the grading scale above will be used as a guideline, translation of the total points into a letter grade will
ultimately be based on the professor’s judgment. The letter grade will reflect each student’s performance relative
to the class and standards expected of UT students. I will impose a substantial grade penalty (one course grade per
incident) for those who distract other students during class.
                                                                                                                    4


Exams
There will be three closed book exams in this course. Exams are 100% independent work. You are not permitted to
use any electronic communications devices during the exam. This explicitly includes cell phones, pagers,
computers, laptops, iPads, and other advanced electronic devices. I will consider it cheating if a cell phone or other
electronic communication device is used and/or visible during the exam. You are not permitted to copy or otherwise
reproduce the exams at any time. This includes taking pictures of the exam with your cell phone or other device
while taking the exam or when reviewing graded exams. All students are required to present proof of identification
at the time of the exam. Exam papers will be recycled at the end of the semester.
Exams may include conceptual, multiple-choice, short answer, and computational questions. You may have 1-
page (8.5” x 11”, front/back, your own handwriting) of notes for use during the exam, which must be turned in
with your exam. Because exams require 100% independent work, electronically prepared exam notes (which can
be easily reproduced) will be considered as a cheating case. Any request for a re-grade must be made in writing
no more than seven days after the exam grades are available. The request must state, in detail, the reason you
believe the grade is in error. Requests that do not conform to this policy will not be honored.
Make-up Exams
Students must take all exams. Any missed exam must be approved through Student Emergency Services and
makeups will be given only in truly extraordinary circumstances (at my discretion). Makeup exams are given only
for excused absences, which must be determined, if possible, prior to the exam. Excused absences may be given
for verifiable medical or family emergencies. Written documentation must be provided to qualify for an “excused
absence”. The medical documentation must specifically state that you could not complete the exam on the day of
the exam due to your illness and must be signed by a licensed physician. Students who miss an exam without making
arrangements with me prior to the exam will receive a zero. All documentation evidencing your absence from an
exam is due within two business days of the missed exam and you must make up the missed exam within three
business days. If the documentation of an emergency is not received within the two-day window and the exam is
not completed within the three-day window, you will receive a grade of zero. The determination of an “acceptable”
excuse is solely up to the instructor’s discretion. A job or internship interview or any other appointment does
not constitute a valid excuse for not taking the exam on the scheduled date. Students who have three or more
exams on the same date should notify the professor before the third class day with the documentation of their exam
date conflicts. Students who fail to provide documentation (proving the existence of their three exams on the same
date) by the third class day are not eligible to take a make-up exam. Students who have two exams on the same date
are not eligible for a make-up exam. It is solely the student’s responsibility to communicate with the professor
regarding these issues and it is solely the student’s responsibility to ensure that the instructor is receiving the
communication and any documentation. The student should use UT e-mail as the main form of communication.
Also, the student must verify that the instructor has received the appropriate documentation within the three-day
window. I do not guarantee that the level of difficulty of the make-up exam will be comparable to the exam given
at the scheduled time. I will determine the date and time of the make-up exam, and you must make arrangements to
take it at that time.
Team Project
The purpose of the project is to enhance your financial statement analysis skills. The specific requirements for the
project along with the grading standards will be posted at Canvas early in the semester. After the second week of
the classes, I will group the students into teams. Each student team will select an industry and complete a financial
statement analysis on the firms in that industry. The project will include a written paper along with a presentation
                                                                                                                     5


at the end of the semester. All students must attend all presentations or you will receive a 50% reduction in your
team project score. You must be in attendance entire time on the presentation day even if you are not presenting.
Your work will be evaluated for content and format. Content criteria include relevance and depth of analyses, and
the degree to which the assigned task was accomplished. Format criteria include clarity, accuracy, neatness,
organization, and structure of appendices.
At the end of the semester, each team member will evaluate the contributions of the other team members and
submit a “Peer Evaluation Form”. Your personal score for the project will be the sum of your team’s score minus
points deducted for adverse evaluations (if any) of your contribution by your team members.
Your team paper will be submitted and examined through the integrated plagiarism detection tool. E-mail or hard-
copy submissions will not be accepted. You will find the assignment submission link on the course page at Canvas.
If I suspect that your paper is not original (e.g., based on the plagiarism detection tool’s evaluation of originality),
I will forward your documentation to the Office of Judicial Affairs.
Submission of Homework Assignments through WileyPLUS
To gain access to your class, please register at the following class section URL:
wileyplus/class/748647
When you click on this link, you will be taken directly to our WileyPLUS class section, where you will log in if
you already have a WileyPLUS account, or if not you will be prompted to create one. Once that is done, you will
be taken to the e-commerce page to choose the type of access you prefer.
You must include your official UT e-mail address, and your name using only the English characters as part of
your registration to WileyPLUS.
Online homework assignments will be available at WileyPLUS every week on Wednesday (starting on 1/29). The
homework will be due on the following Tuesday. Given the fixed schedule of homework assignments (as shown
on the last page), no e-mail announcement will be sent regarding the homework assignments. It is your
responsibility to check WileyPLUS website regularly.
Online homework assignments will be automatically graded by WileyPLUS Software. It is your responsibility to
successfully submit your homework assignment online. It is unlikely that WileyPLUS questions / grading
schemes are wrong. If you have questions regarding the grading of homework assignments through WileyPLUS,
please state the question in an e-mail to me within one week from the time that the homework assignment is due.
Questions regarding the grading of homework assignments through WileyPLUS that are submitted beyond one
week from the time the homework assignments is due will not be answered.
Having your homework assignments done by someone else is cheating, and any suspicious case will be forwarded
to the Dean of Students.
No make-up homework assignments will be offered for the missed homework assignments. If you miss the
deadline for an online homework submission, then your grade for that homework assignment is zero.
Important Student Tips for Using WileyPLUS
https://hub.wiley.com/community/support/wileyplus-v4
Technical support line: 1-877-586-0192
                                                                                                                      6


Unannounced In-class Quizzes
In order to encourage class attendance and regular studying of the material, you will be tested on the material
through in-class quizzes. The dates of in-class quizzes will not be announced in advance. Different class sections
may be given quizzes on different dates. The number of in-class quizzes will not be announced in advance. If you
are absent when a quiz is given in class, then your grade for that quiz is zero. No make-up quizzes are offered for
the missed quizzes. No excuse reports will be accepted for the missed quizzes. Your professor understands that
students may occasionally have to miss a class. Therefore, at the end of the semester when calculating your point-
total, your quizzes with the two lowest scores will be dropped ("allowed quiz drops"). A job interview or an
internship interview or a doctor’s report does not constitute a valid excuse for missing a quiz; two allowed
quiz drops should compensate for such circumstances. Your instructor or TAs do not respond to requests
for an exception on this policy. The syllabus quiz will be considered as the first in-class quiz, and it is a requirement
to have full points on the syllabus quiz.
Given the possibility of an unannounced quiz on any class day, it is a requirement to bring a calculator to every
class hour. You will not be allowed to use your computer or your cell phone as a calculator while taking quizzes.
You are allowed to access the hard copy of your class slides and notes when taking the quizzes. Therefore, you
should bring the class notes from the previous class sessions together with the class slides for the current session.
Extra Credit & Late Work
There are no extra credit opportunities in this class. Late work is not accepted without an approved excuse as verified
by the professor.
Teaching Assistants
TAs have earned their positions; they are eager to help you. They will be attending my classes and you should be
able to catch them before or after class. Content related questions on the homework assignments and other class
material must be directed to them first. Feel free to drop by their office during the TA office hours that are listed
at Canvas. They will have extended office hours during the exam weeks. Check the announcements at Canvas.
TAs will not respond to your grading related questions. They are not authorized to decide whether you are eligible
to take a make-up exam.
Instructor’s Policy on Academic Integrity
Business professionals have important legal and ethical duties to investors, creditors and to non-investor
stakeholders who rely on their comments, analyses, forecasts and representations. Students in this course are
expected to act with personal integrity at all times. Academic dishonesty is incompatible with preparation for a
career as a responsible business professional. As such, academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course.
Any offenders will be subject to appropriate sanctions and discipline, a process which begins with a referral to Dean
of Students. For purposes of this course, the instructor will always seek a score of zero for any exam or assignment
in which the student has engaged in academic dishonesty. Information about the University’s policy on academic
integrity can be found on page 9.
                                                                                                                       7


Key Take-Aways
This is a very demanding course. To succeed in this course you have to:
         1) Read the chapters in the book. This is critical; there are a lot of concepts covered in this course that
             you can only really grasp if you read the chapters of the book we cover. Just doing the homework is
             not enough.
         2) Work the recommended assignments listed at Canvas without referring to the solutions manual.
         3) Keep up with the course. This is a comprehensive course, and the material builds upon itself. In
             addition, much of the material is highly detailed. As a result, it is highly difficult to cram this material
             at the end. You should expect to  study a minimum of 6 hours outside
             of class per week to pass the course.
         You are expected to exert a high level of effort for learning the material.
                                       Get ready to be challenged.
                                                                                                                       8


                                                   University Policies
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably
expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have
agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity
website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and procedures on
scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
      If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
      In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                                                                                     9


                           ACC 326 Spring 2020 Tentative Schedule Updated on 1/14/2020*
  Week         Class        Chapter in         Topic                                                                   Assignment &
                Day         Textbook                                                                                   Homework
     1          1/22        Chapter 1          Introduction to the course, the Syllabus,                               Read the syllabus; register
                                               Financial Reporting Overview                                            for WileyPLUS; solve
                                                                                                                       RQs** for Ch1
     2          1/27        Chapter 2          Basic Assumptions & Principles of Financial Reporting Be ready for syllabus quiz;
                1/29                           The Accounting Information System (Review)                              review accounting cycle
                            Chapter 3                                                                                  (Ch3); solve RQs for Ch2
     3           2/3        Chapter 3          The Accounting Information System (Review)                              WPH1*** due 2/4; review
                 2/5        Chapter 4          Income Statement                                                        accounting cycle
                                                                                                                       (Ch3); solve RQs for Ch3;
                                                                                                                       check Canvas for your team
                                                                                                                       assignment & meet with
                                                                                                                       your team
     4          2/10        Chapter 4          Income Statement                                                        WPH2 due 2/11; solve RQs
                2/12                                                                                                   for Ch4
     5          2/17        Chapter 5          Statement of Cash Flows                                                 Review balance sheet
                2/19                                                                                                   (Ch5); WPH3 due 2/18;
     6          2/24        Chapter 5          Statement of Cash Flows                                                 WPH4 due 2/25; solve RQs
                2/26                                                                                                   for Ch5; submit the
                                                                                                                       company selection for team
                                                                                                                       project
     7           3/2        Chapter 19         Income taxes                                                            WPH5 due 3/3; solve RQs
                 3/4                                                                                                   for Ch19
     8           3/9        Exam 1 will be held from 7:00pm – 8:30pm in UTC 2.102A. No class on exam day.
     8          3/11        Chapter 14         Long-Term Debt                                                          WPH6 due 3/17
     9          3/23        Chapter 14         Long-Term Debt                                                          Solve RQs for Ch14
                3/25
    10          3/30        Chapter 15         Stockholders’ Equity                                                    WPH7 due 3/31; solve RQs
                 4/1                                                                                                   for Ch15
    11           4/6        Chapter 16         Stock-based Compensation, Dilutive Securities and                       WPH8 due 4/7; solve RQs
                 4/8                           Earnings Per Share (EPS)                                                for Ch16
    12          4/13        Exam 2 will be held from 7:00pm – 8:30pm in UTC 2.102A. No class on exam day.
    12          4/15        Chapter 21         Leases                                                                  Submit the team project
                                                                                                                       paper, presentation material,
                                                                                                                       and peer evaluation form --
                                                                                                                       due 4/19
    13          4/20        Chapter 17         Intercompany Investments, Consolidations, and                           WPH9 due 4/21; solve RQs
                4/22                           Derivatives                                                             for Ch21
    14          4/27        Student presentations of financial statement analysis project (the order                   WPH10 due 4/28; solve
                            of presentations is to TBD on 4/27)                                                        RQs for Ch17
    14          4/29        Student presentations of financial statement analysis project
    15           5/4        Catch up and review
    15           5/5        Exam 3 will be held from 5:00pm – 7:00pm in UTC 2.102A. No class on exam day.
* Descriptions and timelines (including assignment due dates and exam dates) contained in this syllabus are subject to change at the discretion of the
Professor. Any change will be announced at the course homepage at Canvas. ** RQs: Recommended questions for each chapter are listed at Canvas
course page. ***WPH: WileyPLUS homework assignment.
                                                                                                                                                      10
