                             GER F506: First-Year German I
                                      Department of Germanic Studies
                                        University of Texas at Austin
                                               Summer 2020
SECTION INFORMATION
Unique Number: 80485
Meeting Time / Location: MWF: 8:30-11:30, Zoom (link on Canvas)
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION
 Instructor: Kirsten Meemann                             Program Director: Dr. Nick Henry
 Email: kirsten.meemann@utexas.edu                       Email: nhenry@austin.utexas.edu
 Zoom Office Hours: T 10-11 am &
 by appointment
                             Welcome to UT’s Department of Germanic Studies
 My name is Nick Henry, and together with your instructor, I would like to welcome you to the German
 Language Program. We are excited that you are studying German with us and are looking forward to
 helping you become proficient in the language and the culture of German-speaking communities. I
 want to take this opportunity to briefly discuss our program.
 If you have studied a language before, you know how difficult it can be at times. Indeed, second
 language acquisition is a complicated process that is influenced by numerous social and psychological
 factors. Modern research on second language acquisition has taught us that acquisition happens only
 when learners have an opportunity to interpret language for meaning and interact with others. I am
 reminded of von Humboldt, who wrote that we cannot really teach language, we can only create
 conditions in which it will develop spontaneously in the mind in its own way. Our program therefore
 uses a communicative approach, in which class time focuses on using the language to talk about
 ourselves, learn about others, discuss culture, solve problems, play games, and role-play. This means
 that we spend less time in class learning grammar rules and vocabulary. But it is still important that
 you study these elements of language outside of class in order to make the most of your time in class.
 In order to truly use the language communicatively in class, you will need to prepare by studying
 vocabulary and grammar at home. I urge you to take your class preparation most seriously, as both
 your success and your peers’ success (as well as the fun to be had in class) heavily depend on it.
 As I mentioned before, language learning can be very difficult. But I can also say from personal
 experience, it is extremely rewarding and will open you up to new experiences and ideas that are
 otherwise out of reach. Both your instructor and I are committed to making your language learning
 journey as joyful, exciting, and rewarding as possible. If you have any questions, concerns, or feedback
 about your course, please reach out to us soon as possible. I wish you all the best for the upcoming
 semester and your future as an ever more proficient speaker of German.
 Dr. Nick Henry, Language Program Director


COURSE DESCRIPTION AND PREREQUISITES
German 506 is a first semester German course and assumes no prior knowledge of German. If you do
have prior knowledge of German, we strongly urge you to take a credit by examination test with Testing
& Evaluation Services (TES), or conduct a placement interview with the Language Program Director (Dr.
Nick Henry). No “easy A” is worth the amount of time, tuition, and opportunity lost!
This course focuses on using German meaningfully in spoken and written genres. In order to maximize
the time we spend communicating in German, you will need to prepare for each class by studying new
material on your own, in advance. In class, you will briefly review, and then apply what you learned.
Therefore, it is crucial to:
     •    start a studying routine and always stay on top of the homework
     •    regularly review vocabulary (using flash cards)
     •    review formal elements of the language (i.e., grammar, pronunciation) as needed
     •    ask questions as you have them
     •    engage actively in the classroom, in pair as well as group activities, and
     •    most importantly: commit to communicating in German as much as possible during class
You should be prepared to study two to three hours for each class period. Students who cannot make this
commitment over the entire span of the semester should not take this course.
COURSE PROFICIENCY GOALS
It is our stated goal, that by the end of the course, you will be able to do the following tasks, and that you
will be able to comprehend written and spoken texts, in which people perform these tasks.
Basic interpersonal and classroom skills
“Wie geht’s?” = Introductions
1. I can greet people, introduce myself, tell them how I am doing and that it is a pleasure to meet them.
2. I can ask someone their name and ask them how they are doing. I can understand and respond to
     similar questions.
“In der Schule” = Classroom Interactions
1. I can ask someone to repeat themselves, ask what a word means, or how to say something.
2. I can understand simple classroom instructions, such as what page we are on or if we will turn in our
     assignments.
3. I can ask questions to clarify simple classroom instructions, such as what page we are on or if we will
     turn in our assignments. I can understand and respond to similar questions.
Daily Activities
“An der Universität” = Daily Schedule
1. I can talk about a typical week of mine, three things I do every day / three places I go most days, and
     if any of these things are different on the weekends. I can answer basic questions about my schedule
     including classes, work, and study time.
2. I can ask someone else about their typical week, and what their daily and weekend activities are. I can
     understand and respond to similar questions.


“Sport und Freizeit” = Hobbies and Free Time
1. I can describe three activities that I like to do in my free time.
2. I can ask someone else about what they like to do in their free time. I can understand and respond to
    similar questions.
Family and Friends
“Johanna Schmidts Familie” = Family and Friends
1. I can describe my immediate / extended family and my best friends, what they look like, and what
    they do for a living or what / where they study.
2. I can ask someone about their family and friends, what they look like, and what they do in life. I can
    understand and respond to similar questions.
“Wie sind sie?” = Personality Traits
1. I can make three statements about my basic personality traits and describe 2 personality traits for each
    of my family and friends.
2. I can ask someone else about his or her personality. I can understand and respond to similar questions.
Food and Restaurants
“Lebensmittel” = Preferences / Preparation
1. I can tell someone about what foods I like / dislike for my breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
2. I can ask someone some basic questions about what like / dislike to eat for breakfast, lunch, and
    dinner.
3. I can state what I need to prepare meals that I and my classmates like.
4. I can understand work with my classmates to plan for a shared meal.
“Im Restaurant” = Making Arrangements
1. I can understand my preferences and others’ preferences to suggest a restaurant to meet at. If my
    suggestion is disagreeable, I can work with others to come to an agreement.
2. I can ask simple questions to make arrangements to meet at the agreed upon restaurant. I can and
    adjust plans if necessary. I can understand and respond to similar questions.
COURSE MATERIALS
Textbook (required):
Sag mal. An Introduction to German Language and Culture. Vista Higher Learning. 2nd Edition. This is
a textbook package (ISBN 978-1-68004-402-7) that can be purchased online at
https://vistahigherlearning.com/sag-mal-2nd-edition-012.html.The package includes:
    1. Sag mal vtext
    2. Sag mal Supersite Plus access
    3. Sag mal WebSAM (Student Activities Manual)
Recommended Materials:
    1. One medium-sized dictionary
    2. English Grammar for Students of German. Cecile Zorach. Olivia & Hill Press, 1994


GRADING SCALE
Grades are assigned according to the following scales. Grades will be rounded at the .9 level.
  93         A                Class Participation and Preparation                15%
  90         A-               Online Homework (VHL + Canvas)                     15%
  87         B+               Dialogue Journal (4)                               10%
  83         B                Quizzes (4)                                        15%
  80         B-               Oral Tasks (2)                                     15%
  77         C+               Written Chapter Tests (4)                          30%
  73         C                Total                                              100%
  70         C-
  67         D+
  63         D
  60         D-
There are no incompletes given in German 506. A grade of C or better is required to enroll in your next
German course (i.e., a C- is not a passing grade).
ATTENDANCE POLICY
You are expected to attend each class session on time. To receive full credit in this course, you must have
no more than 4 absences (1 absence = 1.5 hours), including absences for illnesses, doctor’s visits, family
matters, job interviews, etc. Beginning with the 5th absence, your course grade will drop dramatically (a
2% deduction off of your final grade per 1.5 hours missed, with a 10% maximum). Make sure to be on
time. Every two times you arrive late to class will count as one full day absence.
         Family emergencies that can be substantiated or serious illnesses verified by a doctor’s note may
be treated as exceptions. Absences for jury duty, military duty, and university sponsored activities may be
excused with proper documentation and advance notice. Observance of a religious holy day may be
excused only if you notify your instructor of the absence via email within the first week of class (only the
holiday itself—not “travel days”—can be excused). For excused absences only, you will have the
opportunity to complete missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
COURSEWORK
1. Class Participation and Preparation (15%)
Since attaining communicative competence is a primary goal of this course, you must be willing to speak
up and share ideas with your instructor and your classmates. Errors and mistakes are inevitable and are, in
fact, crucial for your learning. Your instructor will create an atmosphere where mistakes are treated
respectfully. Language learning requires risk-taking, and it is important for you to feel safe and relaxed,
so that you can speak up without any anxiety, even if you are not certain whether your contribution is
100% correct. If you feel particularly uncomfortable speaking up in class, please get in touch with your
instructor and help them understand why.
Participation is evaluated daily and graded on a weekly basis. To earn full credit for participation, you
must be present with your camera on, punctual, prepared, and actively / cooperatively involved in the
class session. You must work cooperatively with your classmates, engage with the professor, and
maintain an open mind towards the target culture. You must speak German and show your teacher and


classmates respect when they are speaking. A score of 85% represents average participation, meaning that
you have met your instructor’s basic expectations but have not exceeded expectations. Unexcused
absences result in a score of 0 and will prevent you from earning full credit for participation.
The following criteria are used to determine your participation grade (using a 10-point system):
10 always well-prepared, is attentive and volunteers often; tries to use German with classmates and
         instructor; makes the most of each activity; shows real resourcefulness and imagination in using
         the language; responds to and engages classmates in a respectful manner; remains critical and open-
         minded toward target and native culture.
8 usually well-prepared; is attentive and volunteers occasionally; tries to use German with classmates
         and instructor; makes the most of each activity; completes exercises with some imagination and
         resourcefulness; makes some effort to engage fellow students; shows some development of cultural
         sensitivity.
5 adequately prepared and attentive; typically waits to be called upon; occasionally needs to be reminded
         to use German with instructor and classmates; responds and completes exercises with minimal
         imagination; does not engage classmates beyond the minimum.
3 is unprepared; makes little effort to participate or complete exercises; rarely tries to use German with
         instructor or classmates.
0 makes no contribution to class whatsoever; is not on task.
2. Online Homework (15%)
Daily or almost daily homework is key to your language development. A large part of the homework is
assigned online through Sag mal’s accompanying “Supersite” at www.vhlcentral.com. The exercises
target reading, listening, writing, and speaking abilities. On the Supersite, you get immediate feedback on
exercises. Since you can do these online exercises repeatedly throughout the semester, they also serve as
excellent study tools for quizzes and tests. All homework must be done by the due date indicated by your
instructor. Homework turned in late will be penalized with -10% for every day late.
3. Dialogue Journals (10%)
Four online writing tasks over the course of the semester give you the opportunity to strengthen your
writing abilities in German in meaningful and creative ways. These dialogue journals are meant to give
you an open space to write about yourself, your lives, and topics that interest you. You are encouraged to
write about something related to the course, but you may select any topic you wish. Your entries should
consist of a minimum of 10 sentences, and they should grow in length and depth as your proficiency with
German develops. At the end of your entry, you will pose 1-2 questions to your instructor. Your instructor
will then respond to your questions and other information in your entry. The cycle will continue
throughout the rest of the semester. You will submit your dialogue journals online in a Google doc that
you should create and share with your instructor within the first week of class.
The primary goal of this assignment is to have an open conversation in written form. The purpose is NOT
to practice vocabulary and grammar (though you certainly will do that). Dialogue journals are therefore
graded primarily on the depth of discussion and overall communicative ability. You may not seek help
from outside sources (friends, tutors, translators) on your entries. Seeking help from these sources
undermines your ability to express yourself communicatively using your own language. If you must, you
may ask your instructor to help you convey a thought that is giving you difficulty.
4. Quizzes (15%)
To ensure regular studying from the textbook and other instructional materials, there will be four short
written quizzes scheduled across the four chapters targeting key vocabulary and grammar. Quizzes will be
completed as timed assessments in Canvas and will be open-book and open-note. No make-ups will be


given for missed quizzes except for an excused absence. In addition to the scheduled quizzes, your
instructor may give “pop” quizzes in class or assign take-home quizzes to be done outside of class. These
quizzes will count towards your overall quiz grade.
5. Oral Tasks (15%)
Twice this semester, you will record yourself performing an oral task with a partner. These tasks are
designed to assess communicative proficiency and give you a sense of the things you can do with the
language. Grading will focus primarily on how successfully you perform the task but will also consider
how accurately and fluently you speak (as is appropriate to your level).
6. Written Chapter Tests (30%)
Each of the four tests covers material from one chapter. However, since language learning is cumulative,
note that each exam inherently covers all previously learned material. The tests will be completed as
timed assessments in Canvas and will be open-book and open-note. The exams test your knowledge of
and ability to use German language forms (grammar and vocabulary) introduced in the chapters.
Listening and reading comprehension, as well as writing abilities will also be assessed. If you miss a test
without having obtained permission from the instructor in advance, you will not receive any credit for the
test, unless the absence was due to a documented medical/ family emergency, religious holiday, or
military service.
EXTRA CREDIT
A great way to practice your German (and get extra credit) is to take part in department-sponsored
summer events, where you have the opportunity to discuss German culture, watch some films, listen to
some music, and get to know people in the department. Dates, times, and Zoom links for all extra-
curricular events will be announced in class. Participation in each event counts as +0.5% on your overall
course grade. You must participate in at least two events before receiving any extra credit. You can
receive up to 3% points total through extra credit.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Please keep in mind that language learning is a long-term process and necessarily involves making
mistakes. Your instructor is there to help you along the way, but ultimately the effort must come from you
to make the experience worthwhile. While you are certainly encouraged to study as groups and help each
other in understanding the material at hand, your work must ultimately be your own:
     • If consulting with more advanced speakers of German (such as a tutor), you should follow your
         instructor’s policies and instructions regarding outside help. If you do not know these policies,
         you should consult with your instructor before seeking outside help.
     • You should use appropriate citation methods whenever you are using someone else’s words, even
         if these words are translated.
     • Copying or collaborating on exams is not permitted unless explicitly stated so by your instructor.
     • USING TRANSLATION WEBSITES, SOFTWARE, OR SERVICES FOR ANY
         PORTION OF ANY ASSIGNMENT IN THIS COURSE IS DEFINED AS ACADEMIC
         DISHONESTY AND PLAGIARISM UNLESS EXPLICITLY STATED OTHERWISE.
Each student should be familiar with the Honor Code and other university policies and procedures
regarding academic integrity. Make sure you understand not only what counts as plagiarism and cheating,
but also how to avoid engaging in these practices. Students who do not comply with University rules on
scholastic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, ranging from failure of the assignment to


immediate expulsion from the university. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies are strictly enforced. For more information, visit
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
GENDER NEUTRAL PRONOUNS
We strive to create an inclusive and welcoming classroom for everyone. Grammatical gender plays a
significant role in the German language. While no standards for gender neutral pronouns have been
established in contemporary German yet, some ideas and suggestions exist. We will be happy to inform
you of these suggestions and use your desired pronouns in both German and English to the best of our
ability.
QUESTIONS? CONCERNS? COMMENTS?
We value your feedback. If you enjoy your class, let your instructor know and tell your friends. If there
are any aspects of the class that you do not feel comfortable with, make sure to reach out to your
instructor. If you are not comfortable with approaching your instructor, you are always welcome to
contact the Language Program Director, Dr. Nick Henry (nhenry@austin.utexas.edu).
CONTINUING OPPORTUNITIES IN GERMAN
1. Opportunities at UT and in Austin
Along with the extra credit options listed above, UT and the wider Austin community offer several
opportunities to practice German informally and get to know others interested in the language and culture:
     •   German Club: This is a fun and active group for learners of German at all levels of proficiency.
         Check out their Facebook site at https://www.facebook.com/groups/222912318303159.
     •   Es klingt wie Deutsch: UT’s student-run German language radio show!
         https://www.facebook.com/Es-Klingt-Wie-Deutsch-214889598551642. The program welcomes
         the participation of speakers of German from all levels of proficiency.
     •   Austin German Meetup Group: monthly conversation group: www.meetup.com/austin-german.
     •   PALS is a campus organization that matches American and International students to provide an
         opportunity for cultural exchanges and language contact. https://sites.utexas.edu/pals/
     •   Planet Longhorn is a student-run organization built to help students diversify their cultural
         knowledge and make friends from around the world. https://planetlonghorn.org/about
2. Upper-Division German, Majors, Minors, and the Certificate
It would be a shame if your studies of German would end with the completion of the lower division
program! For information on upper division courses, as well as earning a major, minor, or certificate in
German, please go to https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/germanic/undergraduate/Advising.php and reach out to
our Undergraduate Advisor, Dr. Kirkland Fulk.
3. Study Abroad in Germany
The Department of Germanic Studies offers a number of study abroad opportunities including an
immensely popular summer program (the German and European Studies Summer Program in Würzburg)
that is designed specifically for UT language students like you. We offer two language options: GER 612
(for students who completed GER 506 and 507), and GER 330C, an upper-division Composition and
Conversation course for students who have successfully completed GER 612. In addition, you can enroll


in courses in literature, art history, economics, and politics in Germany, taught in English. Up to 9 UT
credits can be earned. The program also offers a rich cultural excursion program that includes a 5-day trip
to Berlin. Throughout the 10-week program, students are accompanied by a UT Austin faculty member.
For more, see: https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/germanic/undergraduate/abroad/Wuerzburg.php.
4. UT German on Facebook
You can keep up with all of these opportunities and more by joining the UT German Facebook group:
https://www.facebook.com/TexasGermanProgram/
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
1. Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement’s Services for Students with Disabilities. For more information,
see http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability.
2. Use of Email and Canvas for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should be familiar with the University’s official email student notification policy. It is the
student's responsibility to keep the University informed of changes in their email address. Students are
expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis, recognizing that certain communications may be
time-critical. It is recommended that email be checked daily. See the complete text of this policy and
instructions for updating your email address are available at:
https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
The class will use the course management site Canvas, accessible to each enrolled student through
their UT Direct account. Email reminders and updates may be sent through this site.
3. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone in the UT community, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss your concerns with professional counselors. This service is provided through a partnership
among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-
232-5050 or visit www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
4. Counseling and Mental Health Center
College life can be overwhelming. If you ever feel distressed, the Counseling & Mental Health Center
(CMHC) provides online counseling, psychiatric consultation, and prevention services that facilitate your
academic and life goals, and enhance your personal growth and well-being: http://cmhc.utexas.edu.
5. Title IX and Sexual Harassment
UT Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from discriminatory conduct
based on gender. As required by Title IX, the University encourages any student or non-student who
thinks that he or she has been subjected to sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual
violence) or sexual misconduct by another student, member of the faculty or staff, or campus visitor or
contractor, to immediately report the incident to any of the persons or offices listed below.
     Institutional Title IX Coordinator                  Deputy Title IX Coordinator for Students
     University Compliance Services                      Student Emergency Services
     512-232-3992                                        Office of the Dean of Students
                                                         512-471-5017


Students may also report incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence) or
sexual misconduct to any university Responsible Employee, who is then required to promptly notify any
of the above Title IX coordinators of the reported incident. Complaints or allegations of student-on-
student sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence) or sexual misconduct will be
handled by the Office of the Dean of Students. Cases of sexual violence may also be reported to the
University of Texas Police Department, the City of Austin Police Department and other local law
enforcement authorities. The Title IX Coordinators can assist individuals with contacting these law
enforcement agencies. https://titleix.utexas.edu
