                             Introduction to Image and Sound
                                           RTF 318 * Summer 2020
Instructor:            Micah Barber
TA:                    Maggie Bailey
This is new.
It will be fun.
This class is all about learning the basics of production and storytelling.
Summer 2020 is the first time it is being taught entirely online.
It’s an action-packed and intense class— basically 5 weeks of nonstop making & learning.
Critical assumptions:
You want to learn this stuff.
You will drive your own learning.
             Here’s what you have to do each week for five weeks:
        1. Weekend / Monday morning = Complete the self-driven learning (on Canvas)
        2. Mondays =          Attend live class on Zoom at 1pm CST
        3. Tuesdays =         Attend lab on Zoom at 1pm CST
        4. Wednesdays =       Individual meetings on Zoom (assigned time) between 1-3pm CST
        5. Thurs/Fridays = Turn in your weekly assignment (by Friday midnight)
        6. Anytime =          Take the end-of-week Quiz
Attendance is taken for every session and is seriously the easiest part of your grade.
You’ll have one weekly individual meeting on Wednesday with either Micah or Maggie.
You will receive a scheduled time for this meeting.
For all our Zoom sessions, you need to have your camera on. I recommend using a virtual background.
If you have a circumstance where you need to have your camera off for some reason, please contact me
and/or the TA ahead of time. Some exceptions may be made, with advance notice.
                               Attendance                         25
                               Ideas, Shot Lists, Storyboards     5
                               Project 1                          10
                               Project 1 (second version)         10
                               Project 2                          10
                               Project 2 (second version)         10
                               Quizzes (x5)                       20
                               Surveys (x5)                       5
                               Participation / Peer Reviews       5
                               TOTAL                              100


Equipment
A requirement of this class, as listed in the description, is any smartphone (or camera) that shoots video,
and any editing app (i.e. iMovie or Filmic Pro for iphone, Premiere, Resolve, or AVID for computer).
Calendar
Week 1: Ideas & Language / Week 2: Photography / Week 3: Lighting / Week 4: Editing / Week 5: Sound
Note: The “normal” summer version of this class involves 9 hours of lecture / 9 hours of lab per week
(18 hours total per week), plus assignments. This online version involves 3-5 hours of Zoom / 3 hours of
online on your own (6-8 hours total per week), plus assignments.
The point is that this class is a big time commitment. There isn’t enough time to fall behind.
Grading is pretty typical, as follows (with no “rounding”):
                    A 93-100                        C       73-76
                    A- 90-92                        C-      70-72
                    B+ 87-89                        D+      67-69
                    B 83-86                         D       63-66
                    B- 80-82                        D-      60-62
                    C+ 77-79                        F       below 60
Every assignment is due by midnight on Fridays. Late penalties apply to every assignment.
Note that a grade of B- or better in RTF 318 is a prerequisite for all upper-division production courses.
General Grading Criteria:
The following are general guidelines for grades. These are meant only as general statements and not
intended to be directly applicable for grading projects.
A-level work is strong conceptually, aesthetically, creatively, and technically. It adheres to guidelines
and communicates strongly and clearly through the medium. The concept of the work is original and
innovative and the technical execution of the idea is superior. A-level work takes creative and
conceptual risks while maintaining coherence about the statement it is making.
B-level work achieves success in some areas but not all: originality, concept, aesthetics, creativity, and
technical execution. For example, sometimes it is technically strong but conceptually weak; other times
it is highly original but not technically competent. Sometimes the work is creatively strong but has
trouble holding together as a coherent piece with a particular message.
C-level work typically may have small amounts of success in technical, creative, conceptual, and
aesthetic areas, but has difficulty in multiple areas.
D-level work and below fails to achieve success and competence in most areas. It is typically
conceptually weak, fails to deliver an original or coherent idea, has major technical difficulties, and
takes little or no creative risk.
Final Note: Success
The SINGLE best way to do well (B level or higher) in this class is to have stellar attendance &
participation, and to apply yourself on projects. (It’s not a bad strategy in other areas of life either.)
                               (Additional University info on following pages)


SAFETY
You must follow all state and local laws and guidelines regarding health and safety, at all times, when
participating in this class.
UNIVERSITY FILMING RULE
Filming on UT’s campus is permitted, but showing recognizable UT locations (tower, stadium, logos) is
not. This could affect your grade on projects, and also create some challenges with UT & RTF
administration, so it’s best to avoid it altogether. Plus, it’s usually not very creative!
UNIVERSITY ELECTRONIC MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY
All students should become familiar with the University’s official email student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her email address.
Students are expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that email be checked daily. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating
your email address are available here. In this course email will be used as a means of communication
with students. You will be responsible for checking your email regularly for class work and
announcements.
UNIVERSITY POLICY RE: SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
Additionally, scholastic dishonesty includes signing the attendance sheet on behalf of someone else or
having someone else sign you in when you are not in attendance.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonest damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at
471-6259, 471-4641.
COUNSELING & MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support:
- Call the Counseling & Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | 512-471-3515 / cmhc.utexas.edu
- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 — 512.471.2255 — cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)


FREE Services at CMHC:
-      Brief assessments and referral services
-      Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-      MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-      Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
university can:
    1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
         have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
RTF SAFETY POLICY
Special safety precautions for your crew, actors and others in the area are required if you are
undertaking any hazardous activities while filming, including but not limited to ANY driving or
horseback/livestock shots, shooting in or around water or heights, or if you are using stunts, flames,
pyrotechnics, squibs or simulated weapons. Please note that unlicensed handguns and other real
weapons are never permitted in RTF studios or on location shoots. In addition, you must follow all
federal, state and local laws and the rules of any venue or location at which you are filming regarding
hazardous activities, including University of Texas at Austin rules if filming is done on campus.
Student filmmakers must submit a detailed safety plan to their course instructor and the RTF Technical
Facilities Manager if a script or project involves driving or horseback/livestock shots, shooting in or
around water or heights, stunts, flames, pyrotechnics, squibs, weapons or any other hazardous activities
(this requirement applies to all shoots, including documentary projects, but please see the special
guidelines for documentary driving shots below). It is the responsibility of the student to hire experts in
the field and budget at least $600/day for expert consultation and on-set supervision if, in the judgment
of the class instructor and the Technical Facilities Manager, such expert consultation or supervision is
necessary. In addition, any utilization of pyrotechnics on the University of Texas at Austin campus
requires prior review and approval through the Fire Prevention Services office by the University Fire
Marshal or their designee.
Students should understand that driving while filming will be permitted only in strictly limited
circumstances, such as on a private road or drive. In most circumstances, students who wish to
undertake driving shots will be required to arrange for a police escort and a city permit. Monitors inside


the vehicle will NOT be allowed while filming in a vehicle. Filming from the back of trucks is not
considered safe and is not permitted under any circumstances.
Documentary filming of an interview while the interview subject is driving is only permitted if the
cameraperson is secured in a seat belt and is not directing the driver of the car in any way, besides
engaging in a conversation in which the driver/interviewee has been informed not to look at the camera
or the interviewer at all during the interview. In addition, any filming from a vehicle, for drive-by B-roll,
must be done by a cameraperson secured in a seat belt, where the driver is not being directed in any
way by the director, so that they are driving as they normally would. As noted above, any documentary
student planning on filming in any vehicle must submit a safety plan to their course instructor and the
RTF Technical Facilities Manager.
Students who fail to comply with this policy will receive a failing grade in this class and will be barred
from future access to RTF production and post-production equipment and facilities.
