UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
Department of Curriculum and Instruction
ALD 327 Sociocultural Influences on Learning
Fall 2018
  Course Instructor: Dr. Keffrelyn Brown                                                               Day of Course: Tuesday
  Office Location: SZB (Sanchez) 528A                                                                     Time: 1 p.m.-4 p.m.
  Office Telephone: 512.232.4257                                                                            Location: SBZ 411
  Office Hours: Thursday 1-3 p.m. and by appointment                                            Course Unique Number: 09040
  Course Instructor Email: keffrelyn@austin.utexas.edu
                                                                                                   COURSE CROSS-LISTING
African American Studies AFR 372D
Course Unique Number: 30660
                                                                                                       COURSE OBJECTIVES
The purpose of this course is to explore and become familiar with the vital role sociocultural factors play in the learning
process. These factors, which are embedded both in historic ways of constructing what it means to be “normal,” and in
institutional practices and social inequalities, fundamentally shape how individuals understand themselves, their place in
the world, as well as others around them. In particular, this course will consider how issues related to race, class,
gender, culture and sexuality operate in and exert an influence on the teaching and learning process. Focus will be
placed on the experiences faced by student populations that have historically experienced challenges and
marginalization in U.S. educational systems. It is expected that at the conclusion of the course, you will have a more
comprehensive and complex understanding of the role sociocultural factors have played and continue to play in
learning; as well as the perspectives necessary to embark on working effectively with children and youth from all
backgrounds.
PLEASE NOTE: This course includes a 15-hour service learning component. You will need to locate an appropriate
location to engage in 15 hours of volunteer service learning. We will talk about some options for fulfilling this
requirement during the first two weeks of class. I will provide in class time for you to discuss experiences in the service
learning site. You will also reflect on these experiences in your final paper reflection.
                                                                                                              COURSE TEXTS
Articles and Book Chapters: Course Packet (optional). Can be purchased at Jenn’s Copy and Binding.
Books: All of the course texts below can be purchased at the University Co-op
     (1) Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Students (2nd Edition)
     (2) Amanda Lewis, Race in the Schoolyard: Negotiating the Color Line in Classrooms and Communities
Articles: Article and book chapter required readings will be uploaded to the Canvas system
While this syllabus is intended to outline and frame the general goals and expectations of the course, it should be
considered a “work in progress”. As I get to know the class and over the course of the semester, reading assignments
and due dates may be subject to modification/change.
                                                                                  EXPECTATIONS & ATTENDANCE POLICY


CLASS EXPECTATIONS. Since this course primarily relies upon your participation and effort, grades will reflect the degree
to which your class participation (group and individual) is thoughtful, engaging and critical; as well as the assignments
you submit are timely, well-organized and analytical. In addition, your final paper should utilize appropriate style and
citation rules. For this course, you should utilize APA style (American Psychological Association). For style assistance,
see the attached “Guide to citing work,” found at the end of this document and/or consult the APA style manual. I also
expect that you will check your UT affiliated email frequently as this is the primary way that I contact the class.
INDIVIDUAL MEETINGS WITH ME. I want to meet and talk with each of you in a personal meeting, sometime within the
first weeks of the fall 2018 semester. I will pass around a sign-up sheet for you to sign up for a 15-20 minute meeting
with me in my office (528A Sanchez Bldg.).
ATTENDANCE. The success of this course is in large part dependent on the degree to which you attend class and
thoughtfully and actively engage in small/large class discussion. This requires that prior to class meetings, you will have
read and critically considered the class readings and other assigned materials. It is VITALLY important that you attend
class in a timely and consistent manner. It is understood that over the course of the semester situations may arise that
prohibit your attendance. For this reason, you may miss two (2) classes—for any reason (including by not limited to
illness) without any penalty. Each additional absence will result in a one point deduction from your grade. The only
absences excused from this policy are those accompanied with a doctor’s note or some other documented valid excuse.
NOTE: IF YOU MISS MORE THAN FOUR (4) CLASSES AND DO NOT HAVE A DOCTOR’S NOTE OR SOME OTHER VALID
DOCUMENTATION JUSTIFYING YOUR ABSENCE, YOU WILL FAIL THE COURSE.
                                                                                         UNIVERSITY POLICIES & SERVICES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
UNIVERSITY ELECTRONIC MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY (Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students). All
students should be familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in her or his e-mail address. Students are expected to check
e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that
certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice
per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your
e-mail regularly for class work and announcements.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC HONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at to access the official University policies
and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
ACCOMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS. The University of Texas at Austin upon request provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Please see me the first week of classes if accommodations need
to be made. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
CARE COUNSELING. CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to need
support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are available to help
                                                                  2


with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of
Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an
appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please include your
name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM. You will
check-in at the College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let Danie know you’re waiting. All
services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without your written consent.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS & ABSENCES. Every effort shall be made to reasonably and fairly deal with all students who,
because of religious obligations, have conflicts with scheduled exams, assignments, or required attendance, provided
advance notification of the conflict is given. Whenever possible, students should give at least two weeks advance notice
to request special accommodation. If you have any questions about a certain holy day, several calendars can be found
online including the one at http://www.interfaithcalender.org/index.htm.
                                                                                                                 GRADING SCALE
                                     A                 93-100                C+               77-79
                                     A-                 90-92                C                73-76
                                     B+                 87-89                C-               70-72
                                     B                  83-86                D                60-69
                                     B-                 80-82                 F           59 and under
                                                                        ASSIGNMENT EXPECTATIONS & SCORING RUBRICS
            Percent of Grade                                Assignment                                    Due date
                   15%                                      Attendance                                     Weekly
                    5%                         Active Engagement/Participation                             Weekly
                    5%                                  Reading Facilitation                               Sign-up
                   15%                            Session Write-Up Reflections                             Weekly
                   15%                              Service Learning Project                     Session 15, 12.11 (in class)
                   15%                                        Quizzes                                      Weekly
                   15%                             Educational Autobiography                     Session 10, 11.06 (in class)
                   15%                                  Final Course Paper                  Friday, 12.14, by 4:00 p.m. in my box
ATTENDANCE (15 POINTS). It is VITALLY important that you attend the entire class session in a timely and consistent
manner. However, it is understood that over the course of the semester a situation may arise that prohibits your
attendance. For this reason, you may miss two (2) classes—for any reason (including but not limited to illness) without
any penalty. Two additional absences will result in a two (2)-point deduction, per each absence from your final grade.
The only absences excused from this policy are those accompanied with a doctor’s note or some other documented
valid excuse (e.g., obituary, legal hearing, etc.). I strictly follow this policy so please bring in your documentation the
next class session after a missed meeting. NOTE: IF YOU MISS MORE THAN FOUR (4) CLASSES—INCLUDING THE ONE
                                                                   3


FREE ABSENCE ALLOWED—AND DO NOT SUBMIT WRITTEN DOCUMENTATION FOR THE ABSENCE (E.G., DOCTOR’S
NOTE, OBITUARY, LEGAL SUMMONS, ETC.), YOU MAY RECEIVE AN F IN THE COURSE.
ACTIVE ENGAGEMENT/ PARTICIPATION (5 POINTS). The success of this course is in large part dependent on the degree
to which you attend the entire class session and thoughtfully and actively engage in small/large class discussion. To
receive credit for active engagement/participation, you need to: (1) read and critically consider all scheduled readings
prior to coming to class; (2) bring a hard copy of all assigned readings to class; (3) stay engaged in the class session by
not surfing the internet or texting and (4) thoughtfully speaking aloud during large and small group
discussions/activities.
SESSION WRITE-UPS (15 POINTS). Each class session, you will turn in a completed session write up reflection sheet.
Reflection sheets can be downloaded on Canvas. The purpose of the weekly reflections is to provide a structured
opportunity for you to reflect on the readings, including key ideas I ask you to attend to, as well as provide talking points
for large class and small group discussions. You will reflect on your initial write up at the end of the class session. I will
read these, as well as pass them back on the Tuesday of each new week. It is expected that you will turn in write-ups
even for those classes that you missed. Late write-ups will only be accepted in the event of a class absence and must be
turned in within a week of the absence. PLEASE NOTE: You may choose not to turn in two (2) session write-ups over the
course of the semester. However it is still expected that you will read the pieces assigned for that week. Two additional
missed write ups will result in a two (2) point deduction for each write up from your final grade. NOTE: YOU CANNOT
MISS TURNING IN TWO (2) CONSECUTIVE SESSION WRITE-UPS ASSOCIATED WITH BOOKS. IF YOU MISS MORE THAN
FOUR (4) WRITE-UPS YOU MAY RECEIVE AN F IN THE COURSE.
DUE DATES: Weekly, every class session (relevant session are noted in this syllabus with the symbol ***)
READING FACILITATION (5 POINTS). You will facilitate the assigned readings for one class session. This is an open-ended
and creative assignments, which asks you to analyze the topic take initiative opening the discussion. Focus your
activity/facilitation on the most important points in the reading, considering the broader implication of the readings on
teaching and education. Plan your facilitation for 10 min.
DAILY QUIZZES (15 POINTS). Each class session you will have a quiz over the required session readings. Each quiz is worth one
(1) point. The two lowest grades and/or two missed quizzes will be dropped. Quizzes cannot be made up.
EDUCATIONAL AUTOBIOGRAPHY (15 POINTS). You will write an educational autobiography that explores your past
schooling experiences. In this piece, you should address how you identify yourself (e.g., race, class, gender etc.), the
kinds of schools you attended, what your experiences were like in these school settings—particularly in relation to the
kinds of learning experiences you had, your relationship with teachers and other faculty/staff, as well as with your peers
and how your own sociocultural background may have contributed to your schooling experiences. Autobiographies
should fall within a 6-8 double-spaced page range.
DUE DATE: Session 10, 11.06
SERVICE LEARNING PROJECT (15 POINTS). Each student must complete 15 service-learning hours in site located in a
community characterized by low socioeconomic status and/or with high numbers racial/cultural/ethnic minorities. The
purpose of this assignment is to both collect information on the community wealth and funds of knowledge that exist in
site, while also allowing you to learn through critical engagement and action.
You will spend 10 hours volunteering or tutoring at the site and five (5) hours observing a local community wealth site.
Each project will include: (1) autobiographical reflections of your work in the site and (2) an assessment of the
community wealth resources related to the site.
                                                               4


You must locate a service learning site by session 4. After this time, you will lose two (2) points weekly until you secure
a location. You will also turn in a signed log of all the hours you completed. NOTE: IF YOU DO NOT COMPLETE ALL 15
HOURS AND SUBMIT A SIGNED LOG OF ALL THE HOURS COMPLETED YOU WILL RECEIVE AN INCOMPLETE IN THE
COURSE UNTIL YOU FINISH THE HOURS.
DUE DATE: Session 15, 12.11
FINAL PAPER (15 POINTS). The purpose of the final project is for you to critically reflect on what you have learned and
experienced in the course. To successfully complete this assignment, you will need to discuss what sociocultural
influences means to you and how your thinking about and understanding of the role sociocultural influences play in the
educational process has changed or modified since beginning the course. At different points in the course, you will be
asked to complete in-class reflective writing/journaling assignments to prepare you for this final paper. The reflection
can be approached as creatively as you wish, but it needs to address each of the following components of the course:
(1) course readings and weekly reflections
(2) class discussions and activities
(3) service learning project
(4) course assignments
*Papers should fall between 8-10 double-spaced pages.
DUE DATE: Friday, 12.14 by 4 p.m.
                                                                 5


                                                              Educational Autobiography
In this assignment I want you to address the question:
How did sociocultural factors play a role in your schooling and academic learning experiences?
To address this question, use the following questions to help you organize your thoughts:
(1) How do you identify yourself? (e.g., race, class, gender, etc.)? What are the implications of your identity (historical, institutional, local) and social
location in relation to advantage and disadvantage? (Please think about this question at both the macro and micro levels.
(2) What kind of schools have you attended? How were students grouped to learn? Was the curriculum and accompanying learning experiences different
and/or differently valued by teachers, staff, etc. across classrooms? How were decisions made regarding class selection and/or course-taking? Please think
about the various sociocultural factors (race, class, gender) and the educational issues related to them (achievement gap; equality; equity; racism; social
construction of race; various forms of capital; habitus; symbolic violence, etc.) when addressing this question.
(3) How would you describe your schooling experiences? (e.g., kind of learning experiences, relationship with teachers and other staff, relationship with
peers) Please think about the various sociocultural factors (race, class, gender) and the educational issues related to them (achievement gap; equality;
equity; racism; social construction of race; various forms of capital; habitus; symbolic violence, etc.) when addressing this question.
(4) How did the sociocultural factors discussed so far in the course (e.g., race, social class, gender) operate in your schooling and in the experiences of
others that attended your school? Please think about the various sociocultural factors (race, class, gender) and the educational issues related to them
(achievement gap; equality; equity; racism; social construction of race; various forms of capital; habitus; symbolic violence, etc.) when addressing this
question.
Directions
* Hard copy due in class, session 10, 11.06.18
* You must cite four (4) or more DIFFERENT course readings in your paper. Citing the same reference more than once will only count once.
*You must include and use in the correct definitional context, five (5) key terms from the course. Please BOLD IN BLACK the terms used in your
paper
*Late papers will lose one (1) point for each day late. Papers submitted one week late will lose 10 points. Papers submitted more than one
week late will not be accepted and will result in a loss of all points.
                                                                    Scoring Rubric (15 points)
           COURSE READINGS                        KEY TERMS/KEY IDEAS                       PERSONAL REFLECTION                         ORGANIZATION
                 4 points                                 5 points                                  3 points                                  3 points
  Clear evidence that appropriate          Clear evidence that the key               Clear evidence that thoughtful,          Clear evidence that the written
  course materials were                    terms/key ideas incorporated in           critical reflection given the            response was completed in a
  thoughtfully read and                    the paper.                                explanation of personal                  neat, coherent, clear, and well-
  incorporated in the paper.                                                         sociocultural background and             organized manner.
                                                                                     how larger sociocultural factors
                                                                                     contributed to the schooling
                                                                                     experiences
  Evidence:                                Evidence:                                 Evidence:                                Evidence:
  Specific reference to the course         Specific reference to the key             Discusses sociocultural factors in       Paper is presented neatly and
  readings. Attends to the four            terms/key concepts examined in            relation to identity and social          well organized; easy for the
  questions outlined in the                the course.                               location; as well as schooling           reader to figure out the author’s
  assignment description.                                                            experiences.                             ideas; free from major typos or
                                                                                                                              grammatical errors. Utilizes
                                                                                                                              appropriate style and citation
                                                                                                                              format.
  POINTS
Final Score:
                                                                                  6


                                                                     Final Paper
Directions:
Papers should fall between 7-8 pp of text. This does not include your cover page or your references page. Please cite at least five (5) course
readings. You should also complete a reference or work cited page for this assignment. Include page numbers. DUE BY FRIDAY,12.14.18,
AT 4 PM IN MY BOX (SZB 528)
Late papers will lose one (1) point for each day late. Papers submitted one week late will lose 10 points. Papers submitted more than one
week late will not be accepted and will result in a loss of all points.
Papers should answer the following questions:
     1. What are sociocultural factors and how do they interact with and potentially impact the schooling and achievement process? (2
           pp.)
     2.    How did the following aspects of the course impacted your learning? (2-3 pp.)
           ~ course readings and weekly reflections
           ~ class discussions and learning activities
           ~ your service learning experiences (overall impact; no need to discuss in depth as you will have completed the service learning
           project—no more than ½ a page).
           ~ course assignments, including educational autobiography and midterm
     3.    In what ways has this course challenged, reinforced and/or modified your understanding about sociocultural influences on
           learning? What knowledge did you have about this topic prior to coming into the course? What knowledge have you gained?
           How do you envision using the knowledge you gained in the course in your future endeavors? (academic, personal, professional,
           etc.) (2-3 pp.)
                                                              Scoring Rubric (15 points)
                COURSE READINGS                                 PERSONAL REFLECTION                              ORGANIZATION
  ANALYSIS OF SOCIOCULTURAL INFLUENCES
                   ON LEARNING                                           5 points                                    5 points
                      5 points
  Clear evidence that appropriate course             Clear evidence that thoughtful, critical     Clear evidence that the written response
  materials were thoughtfully read and               reflection was given to course readings,     was completed in a neat, coherent, clear,
  incorporated in the project.                       weekly reflections, class discussions,       and well-organized manner.
                                                     learning activities, service learning
                                                     experience and course assignments
  Evidence:                                          Evidence:                                    Evidence:
  Specific reference to the course readings (at      Personal reflective insight provided in the  Paper is presented neatly and well
  least 5). In addition, paper may also draw         paper connected to course readings,          organized; easy for the reader to figure out
  from outside of course materials. Addresses        learning activities and the service learning the author’s ideas; free from major typos or
  the four questions outlined in the                 experience.                                  grammatical errors. Utilizes appropriate
  assignment description.                                                                         style and citation format.
Total Grade:
                                                                            7


WEEKLY OUTLINE OF READINGS
 1      Tuesday,  Introduction to the Course
        09.04
 2      Tuesday,  ***Contemporary Discourses in U.S. Education
        09.11          • McLaren, P. (2006). Life in schools: An Introduction to Critical Pedagogy in the Foundations of
                           Education. (5th edition). (pp. 193-205). New York: Allyn & Bacon [article/book chapter]
                       • Oakes, J., Lipton, M., Anderson, L. & Stillman, J. (2013). Teaching to change the world. (4th
                           edition). (pp. 29-59). Boulder: Paradigm.
 3      Tuesday,  ***Historic Discourses in U.S. Education
        09.18     READ ONE OF THE FOLLOWING SETS OF READINGS (WE WILL SELECT TOGETHER IN CLASS):
                       • European American Immigrant Experience [article/book chapter]: Cordasco, F. (1973). The children
                           of immigrants in the schools: Historical analogues of educational deprivation. The Journal of Negro
                           Education, 42(1), 44-53.
                       •   African American Experience [article/book chapter]: Anderson, J.D. (1988). The Education of Blacks
                           in the South, 1860-1935. (pp. 4-32). Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina.
                       •   Chinese American Experience [article/book chapter]: Wollenberg, C. (1978). ’Yellow peril’ in the
                           schools (I). All deliberate speed: Segregation and exclusion in California schools, 1855-1975. (pp.
                           28-47). Berkeley, CA: University of California.
                       •   Mexican American/Chicano Experience [article/book chapter]: Gonzales,G. G. (2013). Chicano
                           Education in the Era of Segregation. (pp. 13-29; 157-161). Denton, TX: University of North Texas
                           Press.
                       •   (Dis)Ability [article/book chapter]: Tropea, J. L. (1987). Bureaucratic order and special children:
                           Urban schools, 1890s-1940s. History of Education Quarterly, 27(1), 29-53.
                  Everyone reads:
                       • Weiner, L. (2006). Challenging Deficit Thinking. Educational Leadership, 64(1), 43-45. [article/book
                           chapter]
 4      Tuesday,  *** Class & Schooling I
        09.25          • Hochschild, J. L. (2003). Social class in public schools. Journal of Social Issues, 59(4), 821-840.
                           [Canvas: article/book chapter]
                       • Lareau, A. (1987). Social class differences in family-school relationships: The importance of cultural
                           capital, Sociology of Education, 60(2), 73-85. [Canvas: article/book chapter]
                       • Pittelman, K. & Resource Generation (2013). Deep thoughts about class privilege. In M. Adams, W.
                           J. Bumenfeld, C. Castañeda, H. W. Hackman, M. L. Peters & X. Zúñiga, Eds., Readings for Diversity
                           and Social Justice. (third edition). (pp. 221-225). New York: Routledge.
 5      Tuesday,  *** Class & Schooling II
        10.02          • Yosso, T. J. (2006). Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory discussion of community
                           cultural wealth. Race, Ethnicity and Education, 8(1), 69-91. [article/book chapter]
 6      Tuesday,  *** *** Race & Schooling I
        10.09          • Lewis, A. (2005). Race in the Schoolyard (pp. 1-86)
                       • Chang, B. & Au, W. (2014). You’re Asian. How Could You Fail Math? Unmasking the Myth of the
                           Model Minority. In Rethinking Multicultural Education: Teaching for Racial and Cultural Justice.
                           (pp. 47-55). Milwaukee, WI: Rethinking Schools. [article/book chapter]
 7      Tuesday,  *** Race & Schooling II
        10.16          • Lewis, A. (2005). Race in the Schoolyard (pp. 87-196)
                                                             8


                           •   Brown, K. D. & Brown, A. L. (2011). Teaching K-8 students about race: African Americans, racism, &
                               the struggle for social justice in the U.S. Multicultural Education, 19(1), 9-13.
 8         Tuesday,    *** Gender & Schooling I
           10.23           • Brown, L. (2002). The Madgirl in the Classroom. In the Jossey-Bass reader on gender in education.
                               (pp. 204-242). San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. [article/book chapter]
                           • Horvat, E. M. & Antonio, A. L. (1999). ‘Hey Those Shoes are Out of Uniform’: African American
                               Girls in an Elite High School and the Importance of Habitus. Anthropology & Education Quarterly,
                               317-342. [article/book chapter]
 9         Tuesday,    ***Gender, Sexuality & Schooling II
           10.30           • Ferguson, A. A. (2002). Naughty by Nature. In the Jossey-Bass reader on gender in education. (pp.
                               584-608). San Francisco, CA: Jossey Bass. [article/book chapter]
                           • Macgillivray, I.K. (2000). “Educational equity for gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgendered, and
                               queer/questioning students.” Education and Urban Society, 32(3), 303-323. [article/book chapter]
 10        Tuesday,    ***Culture, Language & Schooling I [Educational Autobiography Due]
           11.06           • Valenzuela, A. (1999). Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics of Caring (pp. 61-
                               113) [Canvas: article/book chapter]
                           • Solórzano, D. G. & Delgado Bernal, D. (2001). Examining transformational resistance through a
                               critical race and LatCrit theory framework: Chicana and Chicano students in an urban context.
                               Urban Education, 36(3), 308—342. [article/book chapter]
 11        Tuesday,    ***Neoliberalism and Critical Pedagogy
           11.13           • Hursh, D. (2007). Assessing No Child Left Behind and the Rise of Neoliberal Education Policies.
                               American Educational Research Journal, 44(3), 493-518.
                           • Freire, P. 2005. On the Indispensable Qualities of Progressive Teachers for their Better
                               Performance. In Teachers as Cultural Workers: Letters to Those Who Dare Teach, 71-82.
 12        Tuesday,    *** Teaching and Curriculum in the Context of Sociocultural Influences on Learning I
           11.20           • Independent workday, no class session
 13        Tuesday,    *** Teaching & Curriculum in the Context of Sociocultural Influences on Learning II
           11.27               Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers, 2nd edition (pp. 1-84)
 14        Tuesday,    *** Teaching & Curriculum in the Context of Sociocultural Influences on Learning III
           12.04           • Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers, 2nd edition (85-177)
 15        Tuesday,    ***What are Sociocultural Influences on Learning? A Reflection [Service Learning Project Due]
           12.11       No readings
                                                                                                            APA CITATION HINTS
PAGE SET-UP
Margins
Your paper should have 1” margins all around
Spacing and Font
Double-spaced, 12 inch font (Times New Roman, Garamond, Palatino, Courier)
                                                                 9


CITATIONS
Summarized ideas from one author
Johnson (1998) points out that education is a building block for life.
Summarized ideas from multiple authors
Several readings discuss the importance of reflection in effective teaching practice (Abelson, 1996; Carter, 1993; Tang,
2000; Yazzie, 2001) NOTICE THAT THE AUTHORS ARE LISTED IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER ACCORDING TO THEIR LAST
NAMES
Direct quote from an author
Johnson (1998) states, “Education is only the beginning for a child. Education, then, prepares the child for life. And as a
stepping stone, it is vital that teachers hold the process of education in high esteem” (p. 12).
OR
I agree with the following statement, “Education is only the beginning for a child. Education, then, prepares the child for
life. And as a stepping stone, it is vital that teachers hold the process of education in high esteem” (Johnson, 1998, p.
12).
Direct, long quote from the author (over thirty words, or about three complete lines of text)
Cisneros (2002) says:
         In order for teachers to become multicultural, it is necessary for them to first consider their own experiences in
         a multicultural world. To what degree were they exposed to different perspectives, people, cultures, and
         experiences? To what degree have they considered issues related to inequality and power relations in the larger
         society? Reflection, then, is one of the first steps in becoming a multicultural educator. (p. 147)
OR
In my quest to become a multicultural teacher, I have taken the following advice seriously:
         In order for teachers to become multicultural, it is necessary for them to first consider their own experiences in
         a multicultural world. To what degree were they exposed to different perspectives, people, cultures, and
         experiences? To what degree have they considered issues related to inequality and power relations in the larger
         society? Reflection, then, is one of the first steps in becoming a multicultural educator. (Cisneros, 2002, p. 147)
REFERENCES
Single author (selected passages, not an entire book)
hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. (pp. 1-12). New York: Routledge.
Single author, edited book
Ayers, W. (2001). To teach: The journey of a teacher. 2nd edition. (pp.85-108). New York: Teachers College.
Single author, text/chapter from an edited book
Sylvester, P. S. (1994). Elementary school curricula and urban transformation. In I. Hall, C. H. Campbell, &
         E. J. Miech (Eds.), Class Acts: Teachers reflect on their own classroom practice. (pp. 179-202). Cambridge, MA:
         Harvard Educational Review.
Single author, journal article
Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). But that’s just good teaching! The case for culturally relevant pedagogy. Theory
                                                                10


        into Practice, 34(3), 159-165.
Single author, journal article (on-line)
Gibson, L. S. (1998). Teaching as an encounter with the self: Unraveling the mix of personal beliefs,
        education ideologies, and pedagogical practices. [On-line version]. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 29(3),
        360-371
                                                            11
