                                       ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                                                                University of Texas at Austin
                                                                    School of Architecture
                                                                                    Fall 2018
Syllabus
Lecture:        M 7:00-10:00 pm Sut 2.110
Unique #:       00759 , 00989
Course Website: http://energymodeldesignprocess.wordpress.com/
Contact:
Instructor:     Dason Whitsett
Office:         t.b.d.
Office hours:   Monday 5:00-6:00
Email:          dwhitsett@utexas.edu
Description:
This course explores how energy simulation can support the design of comfortable
low-carbon, high-performance buildings. Students will learn to set comfort and
energy use goals and use simulation to parametrically evaluate the impacts of
various design strategies on the targeted performance. EnergyPlus and
OpenStudio are the primary software tools used, but students will leave the course
with a solid foundation in the broad principles that apply to any simulation tool. In
addition, the course looks at how simulation tools have been used historically and
what possibilities exist for the future. Readings are diverse, spanning from technical
topics to phenomenology.
For the major project of the semester, students design a remodel of an existing
building to Passive House standards in a multi-stage parametric analysis process.
Hybrid strategies- those which leverage passive means and user engagement in
combination with active systems- will be the focus of these investigations. Energy
performance of the final design will be compared to benchmarks and the
Architecture 2030 targets.
On the final project, students reverse this process- conceiving of a thermal
experience and apply knowledge of building performance principles to the
design of a building to create that experience with minimal energy expenditure.
Learning Objectives:
1. Develop familiarity with principles and tools of parametric energy simulation.
2. Critically evaluate the role and reliability of simulation in the design process.
3. Begin to use quantitative simulation data to evaluate qualitative design goals
                                              1


                                      ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                                                                      University of Texas at Austin
                                                                          School of Architecture
                                                                                          Fall 2018
Prerequisites:
Previous energy simulation experience is not necessary, but basic knowledge of
building energy performance is. Prerequisites would be satisfied by any of the
following: Environmental Controls II, Solar Geometry and Energy Flow in Buildings,
or consent of the instructor. Engineering students generally have appropriate
background experience.
Format:
This will be a seminar-style class with a considerable portion of time devoted to class
discussion and presentation by students. Because of the nature of the course, there
is a significant opportunity for learning from the findings of other students. A high
degree of class participation will be expected of students.
Texts & Tools:
Required Books
Heschong, Lisa. 1979. Thermal Delight in Architecture. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Pallasmaa, Juhani. 2012. The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses.
         Chichester: Wiley-Academy.
Additional readings will be posted on Box and assigned from the software
documentation materials. Readings will be assigned on the course website, so
check in there regularly for updates.
Required Software
All of the following software is available for free download at the links provided.
You should download and install the software in the order it is listed below. All in
Mac or PC version according to preference except as noted otherwise.
Install in this Order
1. SketchUp 2017. Either Sketchup Make or Sketchup Pro will work.
http://www.sketchup.com/download/all
2. OpenStudio v2.60- Create a username and password to log in.
https://www.openstudio.net
Recommended Software
Text Editor for PC: Notepad ++ https://notepad-plus-plus.org/
with the EnergyPlus syntax highlighting tool available at:
http://energyplus.helpserve.com/Knowledgebase/List/Index/44/utilities
Text Editor for Mac: Text Wrangler
https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/textwrangler/id404010395?mt=12
                                             2


                                     ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                                                               University of Texas at Austin
                                                                   School of Architecture
                                                                                   Fall 2018
Box desktop application- UT cloud storage solution.
Optional Software
Euclid 0.9.3-
http://bigladdersoftware.com/projects/euclid/
EnergyPlus 8.7- Create a username and password to log in.
https://energyplus.net/downloads
If newer versions of software are released during the course of the semester, do
not upgrade unless we agree as a class to do so. Be careful not to follow the
prompts that the programs will give you. Once you have multiple versions, it
becomes more complicated to ensure you are using the correct one, and you
generally can’t save back to earlier versions.
Computer System Requirements
You may need access to a Windows PC for portions of this course- the computers in
the computer lab will work for this need if you are a Mac user, but it is more
convenient to have your own. All of the software we will be using is available for
Mac, and I will be running OpenStudio mainly on my Mac. Howerver, the Mac OS
version of EnergyPlus lacks a tool that we may use in the latter part of the semester.
Using a Mac in Bootcamp mode or with an emulator such as Parallels generally
works well. Some students have found emulators to be finicky, so I recommend
Bootcamp. Parallels and Windows are available to students at reduced cost from
the Campus Computer Store. Support for operating system issues is available from
the IT desk in the FAC.
Web Resources:
The course website at http://energymodeldesignprocess.wordpress.com/ will be an
important interface point. It will detail assignments, provide important links, tips,
reminders, etc. Students should click on the “follow” at the bottom of the left bar to
be sure to receive important updates. This is how the instructor will notify the class of
new information.
The course will also make extensive use of Box as a repository for files for download
and for students to upload assignments to. The instructor will create a shared folder
for distributing materials to the class and a shared folder with each individual student
for handing in assignments digitally. You need to have your box account associated
with your EID for this to work properly.
Assignments:
Introductory Exercises
                                             3


                                      ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                                                                 University of Texas at Austin
                                                                     School of Architecture
                                                                                     Fall 2018
Students will complete several introductory simulation assignments to get familiar
with the fundamentals of simulation software.
Case Study
Groups of students will be asked to develop a case study critically evaluating the
use of simulation in a built project. Each group will present their findings to the class.
Simulation Project 1: Parametric Building Performance Optimization
Students will select an existing building to perform a series of simulation analyses
upon. Each student will simulate the baseline energy performance of the structure,
parametrically consider various energy conserving measures (ECMs), to compare
the simulated energy performance of the structure to measured data where
available and to achieve a level of performance meeting the Passive House
standard.
Simulation Project 2: Simulation as a Design Tool
Having developed basic skills at applying simulation, students will establish a set of
thermal, energy, light and other performance criteria for a space or built element
and use simulation in combination with their knowledge of passive design principles
to propose a design that fulfills those criteria as closely as possible.
Final Paper
This short paper will be the student’s opportunity to demonstrate the ability to
translate from quantitative data to the qualitative experience. Each student will
write a narrative in the style of Italo Calvino’s Invisible Cities describing what it is like
to experience the space designed in Project 2. An appendix will provide
quantitative backup for description in the narrative.
Writing and Communication Skills
Developing the ability to effectively communicate your ideas is essential to
success in any field today. As our world becomes more mobile and digitally
connected, more and more information is transmitted via graphics and the written
word. The quality of your communication will affect your grades.
If you need help with writing, please avail yourself of the services available at the
UT Learning Center in Jester Center. For more information on their services see:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch05/
Presentations:
Students will present their work to the class on several occasions during the semester.
Presentations serve two main functions in the course. First, there is significant
opportunity for learning from the findings and experience of other students. Second,
it is essential to develop the skill to communicate what you have found to others.
The best analysis in the world is useless if you cannot convey the findings effectively
to others involved in the project. Collaboration is the future of (sustainable) design,
which means that effective communication skills are more essential than ever.
                                              4


                                     ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                                                             University of Texas at Austin
                                                                  School of Architecture
                                                                                 Fall 2018
Attendance:
Attendance is mandatory and will bear upon the class participation grade. The
course will be fast-paced and catching up once behind will be difficult. Please
notify the instructor in advance of necessary absences or if you are sick. Students
with three or more unexcused absences will be dropped from the course without
notice.
A student who is absent from a class for the observance of a religious holy day
may complete the work issued within a reasonable time after the absence if
proper notice has been given. The deadline for notification of such an absence is
fourteen days prior to the class absence or the first class day for religious holy days
that fall within the first two weeks of the semester.
Late Work:
All work is due on the day assigned. Grades will be reduced one half-letter grade
for each day an assignment is late. Get your work done on time! It makes
everyone’s life much better and you will learn more. Catching up is difficult once
behind.
Grading Scale:
A       Exceptional work
A-      Work goes well beyond minimum of assignment in effort and insight
B+      Work demonstrates particularly solid reasoning and good effort
B       Good work
B-      Assignment completed with minor problems
C       Assignment completed, but with problems
D       Assignment incomplete and/or has significant problems
F       Unacceptable work
No incompletes will be given without full documentation of extenuating
circumstances as covered by University policy.
Grade Weighting:
Class participation            15
Introductory Exercises         10
Case Study                     15
Project 1                      25
Project 2                      25
Final Paper                    10
Total                         100%
                                             5


    Course Outline- Energy Modeling & the Design Process- Fall 2017
                        Abbre                                                             Assignmen         Gen Reading
    Week                      Class                                           M eet In:                                     OS Tra ining                                           Training Link
                            v                                                             t Due             Due
    1      9/3    1.1             Labor Day- No Class
    2     9/10    1.1      g.01 Class Introduction
                                                                                          Software                          Follow link: Installatiion Instructions and Workflow
                  1.2      a.01 Software Introduction, [Ex A Skills]                                                                                                               http://nrel.github.io/OpenStudio-user-documentation/getting_started/getting_started/#installation-instructions
                                                                                          Installed                         Overview.
    3     9/17    2.1      g.02 Simulation Software Background                            Exercise A        Wk 2 readings
                                                                                                                            Follow link: Introductory Tutorial: "Selecting
                                  OS Intro- Concepts: Space, Story,                       Case Study
                  2.2      a.02                                                                                             Template", "Skp Plugin- Buiding Envelope", "Skp        "
                                  Zone                                                    topic selected
                                                                                                                            Plugin- Space Types and Thermal Zones"
                                Scripts, Building Form & Envelope, [Ex
                  2.3      a.03                                                                                             Follow link: Remaining videos on page.                 "
                                B1 Skills]
                                                                                                                            On Box: _OpenStudio Interface Quickstart.pdf
    4     9/24    3.1                                                                                       Wk 3 readings
                                                                                                                            through "SketchUp — User Scripts".
                                                                                                                            On Box: _OpenStudio Interface Quickstart.pdf
                  3.2      a.04 Measures, HVAC Intro, [Ex B2 Skills]                      Exercise B1                       through "BCL Account Page
                                                                                                                            bcl.nrel.gov".
                                                                                                                            On Box: _PAT-Quick_Start_Guide.pdf through
                  3.3      a.05 Parametric Analysis, [Ex B3 Skills]                       Exercise B2                                                                              Constructions — Materials
                                                                                                                            "View Locally Run Results"
    5     10/1    4.1     th.01      Framing Experience & Sustainability                                    Wk 4 readings
                                  Buiding Geometry, Definitions, [Ex C                                                      Follow link and Practice Sketchup if you are not
                  4.2      a.06                                                           Exercise C                                                                               http://nrel.github.io/OpenStudio-user-documentation/reference/sketchup_plugin_interface/
                                  Skills]                                                                                   already familiar with the interface.
                  4.3     p.01 Case Study Presentations                                   Case Study
    6     10/8    5.1     th.02       Performative Design- Perspectives                                     Wk 5 readings
6                                                                                                                           Follow link: "Envelope" and "Constructions" sections
                  5.2      g.04 t.b.d.                                                    Exercise B3                                                                              http://nrel.github.io/OpenStudio-user-documentation/tutorials/creating_your_model/
                                                                                                                            on left menu.
                               Energy Benchmarking, PH, Envelope,                                                           On Box: _OpenStudio Interface Quickstart.pdf
                  5.3     b.01
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                               Geometry Creation                                                                            through "Constructions- Materials".
                                                                                                                            On Box: _OpenStudio Interface Quickstart.pdf
    7    10/15    6.1     w.01 Project 1 Meetings                                         P1 Proposal       Wk 6 readings
                                                                                                                            through "Thermal Zones".
                               Envelope- Fenestration, Shading,
                  6.2     b.02                                                                                              Follow Link: all                                       http://nrel.github.io/OpenStudio-user-documentation/tutorials/tutorial_shadingcontrols/
                               Window Shades
                                                                                                                            Follow Link: :"OpenStudio Application", "Site",
                                                                                                                            "Downloading Components…", "Using Facility Tab",
                  6.3     w.02 Working Session- Project 1. 9:30-noon                                                                                                               http://nrel.github.io/OpenStudio-user-documentation/tutorials/creating_your_model/
                                                                                                                            "Spaces", and "Thermal Zones" sections on left
                                                                                                                            menu.
         10/22    7.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           University of Texas at Austin
    8                      g.05                        Guest Presentation                                   Wk 7 readings
                                                                                          P1a Code
                  7.2     w.03 Working Session- Project 1. 9:30-noon
                                                                                          Baseline
                                                                                          P1b Envelope                      Follow Link: : "Schedules" and "Internal Loads"
                  7.3     b.03 Schedules and Loads                                                                                                                                 "
                                                                                          Modifications                     sections on left menu.
    9    10/29    8.1     th.03          Performative Design- Possibilities                                 Wk 8 readings
                                                                                          P1b Envelope                      On Box: _OpenStudio Interface Quickstart.pdf
                  8.2     b.04 Lighting and Daylighting
                                                                                          Modifications                     through "Constructions- Materials".
                                                                                          P1c Schedules
                  8.3                                                                                                                                                              http://nrel.github.io/OpenStudio-user-documentation/tutorials/creating_your_model/
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                School of Architecture
                          b.05 Daylighting                                                & Internal                        Follow Link: all
                                                                                          Loads
    10    11/5   10.1     w.04 Working Session- Project 1. time t.b.d.                                      Wk 9 readings
                 10.2     b.06 Ventilation/Infiltration                                   P1d Daylighting
                                                                                                                            On Box: _OpenStudio Interface Quickstart.pdf
                 10.3     b.07 HVAC                                                                                         through "HVAC — Edit Variable Refrigerant Flow
                                                                                                                            (VRF)".
    11   11/12   11.1     w.05 Working Session- Project 1. time t.b.d.                    P1e Ventilation Wk 10 readings
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Fall 2018


                 11.2   b.08 HVAC
                 11.3   c.01 Generators & Renewables                     P1f HVAC
    12   11/19   12.1   th.04            Performative Design- The Eye                  Wk 11 readings
                 12.2   p.02 Project 1 Presentations
                 12.3   p.03 Project 1 Presentations                     P1 Report
    13   11/26   13.1   th.05          Performative Design- The Body                   Wk 12 readings
                 13.2   c.02 Advanced Topics- Algorithms and PCM
                 13.3   c.03 Advanced Topics
                                   Performative Design- Reality Check
    14    12/3   15.1   th.06                                                          Wk 13 readings   Site/Source Energy, Reports
                                                (Waltz & POE reports)
                 15.2   w.07 Working Session- Project 2. time t.b.d.                                    Energy Generation, Water
                                Uncertainty, Role of Simulation, Right
                 15.3   th.07                                                                           Guest Lecture- TBA
                                Tools
    15   12/10   16.1   p.04 Project 2 Presentations                     Project 2
                 16.2   p.05 Project 2 Presentations
                 16.3    g.07 Wrap-up                                    Final Paper
7
                                                                                                                                      ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                                                                                                                                                             University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                                                                                                  School of Architecture
                                                                                                                                                                                 Fall 2018


                                               ARC 327R/386M Energy Modeling & the Design Process
                                                                                 University of Texas at Austin
                                                                                        School of Architecture
                                                                                                        Fall 2018
The University Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Academic Dishonesty
Academic dishonesty or scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating,
plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act
designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to,
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two classes without the prior
permission of the instructor), or the attempt to commit such an act.
Plagiarism includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or
media, and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit.
For more information on the University’s policies on academic dishonesty, please see:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/app/gi09.appc03.html
Students in Need of Special Accommodations:
At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special
accommodations should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the
Services for Students with Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most appropriate
accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or
471-4641 TTY.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-     CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the School of Architexture is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
          -     M-F 8-5p | BMC 3.390 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
Other Services at CMHC:
-     Brief assessments and referral services
-     Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-     MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-     Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
-     Tips on self-care - cmhc.utexas.edu/selfcare.html
Other Helpful Offices at UT
-       Student Emergency Services (SES) - deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
-       Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) – diversity.utexas.edu/disability
-       Office of the Student Ombuds - ombuds.utexas.edu/student
                                                          8
