Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                       SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
                   Monuments, Movements, and the Mississippi River:
                       Ecologies of Memory in the City of New Orleans
                           Bird's-eye view of New Orleans with the Mississippi River in the foreground, c. 1880.
course:                     LAR 696, ARC 696, ARC 561
unique number:              01545
type of course:             Studio
credits:                    6
enrollment:                 MLA, MArch, BArch
prerequisite:               Completion of LAR 695 / Advanced Studio Lottery
instructor:                 Sara Zewde
schedule:                   MWF 1:00-6:00 pm
location:                   TBA
semester:                   Fall 2018
                                                                                                                          1


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                    SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Studio Description:
In December 2015, New Orleans City Council voted 6-1 in favor of removing four confederate monuments, declaring
them a “public nuisance.” In 2017, the City went on to remove the four statues, leaving empty pedestals and few plans to
re-envision the landscapes they sit in. This studio positions these four sites as departure points for a process of expanding
the question of confederate monuments, to take on a myriad of intersecting design issues in the city and region. Through
defining, mapping, and aggregating the region’s ‘ecologies of memory’, each student will propose expanded systems and
sites of intervention. Each expanded system of intervention will be explored for its potential to host new commemorative
landscapes with new narratives, as well as for addressing the embedded historical legacies in the city that manifest
themselves in the contemporary city (such as flooding / stormwater management, housing, public amenities, and beyond).
Students will articulate landscape and architectural design proposals that demonstrate the potential of their proposed
system of sites and the landscape legacies they have chosen to address. The methodology of the studio will focus heavily on
articulating culturally-relevant and culturally-specific design, responsive to the history, culture, and everyday lives of the
people of the region. The studio will include a trip to New Orleans to visit relevant historic, contemporary, and ecological
sites and will engage directly with local community groups on the ground.
Learning Objectives:
      ● To expose students to a process of working within the context of current events and public discourse
      ● To develop skills of criticism in the telling of histories and interpretations of contemporary cities in the South
      ● To work at multiple scales and methods of mapping, diagramming, and site design in a non-linear fashion
      ● To critically analyze the limitations of traditions like the memorial, and the cultural biases in architecture and
           landscape architecture that reinforce them
      ● To design with cultural and ecological specificity, as to expand or challenge those very traditions
Studio Structure:
Studio activities will involve individual and group work that entail research, design, and design production. Studio
           participants will receive verbal feedback during studio meetings (desk critiques) and scheduled pin-ups or project
           reviews. It is up to the student to make effective use of the studio time and the critical feedback that addresses
           conceptual and technical development of the studio exercises. Studio participants shall be able to gauge course
           performance based on verbal feedback.
Time Commitment:
Class times as stated in the Graduate Catalog, and as much additional time as necessary to meet the objectives of the course.
           Students should anticipate spending at a minimum, four times the credit hours of work per week on coursework
           outside of class time. Absences due to illness will be accepted only with appropriate documentation from a
           physician.
Attendance:
Regular Attendance
Regular Attendance is expected for all lectures, field trips, and reading discussions unless stated by the instructor. If a class
           meeting has to be rescheduled for any reason, it will be done in as timely a manner as possible, with the intention
           of accommodating the majority of the course participants' schedules. Students will be informed via Canvas.
Final Review
All course participants are required to attend the Final Review scheduled by the Associate Dean for Graduate Studies.
Religious and Holy Days
Absences based on religious observances must be arranged fourteen [14] days in advance. Any assignment submission
           missed during that time must be turned in within one week [7 days] of the scheduled absence. A student who fails
           to complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties for late work.
                                                                                                                                  2


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                        SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Military Service
In accordance with section 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code, a student is excused from attending classes or engaging
           in
           other required activities, including exams, if he or she is called to active military service of a reasonably brief
           duration. The maximum time for which the student may be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher
           Education Coordinating Board as “no more than 25 percent of the total number of class meetings or the contact
           hour equivalent (not including the final examination period) for the specific course or courses in which the
           student is currently enrolled at the beginning of the period of active military service.” The student will be allowed
           a reasonable time after the absence to complete assignments and take exams. Policies affecting students who
           withdraw from the University for military service are given in the Withdrawal section of Academic Policies and
           Procedures of the General Information Catalog.
Illness driven Absence
An absence due to illness will be labeled as EXCUSED when the Instructor receives appropriate documentation from a
           physician. Any assignment submission missed due to documented illness must be turned in within one week [7
           days] of the absence or one week [7 days] from the original submission date.
Missing twenty-five percent [25%] of the class meetings is beyond reasonable under any circumstance. Course participants
           with three [3] unexcused absences will have their numeric grade reduced by one out of four grade points at the
           conclusion of the semester. Additional unexcused absences will result in additional point reductions of .33 grade
           points per absence. It is recommended that students contact the instructor prior to class if they expect to be
           absent.
Review Make Up Procedure
Studio participants are expected to attend all pin-ups and reviews scheduled during the semester. Only under extreme
           circumstances will there be awarded a make-up opportunity. If you are unable to attend, course participants are
           required to have their work pinned up before the appointed time. If awarded Make-up reviews will be scheduled
           sometime at the start of the following semester. Make-up reviews are scheduled only during the long session or
           regular academic year.
Grade Percentages:
Class Participation [20% of course grade]
Each student is expected to participate actively in the discussion of the required readings each week. Students should expect
           to be called upon to state opinions about ideas about every reading.
Exercise 1: Precedent Analysis [10% of course grade]
Students will work in groups to conduct this research and analysis. Presentations of work in class on Monday, September
           10. Additional handout to be given.
Exercise 2: Making Memory [10% of course grade]
Students will work individually on this design exercise. Presentations of work in class on Wednesday, September 19.
           Additional handout to be given.
Exercise 3: Ecologies of Memory [20% of course grade]
Students will work individually on this mapping exercise. Presentations of work in class on Friday, October 12.
           Additional handout to be given.
Final Project: Design Proposal [40% of course grade]
Students will work individually to develop their final design project. Additional handout to be given.
                                                                                                                                3


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                  SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Grade Evaluation:
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic areas. While
each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is
derived from a broader, more subjective set of issues. Work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the semester.
          grasp              [.34]: Demonstrate efficacious spatial and formal idea combined with a meticulous process of
                             research and inquiry
          process            [.33]: Demonstration of consistent and rigorous development and testing of spatial ideas
                             (iteration) and the effective application of quantitative measures through analysis.
          resolution         [.33]: Demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through representation
Student work is evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions for
          absences, late work, and late arrivals at the discretion of each instructor.
A student must earn a grade of C or better in order for the course to count toward the degree, and to progress to the next
          studio. A grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements or prerequisites for the design studios that follow
          grade    quality          performance level                                                  points
          A        excellent        Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness,          4.0
                                    appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor,
                                    craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts
                                    and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class.
                                    Project is complete on all levels.
          A-                                                                                           3.67
          B+                                                                                           3.33
          B        good             Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and      3.0
                                    successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and
                                    suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
                                    required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
                                    demonstrates potential for excellence.
          B-                                                                                           2.67
          C+                                                                                           2.33
          C        required         Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made           2.0
                                    in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is
                                    incomplete in one or more areas.
          C-                                                                                           1.67
          D        poor             Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills,      1.0
                                    model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are
                                    not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the
                                    required design skill and knowledge base.
          D-                                                                                           .67
          F        unacceptabl      Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met.             0.0
                   e                Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
                                    assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
          X        excused          Issued only in the case of compelling, nonacademic
                   incomplete       circumstances beyond the student's control. Simply not
                                    completing work on time is an inadequate cause for assigning
                                                                                                                            4


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                    SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
                                      this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with
                                      the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a
                                      new completion date. According to School of Architecture
                                      policy, studio work must be completed before the second
                                      week of the next design semester in which the student is
                                      enrolling.
Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the grade to be reduced, remain
unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an individual basis, not as a comparison with other students'
grades.
Accommodations:
               ● Class meetings, lectures, and discussions as well as studio centered work sessions will be conducted in
                     the assigned classroom or studio. Any change in location will be announced on Canvas or via email.
               ● Studio Participants with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
                     Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
                     512-471-6259, w ​ ww.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Recommendation in Case of Emergency Evacuations:
               ● Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
                     when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
                     outside.
               ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom/studio and building you may occupy.
                     Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
               ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
                     of class.
               ● In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
               ● Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
                     University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
               ● Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
                     www.utexas.edu/emergency
               ● The Behavior Concerns Advice Line provides a central resource to anyone who is concerned about an
                     individual and may not be sure about how best to help them. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
                     512-232-5050 or www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/
               ● Cases that present an immediate threat to self, others, or property should be considered an emergency
                     and should be directed to The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD) by calling 911.
Academic Integrity:
Course participants are expected to have completed the assigned readings and be prepared to engage in a meaningful
discussion of the material in class or studio. Assignments, problem statements, research assignments and presentations or
other course related work submitted for evaluation is expected to be their own work, prepared without unauthorized
assistance. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct)
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
          of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
          students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Availability of Coursework:
Course material, produced by MLA students, will be retained by the program for the purpose of exhibition during
                                                                                                                               5


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                  SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
          professional accreditation evaluation. Each student is required to submit to the Instructor of Record a jump
          drive, or link to cloud storage that contains all material produced for evaluation during the semester immediately
          following their presentation on the day after the Final Review. Failure to submit the digital record to the
          instructor will be reflected by a 25% reduction in the overall grade.
Reading and Engagement Skills:
This studio course is discussion intensive. Students are expected to have read the assigned readings and participate actively
          in all discussions. If you are not confident in your English language skills, it is recommended that you go to the
          University's International Office and meet with someone in ESL Services to discuss classes or workshops that can
          help you.
Expectations for Desk Critiques:
Each student must demonstrate satisfactory progress on currently assigned work at every desk critique.
Studio Trip to New Orleans:
A studio trip to New Orleans is scheduled for October 14 through October 19. Please inform the instructor as soon as
          possible should you have any issues attending the trip. Additional handout with trip itinerary details to be given.
Studio Materials:
          ●     Primary reading materials will be distributed digitally through Canvas, through email, or on reserve in the
                Architecture and Planning Library.
          ●     Course participants should anticipate expenses related to printing and plotting, laser cutting, CNC routing
                and deposition printing in the Digital Media Lab of the School of Architecture.
          ●     Course participants should anticipate expenses related to the purchase of model and drawing materials
                related to the production of the course assignments/design products.
          ●     Course participants should be prepared to work on their own computer or the computers provided in the
                Computer lab.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your email
          for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
          informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay
          current with university-related communications, some of which can be time critical. You can find UT Austin's
          policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
          http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Faculty:                       Sara Zewde
Office Hours:                  Wednesdays and Fridays, 12:00–1:00
Primary Contact:               sara.zewde@gmail.com
When sending an email to the instructor, please enter “UT Austin Studio:” in the subject heading line.
Office hours will be maintained at stated times, as well as by appointment, in order to discuss issues related to the schedule,
          evaluation, coursework, etc.
Schedule of Topics & Assignments:
The schedule is subject to minor revision to accommodate guest lecturers, weather events, etc.
                                                                                                                              6


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                            SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Module 1: Monuments
 Week     Date    Day   Activity
   1      8.31     F    Course Introduction: Lecture, Syllabus Review, Assign ​Exercise 1: Precedent Analysis​.
   2      9.03    M     Holiday. No Class.
   2      9.05    W     Reading Discussion, Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 1 Presentations.
   2      9.07     F    Reading Discussion, Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 1 Presentations.
   3      9.10    M     Exercise 1: Precedent Analysis Presentations.
Module 2: Movements
 Week     Date    Day   Activity
   3      9.12    W     Lecture, Reading Discussion, Assign E ​ xercise 2: Making Memor​y
   3      9.14     F    Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 2 Presentations.
   4      9.17    M     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 2 Presentations.
   4      9.19    W     Exercise 2: Making Memory Presentations.
   4      9.21     F    UT Austin Confederate Monuments Site Visit.
Module 3: The Mississippi River
 Week     Date    Day   Activity
   5      9.24    M     Lecture, Reading Discussion, Assign E  ​ xercise 3: Ecologies of Memory
                                                                                                                7


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                           SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
   5      9.26     W     Reading Discussion, Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 3 Presentations.
   5      9.28     F     Reading Discussion, Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 3 Presentations.
   6     10.01     M     Reading Discussion, Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 3 Presentations.
   6     10.03     W     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 3 Presentations.
   6     10.05     F     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 3 Presentations.
   7     10.08     M     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 3 Presentations.
   7     10.10     W     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Exercise 3 Presentations.
   7     10.12     F     Exercise 3: Ecologies of Memory Presentations.
                       ​Prep for New Orleans, Early Discussion of Final Project.
Studio Trip: New Orleans, Louisiana
 Week     Date    Day    Activity
    -    10.14    Sun    Depart to New Orleans.
   8     10.15     M     In New Orleans.
   8     10.17     W     In New Orleans.
   8     10.19     F     Return from New Orleans.
Module 4: Design Definition
 Week     Date    Day    Topic & Readings
   9     10.22     M     Lecture, Assign F​ inal Project
                                                                                                              8


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                              SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
   9     10.24    W     Pin Up of Updated ​Exercise 3: Ecologies of Memory​, based on synthesis of trip
   9     10.26     F    Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   10    10.29    M     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   10    10.31    W     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   10    11.02     F    Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   11    11.05    M     Pin Up Review.
   11    11.07    W     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   11    11.09     F    Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   12    11.12    M     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   12    11.14    W     Pin Up Review.
   12    11.16     F    Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   13    11.19    M     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   13    11.21    W     No Class. Holiday.
   13    11.23     F    No Class. Holiday.
   14    11.26    M     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   14    11.28    W     Penultimate Pin-Up Review.
   14    11.30     F    Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
   15    12.03    M     Desk Critiques: Preparing for Final Project Presentations.
                                                                                                                 9


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                 SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
   15    12.05    W     Potential Final Review Date 1, TBD
   15    12.07     F    Potential Final Review Date 2, TBD
   16    12.10    M     Last Day of Class.
                                                                    10
