                             University of Texas at Austin
             ALDs327 (73685); AFRs372D-2 (79075); MAS s374 (82575)
                     Sociocultural Influences on Learning
                Summer, 2019—MTThF, 1:00 AM to 3:00 PM, SZB 344
Professor: Dr. Luis Urrieta, Jr.               Office: SZB 528G
Phone: 512-232-4129                            E-mail: Urrieta@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: 3:00 PM—4:00 PM, M&F
Teaching Assistant: Judith Landeros            Office: SZB 528 Suite
Office Hours: 3:00 PM-4:00 PM, T&Th
E-mail: judithlanderos@utexas.edu
Course Overview
This course will explore the complex relationship between schools and the larger
society, especially in terms of social, cultural, racial, and economic inequities. Class
materials and discussions will focus primarily on issues pertaining to minoritized and
historically marginalized groups, including Latinxs, African Americans, immigrants,
the working poor, and women and their experiences in U.S. schools. In this course, we
will not focus on how to teach or teaching strategies; rather, we will center our attention
on the larger critical issues that influence one’s perceptions of teaching, pedagogy,
curriculum, and how children of minoritized backgrounds have been and are impacted
by schooling and schooling practices that do not attend to their experiences. In this
course we will also focus on how economic issues shaped and continue to shape U.S.
schools, culturally and socially. Throughout the course, everyone will be encouraged
to question their own and others’ identities and beliefs, and to do so in a respectful
manner. If you are not comfortable dialoguing about issues of race, gender, class,
privilege, and sexual orientation, this may not be the right class for you.
Cultural Diversity Flag
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural
Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness
of U.S. cultural experiences, including groups who have historically experienced
marginalization and exclusion. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of
your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of
African Americans and Latinxs in this course.
Special Needs Reasonable Accommodation
If you qualify for accommodations because of special needs, please submit a letter to
me from Services for Students with Disabilities early in the course so that your needs
may be addressed. Services for Students with Disabilities will determine
accommodations        based      on     documented        disabilities.   (512-471-6259,
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/).
                                              1


Scholastic Honesty
Students who violate university rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
proceedings, including the possibility of failing the course and dismissal from the
University. According to the UT System Regent’s Rules and Regulations, “Scholastic
Dishonesty includes but is not limited to cheating, plagiarism, collusion, the submission
for credit of any work or materials that are attributable in whole or in part to another person,
taking an exam for another person, any act designed to give unfair advantage to a student
or the attempt to commit such acts.” Policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced.
Religious Reasonable Accommodation
Every effort shall be made to reasonably and fairly accommodate all students who, because
of religious obligations, have conflicts with scheduled exams, assignments, or required
class attendance. Students should give at least two weeks advance notice to request special
accommodation.
Classroom Behavior
Students and faculty each have responsibility for maintaining an appropriate learning
environment. Those who fail to adhere to such behavioral standards may be subject to
discipline. Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to
individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, color, culture, religion, creed,
politics, veteran’s status, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity, and gender
expression, age, disability, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor
with the students’ legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an
alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester
so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
CARE Counseling
 CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common
to need support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your
control. CARE Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as
a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is
Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To
schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If
you leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours
are also available on Mondays and Wednesdays from 1 - 2 PM in JES A115 and Tuesdays
and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM in SZB 216. You will check–in at the Front Desk, and they
will let Danie know you're waiting. All services are confidential. None of your
information will be shared without your written consent. Come by and see us, we are here
to listen.
Emergency Evacuation
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall
                                                2


inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an
evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Attendance and Participation (20% of final grade)
Class participation and attendance is critical to your success in this course. You are
expected to be on time for class and prepared to enter into the discussions (that means
you must have read the assigned readings prior to class). It is an expectation that you
make a conscious choice to thoughtfully engage in discussions on a daily basis; you
cannot do this if you are absent or neglect to do the readings and assignments.
Unexcused absences, without prior instructor approval, are not allowed. Arriving 15
minutes late to class or leaving more than 15 minutes early without prior permission
will also affect your grade. Inappropriate use of laptops or tablets in class will not be
tolerated and will affect your grade. Smart phones must be turned off and placed in
your backpack, unless you have an emergency situation; however, you must notify me
in advance and the phone must be in vibrate mode. Any type of social media such as
facebook, snapchat, twitter, instagram, blogs, etc., and checking e-mail, or texting in
class is considered inappropriate classroom etiquette and you will be asked not to bring
these electronics to class and bring printed materials of class readings instead. In class
work such as free-writing, reflective writing, group work, or quizzes matters and will
count toward your participation grade.
Assignments:
Critical Reading Reflections, 40% of course
You are expected to write 4 critical reflections. Critical Reading Reflection
assignments will consist of two parts: 1) critical summaries of at least three readings
and/or films for that week, and 2) your personal reflection and engagement of the
readings/films, including from class discussions. These two parts need not be separate.
You can engage the readings/films as you summarize them.
Your critical summaries don’t need to be extensive, but they should cover the required
three readings and/or films minimum from class. You should cover the main points of
the readings/films, including the main arguments/theses in them. I am not interested in
extensive paraphrasing of what the authors wrote about, but your engagement of the
readings. What was your general perception of the authors’ perspectives? What
questions were raised and/or answered for you in terms of your own interests? How do
the readings help you, or not, to formulate your own ideas about the topics presented?
Each critical reading reflection is worth 10 points for a total of 40 pts., or 40% of your
total grade. Critical reading reflections are to be NO LESS than 3 pages and NO MORE
than 4 pages, double-spaced in Times New Roman, 12 pt font. Please do not exceed
the page limit. Your name, date, class, and number of critical reflection are all that is
needed at the top of your summary. NO cover or reference pages please.
                                                 3


Critical reading reflections are due on Fridays at 1:00 PM (in class) for the first four
weeks and will not be accepted after that date:
First Reflection: July 19h
Second Reflection: July 26th
Third Reflection: August 2nd
Fourth Reflection: August 9th
Educational Autobiography Paper (20% of final grade)
Your Educational Autobiography Paper will be based on your personal reflections
about your family, your personal past and current education and schooling
experiences. In this paper you should connect who you are to these schooling and
education experiences. Your reflection should include some of the following aspects:
     •   Your family background: ethnic/racial heritage, im/migration history, religious
         background, cultural practices, your parents and grandparents educational
         background (schooling) and work history
     •   An examination of your socio-economic class background and your experiences
         related to class
     •   Experiences and analysis of gender issues in your life
     •   Any other significant differences/experiences that impacted you or did not (such
         as language, im/migration status, special needs, etc.) or that you may have been
         unaware of at the time, but now realize that they had an impact on your learning
         experiences (positive, negative or both), or those of others around you
For example: It is not enough to state that you are white (or Latinx, African American,
etc.), female (or transgender, etc.) and of middle (or working) class background—what
does it mean to be a white female of middle class background? When did you realize you
were white and how do you think that impacted your schooling experience? Were you
treated different than white boys, than people of color, than females of color? How did
class impact your access to schools, tutors, after school activities, summer programs, or
international travel that aided in your educational trajectory? How has your sexual
identity and its intersection with other aspects of your identity impacted your experience?
If you were not aware of these aspects of your life and your identities, why do you think
you were not made aware of these explicitly? How might you have been learning about
these aspects of who you are implicitly? By what mediums (TV, internet, curriculum,
family stories, jokes about others, etc.) were you being shaped about your(Self)?
It is important for you to address how the various aspects of who you are specifically
relate to your past and present experiences with schooling and education. You may write
about how these issues impacted the quality (or lack of quality) of your education
growing up and how who you are, and where you come from, shaped and currently
shapes (or does not shape) your views about educational issues, students of different
backgrounds, and your interests in schools and, or in teaching. This paper is open format;
however, it should not be less than 4 double-spaced pages and should not exceed 5 pages,
12 pt. Times New Roman font. Remember we are looking for quality, sincerity, and self-
                                               4


reflective depth rather than strictly length or mechanical accuracy. This assignment is
due by Friday, August 16th by 1:00 PM.
The following assignments are mandatory, you will not pass this course if you do
not submit these assignments:
10 hours of volunteering with children (10%)
10 hours of volunteering/ tutoring at a local instructor approved program. Tutoring
timesheet with supervisor signatures should be turned in with a one-page reflection on
the volunteering experience due on August 15th
Caminata & Reflection 10%
As a class we will do a “community” walk called “La Caminata” around Zavala
Elementary in East Austin. You will be responsible for taking notes and writing a
subsequent reflection of the experience. The Caminata reflection is due on August
13th
Value of Assignments
            • Attendance & Participation                      20%
            • Educational Autobiography                       20%
            • Caminata & Reflection                           10%
            • Critical Reading Reflections (4x10)             40%
            • 10 hours Volunteering                           10%
                                                 __
                Total                                         100%
Late Work Policy
Extensions may be granted with adequate reason in extreme cases and with prior notice
before the deadline unless there is an emergency. You may NOT receive an extension
on the actual due date. Any work that is handed in late without an extension from the
instructor, will automatically receive one letter grade deduction. Mandatory
assignments are MANDATORY, they must be turned in, in order to pass this
course.
Re-writes: If you wish to rewrite an assignment, it must be handed in within three days
of when it was returned to you. You must also resubmit the original paper with my/our
comments. In addition to the revised paper, you must also submit a separate document
explaining how my comments were addressed. Re-writes will only be accepted for
assignments turned in on time and following the assignment requirements (e.g. NOT
partially completed assignments!). Due to grading deadlines, the final assignment cannot
be rewritten.
Syllabus changes: The instructor reserves the right to alter (add, delete, and/or modify)
the syllabus to meet the individual needs of the students.
                                                5


Class Schedule/Readings
Readings will be available through Canvas under “Modules” in files by date
assigned
 I. July 15: Review Syllabus/Course Overview, Expectations
Instructor/T.A./Student Introductions
Syllabus/Guidelines/expectations for course
Identity
The Danger of the Single Story
 II. July 16: Challenging Deficit Thinking and Funds of Knowledge
Weiner, L. 2006. Challenging Deficit Thinking. Educational Leadership
Moll, L.C. 1992. Bilingual classroom studies and community analysis: Some recent
        trends. Educational Researcher, 21(2), 20-24
Moll et al., 1992. Funds of knowledge for teaching: Using a qualitative approach to
        connect homes and classrooms. Theory into Practice, 31(2), 132-141
 III. July 18: Critical Race Theory and Community Cultural Wealth and
 Dehumanization
Berson, M. & Cruz, B. (2001). Eugenics Past and Present: Remembering Buck v. Bell
        Social Education, 65(5), 300-306.
Yosso, T. 2005. Whose culture has capital? A critical race theory discussion of
        community cultural wealth. Race, Ethnicity, and Education, 8(1), 69-91
 IV. July 19: Western, Official, Whitestream, etc. Knowledge
Tuhiwai Smith, L. 2001. Ch. 3. Colonizing Knowledges. In Decolonizing
        Methodologies.
Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 1, pp. 1-17. In Reclaiming the
        Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official
        Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College Press.
                                             6


First reading reflection paper due in class, you must be in class for your work to
be accepted
 V. July 22: Settler Colonialism and Native Americans
Carrillo Rowe, A. & Tuck, E. (2017). Settler Colonialism and Cultural Studies:
        Ongoing settlement, cultural production, and resistance. Cultural Studies<->
        Critical Methodologies, 17(1), 3-13
Calderón, D. (2014). Uncovering Settler Grammars in Curriculum. Educational Studies,
        50(4), 313-338.
 VI. July 23: Settler Colonialism and Native Americans
Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 2, pp. 18-45. In Reclaiming the
        Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official
        Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College Press.
More than a Word-Video
 VII. July 25: Race and African Americans
Ladson-Billings, G. (2004). Landing on the Wrong Note: The Price we paid for Brown.
        Educational Researcher, 33(7), 3-13
Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 5, pp. 114-145. In Reclaiming
        the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official
        Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College Press
 VIII. July 26: Race and African Americans
Brown, K. and Brown, A.L. (2011). Teaching K-8 Students about Race: African
        Americans, Racism, & the Struggle for Social Justice in the U.S. Multicultural
        Education, 19(1), 9-13.
Film: Race, the Power of an Illusion: The House we Live in
Second reading reflection paper due in class, you must be in class for your work
to be accepted
 IX. July 29: Mexican Americans: “A Class Apart”
                                             7


Donato, R. 2012. Legally White, Socially “Mexican”: The Politics of De Jure and
       De Facto School Segregation in the American Southwest, Harvard Educational
       Review, 82(2), 202-225
Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 4, pp. 80-113. In Reclaiming the
       Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official
       Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College Press.
 X. July 30: Mexican Americans: “A Class Apart”
Stolen Education
 XI. August 1: Asian Americans: “Model Minority” and other Myths
Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Chapter 3, pp. 46-79. In Reclaiming the
       Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official
       Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College Press.
Ngo, B. (2017). The Costs of “Living the Dream” for Hmong Immigrants: The Impact of
       Subtractive Schooling on Family and Community, Educational Studies, 53(5),
       450-467.
 XII. August 2: Asian Americans: “Model Minority” and other Myths
Au, W., Brown, A. L., and Calderón, D. (2016). Conclusion, pp. 146-152. In Reclaiming
       the Multicultural Roots of U.S. Curriculum: Communities of Color and Official
       Knowledge in Education. New York: Teachers College Press.
Sentenced Home
Third reading reflection paper due in class, you must be in class for your work
to be accepted
 XIII. August 5: Intersectionality: Toward Multi-axis Analyses of Experience
                                            8


Carbado, D.W., Crenshaw, K.W., Mays, V.M., Tomlinson, B. (2013). Intersectionality:
        Mapping the Movements of a Theory. DuBois Review: Social Science Research
        on Race, 10(2), 303-312.
García, L. (2009). “Now Why do you want to know about that?”: Heteronormativity,
        sexism, and racism in the sexual (Mis)education of Latina youth. Gender and
        Society, 23:4, 520-541
Hines-Datiri, D. & Carter Andrews, D. (2017). The Effects of Zero Tolerance Policies on
        Black Girls. Urban Education
The Urgency of Intersectionality
 XIV. August 6: Intersectionality: Toward Multi-axis Analyses of Experience
Macgillivray, I.K. (2000). “Educational equity for gay, lesbian, bisexual,
        transgendered, and queer/questioning students.” Education and Urban
        Society.
Ladson-Billings, G. 2011. Boyz to men? Teaching to restore Black boys’ childhood.
        Race, Ethnicity, and Education, 14(1): 7-15
Howard, T. 2014. Black Males and Sports: Opportunities or Obstructions?
 XV. August 8: Re-segregation by design, the Creation of Whiteness, and the
 Workings of Power
Busch, A. 2013. Building “A city of upper middle class citizens”: Labor Markets,
        Segregation, and Growth in Austin, TX, 1950-1973. Journal of Urban History,
Torres, R. et al. 2013. Building Austin, building justice: Immigrant construction workers,
        precarious labor regimes and social citizenship. Geoforum, 45, 145-155
Zehr, D. (2016). UT Report: Rising costs, school woes push blacks to leave Austin
AbUSed
 XVI. August 9: Community Walk
MEET IN FRONT OF THE GEORGE WASHINGTON CARVER MUSEUM AND
CULTURAL CENTER, COMMUNITY WALK WILL BEGIN AT 1:00 PM
                                              9


1165 Angelina St., Austin, TX 78702
Attendance is mandatory. No one will be excused unless you have an urgent medical
emergency.
Fourth reading reflection paper due, you must participate in the walk in order
for your work to be accepted
XVII. August 12: Caminata
MEET IN FRONT OF ZAVALA ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, CAMINATA WILL
BEGIN AT 1:00 PM
310 Robert Martínez, Jr., Austin, TX 78702
Attendance is mandatory. No one will be excused unless you have an urgent medical
emergency.
 XVIII. August 13: Caminata Debrief & Current Austin Education Issues
Readings TBD
Caminata reflection paper and map due
 XIX. August 15: Ethnic Studies
Sleeter, C. E. (2011). The Academic and Social Value of Ethnic Studies: A Research
        Review. National Education Association Research Department. Retrieved on
        February 19, 2016 http://www.nea.org/assets/docs/NBI-2010-3-value-of-ethnic-
        studies.pdf
Villanueva, S. T. (2013). Teaching as a healing craft: Decolonizing the classroom and
        creating spaces of hopeful resistance through Chicano-indigenous pedagogical
        praxis. The Urban Review, 45(1), 23-40.
Tintiangco-Cubales, A., Kohli, R., Sacramento, J., Henning, N., Agarwal-Rangnath, R.,
        & Sleeter, C. (2015). Toward an ethnic studies pedagogy: Implications for K-12
        schools from the research. The Urban Review, 47(1), 104-125.
Volunteer hours and reflection paper due
 XX. August 16: Ethnic Studies
                                             10


Cammarota, J. 2009. The generational battle for curriculum: Figuring race and
       culture on the border. Transforming Anthropology, 17:2, 117-130
Romero, A., Arce, S. & Cammarota, J. 2009. A barrio pedagogy: Identity,
       intellectualism, activism, and academic achievement through the evolution of
       critically compassionate intellectualism. Race, Ethnicity, and Education 12:2,
       217-233
Precious Knowledge
Educational Autobiography Paper due by 1:00 PM—the paper will not be
accepted if you do not attend class this day
                                             11
