                                        Integrated Communication for Sports
                                      ADV 305S (06380) PR305S (06940) SPRING 2020
Class meets: MW 2:00 to 3:30 (CMA 2.306)                                 Office: BMC 4.344
Instructor: James Dalthorp Jr.                                           Office Hours: MW 3:30 to 4:30 and by appointment
Email: james.dalthorp@austin.utexas.edu
Phone: 310-874-4169
TA: Ryan Romero, Reid St. John                                           Office: BMC 4th Floor TA Cubicles
Email: ryanromero@utexas.edu, reidst.john@utexas.edu                     Office hours: Monday & Wednesday 11 to 12
                                                      Course Description
The course provides a foundational perspective on how brands evaluate and incorporate targeted integrated marketing
communications strategies to connect with and impact their target audiences as well as how sports organizations (leagues, teams,
tours, etc. use integrated communications to reach prospective fans and customers. We will also analyze how advertisers evaluate
players for personal endorsements, how sports organizations market and position their teams to advertisers and fans. We will also
monitor and discuss current events as they transpire in the sports world.
  What will I learn?
• How an integrated approach to marketing communications enables impact and efficiency compared to non-integrated approaches
• How major brands use integrated techniques and tactics to increase the effectiveness of their sports marketing efforts
• How sports advertising offers unique benefits to large brand advertisers
• How sponsorship provides an opportunity for brands to associate with popular sports, teams and athletes
• How sport organizations seek profit and use analytics together with integrated marketing communications to drive fan enthusiasm
and business results
• How sports organizations use business storytelling to maximize the effectiveness of marketing communications
  Learning Outcomes
1. Students will be able to discern whether a marketing communications effort is integrated or non-integrated
2. Students will be able to identify how unique integrated marketing techniques might fit a specific market situation
3. Students will be able to determine how sports organizations use tools like analytics to guide and determine marketing
communications and target engagement through fan messaging
4. Students will be able to build integration into various tactics that might make up a brand or sports organization campaign
5. Students will be able to identify productive narratives and then use a knowledge of business storytelling to bring those narratives
to life within a sports organization.
How will I learn?
Through enthusiastic classroom discussions that will be a of combination of brief lectures, in class discussions, assigned readings,
study of case histories, through the personal experiences of sports industry guests. There will be short assignments and one group
project will be used to help achieve the learning outcomes. Observe and understand how our course topic is playing out in real time
will be accomplished with the use of Sports Business Journal discussions.
Pre-requisites for the course:
University GPA of 2.25 or higher
How to succeed in this course
Successful students in their class keep up with the readings and come to class prepared to participate in lively discussion. Your
enthusiasm and love for sports is a plus. However, remember we will be looking at the course material from the perspective of a
business’s trying to thrive – a very competitive game in its own right with a great deal of strategy and nuance.
                                                                       1


                                                     Course Requirements
Required reading materials during the term: Both books have made available on Canvas as a PDF or through e-books without cost.
The Sports Strategist by Irving Rein, Ben Shields, Adam Grossman
Oxford University Press
ISBN 978-0-19-026744
Copyright 2015
LeBron Inc. by Brian Windhorst
Grand Central Publishing
ISBNs: 978-1-5387-3087-4 (ebook) 978-1-5387-3086-7
Copyright 2019
The Olympic Games Effect by John A. Davis
John Wiley & Sons Inc.
ISBN-13: 9781118171684 ISBN-13: 1118171683
Copyright 2012
Sports Business Journal: Students who are seriously interested in pursuing a career in sports are encouraged to take an on-line
semester subscription within a discounted program offered by the publication. Sign up information will be posted on Canvas
The Athletic: Students who are interested in pursuing a career in sports are encouraged to read The Athletic on a daily basis.
                                                      Classroom Expectations
Class Participation
Class participation is essential and ranks at the top of factors students use to define a valuable course. Class participation forms part
of your grade in this class. Credit for 2 participation points will be awarded and will be based upon the student engaging in the
Sports Business Day activities and presenting interesting current events in the sports world as it occurs during the term. There will
be several opportunities available during the term for students to participate.
Class Attendance
Attendance is strongly encouraged, as many of the current event topics and discussions covered during the daily lectures may
include topics that will be covered in the weekly quizzes. These (Wednesday) quizzes will contribute to 10% of your final grade.
These quizzes will get a score of zero in the case of an unexcused absences. An excused absence is defined as a documented illness,
documented University-related absence (sports team travel) and religious holidays (prior notification required).
Behavior expectations
First and foremost, be respectful to your fellow classmates, that means being polite and civil. Leave the headphones in the backpack.
Do not create distractions. Excessive non-class related conversations and smartphone texting during class qualifies as a distraction.
We are training for the workplace, the importance of exhibiting professional behavior. Have fun, pay attention, engage in topics.
 Assignments
     1) Approximately 5 class prep assignments based on the readings and learning tied to class topics will be given, often in the
         form of a Canvas Discussion or a Canvas Quiz (Quizzes are designed to make sure top line content is absorbed and the
         alert the instructor to areas of reinforcement. Discussions are designed to prepare students to express a variety of views
         in the upcoming class). If greater or fewer number of class prep assignments are ultimately given, the available points will be
         divided by the fewer number of assignments ultimately given.
     2) Other Class Prep Assignments include four current events presentation days with articles from the Sports Business Journal
         and other sports media outlets. Additionally, a Bio Assignment of an individual is included (Quizzes are designed to make
         sure top line content is absorbed and the alert the instructor to areas of reinforcement. Discussions are designed to
         prepare students to express a variety of views in the upcoming class).
     3) Two group projects will be assigned. One requires students to research and analyze brand integrated efforts to market
         through sports using March Madness. The second group project involves creating a 2020 Tokyo Olympics franchise
         marketing situation and develop narratives and communications examples using practices discussed in class.
Exams
Two (2) exams will be given, one near the middle of the term and another non-cumulative one at the end of the term. Typically,
these exams are a mix of multiple-choice questions and True/False questions, but they may contain other types of questions as well.
Each exam counts for 20% of the final grade.
                                                                       2


Grading for this Course
The following table represents how you’ll demonstrate your learning and how we’ll assess the degree you’ve done so:
  Graded Elements                                                                            Percent of Total Grade
  1. C l a s s P r e p A s s i g n m e n t s                                                10
  2. P a r t i c i p a t i o n & A t t e n d a n c e                                        10
  3. E X A M 1                                                                              20
  4. E X A M 2                                                                              20
  5. G r o u p P r o j e c t 1                                                              20
  6. G r o u p P r o j e c t 2                                                              20
  TOTAL                                                                                     100
Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to note these
changes when announced by email, Canvas Announcement, or announced in class (I will do my best to ensure that you receive the
changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
    Week       Date   Day    Class Topic                             Out of class activities          Assignments due
   1       22 JAN      W     Course overview / expectations      Defining Integrated Marketing
                             Review reading assignment           Communications
   TOPIC 1 INTEGRATED MARKETING COMMUNICATIONS
                      Foundations of Storytelling               Individual BIO Assignment
   2    27 JAN M Integrated Case History: Bud Light
                              Super Bowl Advertising Review      Super Bowl strategic evaluation
           29 JAN      W      Managing IMC Strategy              Advertiser Strategic Insights        QUIZ 1
                             TOPIC 2: ADVANTAGE of SPORTS for BRAND ADVERTISERS                       Bio assignment due
   3       3 FEB       M     Super Bowl Marketing Winners                                             PROJECT 1 ASSIGNED
                             Analysis of large live audience
                         Integrated Sports Marketing             Introduction to
           5 FEB       W Project I: March Madness activation     Sports Business Journal              QUIZ 2
                              TOPIC 3: BRAND USE SPONSORSHIP TO MARKET through SPORTS
   4       10 FEB      M     Sports Business Journal day     Reading: Sponsorships
                                                                    3


             Player and Team Partnerships
   12 FEB  W Branded Content                  Reading from “LeBron Inc”       QUIZ 3
5  17 FEB  M Image Transfer + Association     Reading: Sports Strategist Ch 2
             Exclusivity, Activation options
    19 FEB W Ambush Marketing tactics        Reading from “LeBron Inc”        QUIZ 4
              TOPIC 4: ENDOSEMENT and CAUSE MARKETING
 6 24 FEB  M Fan Avidity and Sports          Sports Strategist reading Ch 3
   26 FEB  W Narrative for Sports             Recognize a great sports story? PROJECT 1 DUE
7  2 MAR   M Crisis Management                Reading 4: Fan Avidity
                                             Team Sports Day:
   4 MAR   W Sports Business Journal          Wear your stuff                 QUIZ 5
                                                 4


TOPIC 5: FAN AVIDITY
8    9 MAR    M      Review for Mid-term exam                                                 EXAM 1 prep and assessment
    11 MAR W         MID TERM EXAM 1 (In class)                                               SPRING BREAK MAR 16-20
                                    TOPIC 6: CRAFTING A DISTINCT IDENTITY
9   23 MAR M        Case History: P&G                                                        THE OLYMPICS 2020
                    The Olympic Platform                  Reading: The Olympic Effect Ch 1    GROUP PROJECT 2 ASSIGNED
                    Brand, graphics, identity
    25 MAR W        The Refresh Dilemma                                                        QUIZ 6
                                  TOPIC 7: STORYTELLING and NARRATIVE
10  30 MAR M         The True Nature of Sports Stories
                     Building characters
     1 APR    W      Three act plot structure             Greatest Sports Books of All-Time   QUIZ 7
                     Imagery, story, setting
                     NCAA Championship Game
11   6 APR    M      The impact of Ed O’Bannon            Read: Dan Jenkins Masters
                           TOPIC 8: BUSINESS STRATEGY WINNING ISN’T THE ONLY THING
     8 APR    W      Industry: Revenue Generation         Augusta National in time            QUIZ 8
                     Tickets / Promotions
                     Sports Business Journal Day
12  13 APR     M     The Analytics of “Moneyball”          Greatest Sports Films of All-Time
                    Sports Scandal:                       “Eight Men Out”
    15 APR     W    protecting integrity of the game       “Pony Excess” ESPN 30 for 30       QUIZ 9
TOPIC 8: SPORTS ORGANIZATION COMMUNICATIONS PLAN
                                                           Reading 7: Sports Strategist
13  20 APR    M      Olympic sponsorship effectiveness     Chapter 1 Ticket Sales
     22 APR    W     Tactics / Execution                I                                       PROJECT 2 DUE
                                                          Complete Reading:
14  27 APR     M     Target Marketing                     Sports Strategist Chapter 5
    29 APR     W      Business Objectives                                                        QUIZ 10
                      Marketing Objectives
15   4 MAY    M      Review for Final Exam
     6 MAY     W FINAL EXAM 2                              In-Class Exam on Canvas             END of TERM
                                                              5


                                                            Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
    Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
    there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible.
    Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you
    to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect
    you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
    As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. If you miss a
    smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be impacted significantly.
    Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
           Grade            Cutoff
           A                94%
           A-               90%
           B+               87%
           B                84%
           B-               80%
           C+               77%
           C                74%
           C-               70%
           D                65%
           F                <65%
 GRACE POLICY: Time-bank options
     Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate any unexpected,
     unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not have to utilize this policy, but if you
     find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to e-mail me as soon as possible to notify
     me that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy one of two ways (please choose, and let me know):
                 You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
                 You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
 Absences
     If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with the necessary
     information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with your team members; you are
     responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a class.
     Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating
     circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday, please let us
     know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be responsible
     for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
     If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-down and notes
     on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise questions, you
     may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific questions you have in advance so
     that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.
                                                                 6


Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •    You have a right to respect.
     •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
          environment.
     •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded
          or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
          and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your experience
          with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the
          quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
          and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters
are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the
Gender and Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may
make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
 Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that
      make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
      me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
      committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs
      with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
      documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
      at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
      authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
      Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
      getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
      on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
      rather than later is often helpful.
                                                                   7


      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
      we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
      improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
      workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
      in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
      (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to prevent high-risk
behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about
BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
      Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
      isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
      The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
      512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
      alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
      exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
      given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
      Fire Prevention Services office.
 •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
      sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
      committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
      misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
           1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
           2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
                involved in a Title IX investigation.
           3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
                                                                 8


     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
     which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
     Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
     Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
     they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an
     official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options
     and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
     University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
     integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
     own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
     plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
     understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and theUniversity Honor Code which can be found at the following
     web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
     which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
     are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                                9
