                              The University of Texas at Austin
                              Steve Hicks School of Social Work
Course Number: SW N381T                                  Instructor: Sarah McCafferty, LCSW-S
Unique Number: 88715                                     E-mail: sarah.m.mccafferty@gmail.com
Semester: Summer 2019                                    Office Room: SSW 3.104A
Meeting Time: Mon/Wed 5:30-8:00pm                        Office Hours: Wednesdays 4–5pm or
Classroom: SSW 2.112                                                     by appointment
                  DYNAMICS OF ORGANIZATIONS AND COMMUNITIES
I. Standardized Course Description
This course familiarizes students with the macro context of social work practice. It examines the
reciprocal relationship between human behavior and social environments. It emphasizes the
interlocking and complex nature of culture and personal identity with content on populations-at-
risk, examining the factors that contribute to and constitute being at risk. It introduces the
student to the obligation that social services meet the needs of groups served and are culturally
relevant. This includes equipping students with skills to recognize diversity within and between
groups that may influence assessment, planning, intervention, and research. Students learn how
to define, design, and implement strategies for effective practice with persons from diverse
backgrounds.
This course examines the impact of social structure and other societal factors on one’s personal
life chances in relation to equity, fairness, opportunity, and other issues of social and economic
justice. Drawing on a systems-ecological perspective, this course helps students develop skills at
using systems thinking approaches to understanding organizations and communities with special
emphasis on their application to a variety of oppressed and disadvantaged populations and
multiple levels of intervention. Special emphasis is given to the development of assessment
skills and intervention methods that are relevant to empowerment, capacity building and social
change within organizations and communities. Understanding the role of age, race, gender,
social class, culture, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation, national origin, and physical and
mental ability is an integral part of this course.
II. Standardized Course Objectives
      Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
     1. Discuss communities and organizations as a context for professional practice to meet
     individual needs, build community capacity, and promote social and economic justice;
     2. Demonstrate an understanding of the value dilemmas and ethical issues confronting social
     work professionals and their implications for social work practice with organizations and
     3. Assess the influence of community norms, priorities, and competitive community factions
     on the social structure of communities and the delivery of human services;


4. Assess various evidence-based intervention approaches for working with organizations
and
5. Analyze the impacts of organizational and community dynamics on populations at risk and
relate those impacts to the participation of such populations in organizational and community
governance, human service provision, and policy formulation;
6. Evaluate alternative strategies for initiating change in organizations and communities,
including planning models, coalition building, community development, direct action, and
7. Understand the relevance of age, race, gender, social class, culture, ethnicity, religion,
sexual orientation, national origin, and physical and mental ability in social work practice
that is grounded in social and economic justice.
EPAS Competencies
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on
Social Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the
UT SHSSW engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with
CSWE’s Education Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of
knowledge, skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following
competencies:
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 6.2: Use empathy, reflection, and interpersonal skills to effectively engage diverse
clients and constituencies
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 7.1: Collect and organize data, and apply critical thinking to interpret information
from clients and constituencies
Outcome 7.3: Develop mutually agreed-on intervention goals and objectives based on the
critical assessment of strengths, needs, and challenges within clients and constituencies
Outcome 7.4: Select appropriate intervention strategies based on the assessment, research
knowledge, and values and preferences of clients and constituencies
Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 8.1: Critically choose and implement interventions to achieve practice goals and
enhance capacities of clients and constituencies
Outcome 8.3: Use inter-professional collaboration as appropriate to achieve beneficial
practice outcomes


    Outcome 8.4: Negotiate, mediate, and advocate with and on behalf of diverse clients and
    constituencies
    Outcome 8.5: Facilitate effective transitions and endings that advance mutually agreed-on
    goals
    Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations,
    and Communities
    Outcome 9.1: Select and use appropriate methods for evaluation of outcomes
    Outcome 9.3: Critically analyze, monitor, and evaluate intervention and program processes
    and outcomes
    Outcome 9.4: Apply evaluation findings to improve practice effectiveness at the micro,
    mezzo, and macro levels
III. Teaching Methods
A variety of teaching methods will be utilized, which might include lectures, class discussions,
experiential exercises, case examples, video presentations, and guest speakers. Students are
expected to be actively engaged in the learning process by participating in whole class and small
group discussions.
IV. Required Text and Materials
• Tough, Paul. (2008), Whatever it Takes: Geoffrey Canada’s Quest to Change Harlem and
        America New York, NY: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
• Articles noted on the syllabus will be available in a course packet for purchase. Additional
        readings or handouts may be added during the semester with a week’s notice to provide
        adequate time to review, either in class or thru Canvas.
• Some supplemental readings listed as “CTB” on the syllabus can be accessed from the
        Internet-based Community Tool Box http://ctb.ku.edu/. The Tool Box provides a free
        online “textbook” developed by the Work Group for Community Health and
        Development at the University of Kansas. While the focus of much of the content is on
        community health, the tools and skills covered in the book are easily translatable to other
        kinds of community issues. Hover over “Learn A Skill” from the home page to access the
        toolkits table of contents.
V. Course Requirements
    Students will be evaluated on the following required assignments, as well as in-class
    participation and contribution.
    1. Attendance, Punctuality, Preparation and Contribution (15% of grade)
    Students are expected to come to class on time having completed all readings, ready to
    participate meaningfully in class discussions and exercises, and remain for the entirety of the
    class time. Failure to contribute constructively to class discussions will be considered in
    grade determinations. The fifteen points for this requirement include attendance (5 total
    points) and in-class contribution (10 total points). Students will be allowed one (1) absence


without excuse or loss of points. Students are asked to notify the professor in advance when
they are going to be absent.
Criteria for Awarding Attendance and Punctuality Points:
     0-1 absence = 5 pts
     2 absences = 3 pts
     3 absences = 1 pt
     4 or more absences = 0 pts
     5 or more absences puts the student in jeopardy of not passing this course.
Note: Establishing a pattern of late arrivals or early departures will cause attendance points to
be lowered. If a student leaves at the break they will be counted absent.
It is important for social workers to be aware of group dynamics including peer groups. A
portion of the grade for this course will depend on your level of participation and
contribution. For some, this means learning to speak up, add to discussions and ask
questions. For others, it means taking a step back and allowing others the space to contribute.
     Criteria for Awarding In-Class Participation/Contributions:
     Active, ongoing participation & consistently prepared for class= 10 pts
     Intermittent participation & well prepared for class or
     Active, ongoing participation & not always prepared for class= 9 pts
     Intermittent participation & not always prepared for class= 8pts
     Limited participation & preparation for class= 7pts
2. Class Discussion Prompt & Facilitation (10% of grade)
Students will be responsible for leading (or co-leading) an in-depth class discussion on a
chosen reading from class which are notated with a * on the syllabus. A list of four detailed
discussion prompts will be prepared and turned in at the beginning of class. Students will be
graded on the questions’ ability to facilitate quality discussion of inquiry (5 points) and
ability to facilitate group dialogue utilizing the reading material (5 points). Students should
be prepared to facilitate a 15-20 minute discussion.
*Students may opt to write a 2-3-page response paper in lieu of the above assignment. This
should be uploaded to Canvas by the associated class time.
3. Book analysis (20% of grade)
This assignment will demonstrate the degree to which you are able to incorporate concepts
learned in class with a specific case example. You are to use content from Paul Tough’s 2008
book Whatever it takes: Geoffrey Canada's quest to change Harlem and America as your
case example, focusing on ways the organization, the Harlem Children’s Zone, assessed and
developed interventions to support the Harlem neighborhood. The focus of the paper should
be on analysis rather than a summary of what took place in the specific case example.
Analysis should incorporate:
• How the systems/ecological framework was or was not applied
• Effectiveness of how the community was defined
• Strengths/gaps in the ways that community needs were assessed


The paper should be 6-8 pages long and include at least two additional readings from class in
addition to Tough’s book. Grading will be based on the depth & breadth of how well the
content was addressed and evidence of critical thinking (80%) and on the mechanics of
writing- organization, clarity, grammar, spelling & following APA guidelines (20%). Please
turn in a hard copy by July 1st at 5:30pm CST.
4. Neighborhood Coalition Response (15% of grade)
Students will respond to a scenario of a hypothetical neighborhood coalition meeting.
Students will be provided a vignette that outlines a challenging dilemma the student must
evaluate and respond to. Students will be expected to answer the questions accompanying the
vignette with thoughtful responses, and the total answer to the - 4 - questions should not
exceed 3 double-spaced pages. The assignment and grading rubric will be distributed two
weeks before the assignment will be due. Responses are due on July 17th and should be
uploaded to Canvas.
5. Community Analysis (40% of grade)
Students will work in task groups of 5-6 members each to complete this assignment. Each
group will study a place-based community or neighborhood located in the Greater Austin
area. Each community/neighborhood must have specific geographic boundaries that
encompass one or more zip codes. The group will employ culturally sensitive ways to gather
information required for this assignment by identifying and engaging one or more local
residents to help guide the group in its’ efforts to learn about the community.
Each group is to complete the following tasks as part of this assignment:
• Obtain demographic information about the community or neighborhood using Census
        data.
• Ride or walk through the target community or neighborhood, observing the condition of
        residential areas, availability of parks and other areas used for recreation, retail and
        other businesses (including grocery stores), schools, places of worship, health care
        facilities, social service agencies, and entertainment venues.
• Interview at least three residents of the community or neighborhood, asking each
        individual what they consider the positive aspects of the community/neighborhood as
        well as the challenges of living there. Interviews should be conducted in student pairs
        in which one student asks questions and clarifies responses and the other student
        records the information provided. The group can obtain suggestions about persons to
        be interviewed from their initial point of entry into the community/neighborhood. Be
        sure to interview a cross-section of residents (e.g. a long-time resident vs. a
        newcomer, people of varying ethnicities, races, genders, sexual orientations, and/or
        ability status. Be sure to obtain written permission from all persons interviewed to use
        their comments, photographs, or tape-recorded or videotaped material, using the form
        provided in class and on Canvas.
    • Visit at least six local businesses, schools, and religious institutions to learn about
        how each entity views the community/neighborhood, what they believe they
        contribute to it, and what they see as the strengths, challenges, opportunities, and
        threats. Be sure to obtain written permission from all persons interviewed to use their


            comments, photographs, or tape-recorded or videotaped material, using the form
            provided in class and on Canvas.
    Prepare a 25-30 minute multimedia presentation about the target community/neighborhood
    including the following:
                 • Name or nickname of the area (e.g. St. John’s, Dove Springs)
                 • Location (include map or drawing)
                 • Demographic snapshot
                 • SWOT (strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, & threats) analysis
                 • At least three (3) recommendations for strengthening the
                     community/neighborhood
                 • At least five (5) considerations that would be important for social workers to
                     consider when implementing macro change in this community
    Additional class time will be reserved for questions and answers after the official
    presentation. This assignment is worth 40 points or 40% of your total grade, 30 of which will
    be a group grade. 10% will be individually awarded with consideration given to three factors:
    1) self-evaluation 2) evaluation from other group members 3) instructor observations during
    in-class work sessions.
VI.     GRADUATE GRADING SCALE
        94.0 and Above              A
        90.0 to 93.999             A-
        87.0 to 89.999             B+
        84.0 to 86.999             B
        80.0 to 83.999             B-
        77.0 to 79.999             C+
        74.0 to 76.999             C
        70.0 to 73.999             C-
        67.0 to 69.999             D+
        64.0 to 66.999             D
        60.0 to 63.999             D-
        Below 60.0                F
VII. Class Policies
NOTE: It is important for social work professionals to be punctual in attendance and in meeting
deadlines. Therefore, class attendance is expected, as is handing in assignments on time. Please
take note of the following:
• Assignments are due at the beginning of class on the scheduled day and will be considered
        late if turned in more than 15 minutes after the beginning of the class period.
• Students will lose two points per calendar day for late assignments. Any adjustments in
        assignment due dates MUST be discussed with the instructor at least 24 hours PRIOR to
        the regularly scheduled date.
• All written assignments must be typed, double-spaced with 12-point font, 1” margins, and
        follow appropriate guidelines for APA format.


VIII. University Policies
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities,
religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect
to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social
Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did
not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment
we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas
expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with
civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of
electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that


might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/).
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-register-with-ssd/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Students who report incidents of sex
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, or sexual misconduct to faculty, instructors,
and/or staff who supervise students, will be provided a list of University resources. If the


incident is impacting the academic environment, a report will be provided to the University’s
Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX, may be
found at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-
sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone
who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    - Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    - If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
        of class.


    - In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    - Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
      Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. Course Schedule
 Date              Topic                Assignment Due                 Readings
 6/10     Course Introduction &                             No assigned reading
                 Overview
                                                            Netting, Kettner, McMurtry &
 6/12    Introduction & Historical                          Thomas, Ch.1, “An
           Roots of Community                               Introduction to Macro Practice
                  Practice                                  in Social Work”
                                                            Begin Paul Tough book
                                                            *Austin, Coombs & Barr,
 6/17       Community Practice                              “Community-Centered
                 Theories                                   Clinical Practice…”
         Bridging Micro & Macro                             *Saleeby, “The Power of
               Social Work                                   Place: Another Look at the
                                                             Environment”
                                                            Kretzmann & McKnight,
                                                            “Asset-Based Community
                                                            Development”
                                                            *Putnam & Feldstein, Ch.7
 6/19  Understanding Communities
                                                            Netting, Kettner, McMurtry &
           Empowerment-based                                Thomas, Ch.5
                 practices
                                                            CTB, Chapter 3, Section 1, 2,
                                                            5&8
 6/24      Assessing Community
                   Needs                                    Poortinga, “Community
                                                            resilience and health…”
                                                            *Curley, “Relocating the
                                                            Poor…”
                                                            Recommended: Hardcastle
 6/26      Community Analysis                               No assigned reading
            Project Work Day


                                                 CTB, Chapter 3, Section 14
 7/1       SWOT Analysis          Book Analysis
                                 Due (hard copy) *Putnam & Feldstein, Ch.4
                                                 CTB, Chapter 17, Section 3 &
 7/3 Understanding the Problem                   4
                                                 *Putnam & Feldstein, Ch.1
7/8    Community Analysis                        No assigned reading
         Project Work Day
                                                 *Gates, “Integrating Social
7/10        Understanding                        Services and Social Change”
            Organizations
                                                 Wolff, “A Practitioner’s Guide
      Networking & Coalition-                    to Successful Coalitions”
              Building
                                                 Recommended: Paul Kivel
                                                 article; Samples & Austin
                                                 article
                                                 Netting, Kettner, McMurtry &
7/15 Building support for change                 Thomas, Ch.9
             Task Groups                         *Speer & Christens, “Local
                                                 Community Organizing and
                                                 Change…”
                                                 Recommended: Wells, Ford,
                                                 McClure, Holt, & Ward
                                  Neighborhood   Netting, Kettner, McMurtry &
7/17 Developing Strategy Plans      Coalition    Thomas, Ch.10
                                 Response Paper
                                 Due (on Canvas) *Minkler, “Community
                                                 Organizing w/ Elderly Poor”
                                                 *Minkler & Pies, “Ethical
7/22   Material Catch-Up and                     Issues…”
          Project Work Day
                                                 Recommended: Pawar article
7/24                                 Group       No assigned reading
                                  presentations
7/29 Course evaluations & self-      Group       No assigned reading
             evaluations          presentations


X. Bibliography
Austin, M., Coombs, M. & Barr, B. (2005). “Community-Centered clinical practice: Is the
        integration of macro and micro social work practice possible?” Journal of Community
        Practice, 13(4), 9-31.
Curley, A. (2010). “Relocating the Poor: Social Capital and Neighborhood Resources.” Journal of
        Urban Affairs, 22(1), 79-103.
Gates, A. (2014). “Integrating Social Services and Social Change: Lessons From an Immigrant
        Worker Center.” Journal of Community Practice, 22, 102-129.
Hardcastle, D. (2011). Community Social Casework. In Community Practice: Theories and Skills
        for Social Workers, (3rd Ed). New York: Oxford University Press. (recommended)
Kivel, P. (2007). “Social Service or Social Change?” In INCITE! Women of Color Against Violence
        (eds). The Revolution Will Not Be Funded: Beyond the Non-Profit Industrial Complex.
        Cambridge, MA: South End Press. pp. 129-149. (recommended)
Kretzman, J. & McKnight, J.P. (1996). Asset-based Community Development. National Civic
        Review, 85(4), 23-29.
Minkler, M. (2004). “Community Organizing with the Elderly Poor in San Francisco’s Tenderloin
        District.” In M. Minkler (ed), Community Organizing and Community Building for Health,
        2nd edition (pp. 272-287). New Brunswick, New Jersey: Rutgers University Press.
Minkler, M. & Pies, C. (2004). “Ethical Issues and Practical Dilemmas in Community Organization
        and Community Participation.” In M. Minkler (ed), Community Organizing and
        Community Building for Health, 2nd edition (pp. 116-133). New Brunswick, New Jersey:
        Rutgers University Press.
Netting, E., Kettner, P., McMurtry, S. & Thomas, L. (2012). An Introduction to Macro Practice in
        Social Work. In Social Work Macro Practice (pp. 1-31). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Netting, E., Kettner, P., McMurtry, S. & Thomas, L. (2012). Understanding Communities. In
        Social Work Macro Practice (pp. 130-166). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Netting, E., Kettner, P., McMurtry, S. & Thomas, L. (2012). Building Support for the Proposed
        Change. In Social Work Macro Practice (pp. 303-332). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Netting, E., Kettner, P., McMurtry, S. & Thomas, L. (2012). Selecting Appropriate Strategies and
        Tactics. In Social Work Macro Practice (pp. 333-362). Boston, MA: Pearson.


Pawar, M. “International Community Practice” In Marie Weil(ed). The Handbook of
        Community Practice (pp. 633-652). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE. (recommended)
Poortinga, W. (2012). “Community resilience and health: The role of bonding, bridging, and
        linking aspects of social capital.” Health & Place, 18, 286-295.
Putnam, R. & Feldstein, L. (2003). Valley Interfaith: “The Most Dangerous Thing We Do Is Talk to
        Our Neighbors. “ In Better Together: Restoring the American Community (pp. 1-33). New
        York: Simon & Schuster.
Putnam, R. & Feldstein, L. (2003). The Dudley Street Neighborhood Initiative. In Better
        Together: Restoring the American Community (pp. 75-97). New York: Simon & Schuster.
Putnam, R. & Feldstein, L. (2003). Do Something: Letting Young People Lead. In Better Together:
        Restoring the American Community (pp. 142-165). New York: Simon & Schuster.
Saleeby, D. (2004). “ ‘The Power of Place’: Another Look at the Environment.” The Journal of
        Contemporary Social Services, 85(1), 7-16.
Samples, M. & Austin, M. (2013). “The Role of Human Service Nonprofits in Promoting
        Community Building.” In Marie Weil(ed). The Handbook of Community Practice. Los
        Angeles, CA: SAGE. pp. 685-700. (recommended)
Speer, P. & Christens, B. (2012) “Local Community Organizing and Change: Altering Policy in the
        Housing and Community Development System in Kansas City.” Journal of Community &
        Applied Social Psychology, 22, 414-427.
Wells, R., Ford, E., McClure, J., Holt, M. & Ward, A. (2007). “Community-Based Coalitions’
        Capacity for Sustainable Action: The Role of Relationships.” Health Education &
        Behavior, 34(1): 124-139. (recommended)
Wolff, T. (2001). “A Practitioner’s Guide to Successful Coalitions.” American Journal of
        Community Psychology, 29(2), 173-191.
