BIM MODELING/REPRESENTATION                                        ARC s327R/s386M /LAR s388                               1
Instructor:          Marla Smith marlasmith@utexas.edu
                     Office Hours:   TU, TH 11:30-12:30 GOL 2.206
Hannah Griffiths S2017                      Ann Staniford F2018     Allie Alford F2018                Kenneth Sneed S2018
 https://roundme.com/tour/325414/view/1071959/                                  https://roundme.com/tour/333810/view/1108520/
Prerequisites:
                     Restricted to Architecture and Engineering students. Open to other majors with instructor’s
                     consent.
Description: In this class you will explore the creation, iteration, representation and visualization of Building
                     Information Models with the option of utilizing various software platforms and representation
                     methods including: Revit, Dynamo, Rhino, Grasshopper, Enscape3D, RoundMe, and HTC Vive
                     VR. You will be representing your project through digital presentations including rendering,
                     panoramas, videos and virtual reality. While various programs will be introduced the class will
                     focus on BIM Modeling in Revit 2019 and representation through Enscape3D and HTC Vive.
                     Week 1: Introduction to BIM Modeling techniques using Revit 2019. We will be covering site
                     creation, system families, and best modeling practices. This model will be the base for further
                     explorations. We will be using Enscape3D to evaluate the project in real time as well as produce
                     renderings and panoramas while utilizing screen representations and HTC Vive immersive VR.
                     Week 2: Parametric form and component creation. Creation of parametric forms and surfaces
                     used to produce divided curves and surfaces. Creation of adaptive components and iteration
                     over divided curves and surfaces. We will be covering Panoramas in both Enscape3D and Revit,
                     video creation in Enscape3D and exploring digital and immersive presentation options.
                     Week 3: Continue to develop model, form and components. Peer review of projects using the
                     HTC Vive to make presentation and design decisions. Introduction to Dynamo.
                     Week 4: Final iteration/development of models, graphs, and presentation techniques. Digital
                     presentation strategy should be finalized during this week. Video Creation and editing.
                     Week 5: Production and evaluation of final presentations and models.
.
Hardware: You should have a laptop capable of running at the minimum Revit 2019 and if possible
                     Enscape3D. If you do not there are lab computers for check out and in WMB.
                     You should also acquire a Google Cardboard or similar for Panorama viewing.
                     VR Representation is a hardware intensive process. We will be using the VR lab in Sutton Hall for
                     presentation and evaluation of models using the HTC Vive headset. There will be limited access
                     to mobile hardware capable of running VR presentations in class.
Software:            Download and install the lab versions of Revit and Enscape3D (if your video card will run it) on to
                     your own computer. Sign up for a RoundMe account. These programs are available from
                     Autodesk and Enscape3D to students at no charge. We will be using Rhino on a limited basis
                     and it is available on the lab computers in WMB 1.114.


BIM MODELING/REPRESENTATION                                  ARC s327R/s386M /LAR s388                         2
Evaluation:
Attendance: Two unexcused absences will result in the lowering of your grade by one letter.
             Three unexcused absences will result in a grade no higher than a C and my recommendation
             that you drop the course. Five unexcused absences = F.
             Use mobile phones for class related assignments. If you need to use your phone for non-class
             related reasons, inform the teacher beforehand and leave the room.
             Work on class related assignments during class. Complete other non-class related items outside
             of class.
Progress:    Everyone is starting out at differing levels of proficiency therefore your grade will be based on
             relative progress.
Assignments: There will be two projects. You should complete the projects by the beginning of class on the
             due date.
Grades:
             X       Excused Incomplete - Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family
                     emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning
                     this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans' offices
                     and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before
                     the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling, according to the
                     School of Architecture policy.
             F       Fail - Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
                     acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when you have excessive unexcused
                     absences.
             C-, D   Poor - Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
                     presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required
                     competence and knowledge base.
             C+/C Average - Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not
                     pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
             B-/B/B+ Above Average - Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
                     completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort
                     to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential
                     for excellence.
             A/A-    Excellent - Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness,
                     visual language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
                     concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
                     complete on all levels.


BIM MODELING/REPRESENTATION                                  ARC s327R/s386M /LAR s388                      3
Resources:
            Lynda.com (free tutorials for current UT Students)
            Video Tutorials included in assignments
            Autodesk Design Academy, https://academy.autodesk.com/software/revit
                                              https://academy.autodesk.com/software/fusion-360
Accommodations:
            At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations
            should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with
            Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be provided,
            students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
            Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
            including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
            dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
            scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
            Feric Fevolution                             290 Mulberry, New York, ShOP Architects


    BUILDING INFORMATION MODELING/REPRESENTATION
    Instructor:     Marla Smith               marlasmith@utexas.edu
    Office Hours: TU, TH, 11:30-12:30, GOL 2.206             471.0708
    date                                           assigned           due
WK1 7/16 Precedent 00-Revit-Enscape                 A00, A01          A00
    7/17 Precedent Base 01
    7/18 Precedent Base 02
            Intro to HTC Vive
WK2 7/23 Parametric Forms-Panoramas                    A02a           A01  1pm
    7/24 Parametric Forms
    7/25 Parametric Components
           Immersive Presentation Options
WK3 7/30 Parametric Components                         A02b           A02a 1pm
    7/31 Parametric Explorations-Dynamo
    8/1    Digital Evaluations
WK4 8/6    Parametric Expressions-Dynamo               A02c           A02b
    8/7    Development/Representation
    8/8    Digital Evaluations
WK5 8/13   Parametric Expressions
    8/14   Representation
    8/15   Digital Evaluations
    8/16   Digital Presentations Finals                               A02c 1pm
    Assignment Points                                    pts %
    A01    Foundation                                     20
    A02a   Parametric Explorations                        25
    A02b   Parametric Explorations                        25
    A02c   Parametric Expression                          30
                                                         100
