                           ALD 328: APPLIED HUMAN LEARNING
                    FALL 2018 Spring 2019, Thursday 1-4, Unique #09425
Professor:    Dr. Angela Richards
    Office:   SZB 506B                           Office Hours:   Monday 12-1pm
  Mailbox:    SZB 504                                            or by appointment
     Email:   abrichards@austin.utexas.edu
       TA: Jendayi Dillard
    Office: SZB 450D                             Office Hours:   Wednesday 11:30am-12:30pm
     Email: jbdillard@utexas.edu                                 or by appointment
PURPOSE: The purpose of this course is to understand, analyze, and apply theories
of human learning, motivation, and assessment as well as develop best teaching
practices for the elementary school classroom context.
COURSE OUTCOMES
A student who participates in this course will gain competency in the following areas:
• APPLIED LEARNING THEORY: Design learning experiences according to cognitive,
    motivational, social, and environmental factors that impact learning.
• LEARNING ASSESSMENT: Evaluate methods to assess students’ learning that align with
    learning goals to provide formative feedback and summative evidence of learning.
• INCLUSIVE TEACHING: Analyze teaching methods that address the needs and
    experiences of diverse learners, and integrate those methods into your own teaching
    practice.
• REFLECTIVE PRACTICE: Reflect on, refine, and articulate your beliefs about teaching and
    learning and your emerging identity as teachers.
COURSE RESOURCES
TEXT: Course packet of readings from University Co-op (ask for your section; it’s red
and says “Richards” on the front). Additional resources will be posted in Canvas.
Course Canvas Website: http://canvas.utexas.edu
Please check this site regularly! You will be responsible for assignments and any
information posted on Canvas.
Technology Requirement: We will be accessing Canvas, as well as other websites
and online tools during class. If you do not have access to a laptop or tablet, let us know
right away. You can also check out a laptop from the Information Technology Office in
SZB 536.
ALD 328                                               `                                Spring 2019
Unique # 09425 Richards                                                                    Syllabus


NOTE: This syllabus is subject to change.
                                   General Requirements
Class participation is important. Participation means that you come to class on time,
stay until the end, and contribute to activities and discussions in a professional manner.
It also means that you are not checking your phone or browsing the web during class at
any time, except during a break. Phones and laptops should not be used during class
unless they are being used for a class-related activity.
Attendance is expected and arriving on time and staying the full class is required.
    • If you will miss class, please notify me by email as soon as you know you will miss.
    • You are allowed one excused absence. After that, if you must be absent (excused
        or unexcused), you will be required to make-up work from any additional missed
        classes. You will turn in a paper that: 1) outlines the readings from that week, and
        2) provides a description of the activities we did in class that day and your
        responses to them. You will need to get notes from a peer when you miss class.
        You must submit it within one week of your absence. Failure to turn in the paper
        will result in a 5-point deduction on your final grade (taken from the points for
        reading assessments).
    • Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of religious
        holidays that fall on our scheduled class day; please give me advance notice of
        these absences.
    • Excessive tardies (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused absence.
                                Reading assessments (10%)
Each week (other than the first and last weeks of class) you will be asked a few
questions related to the reading. Some questions will be application-based and some
will request open-ended comments you have related to the readings in terms of points
of confusion or something you read that is particularly applicable to your experiences in
the classroom and how you connect the reading assignments with your field placement.
Questions and comments will be used to ignite discussion during class.
                           Classroom Observation Papers (30%)
Observation papers will include a description of the classroom or environment, details of
the situation, as well as classroom observations and analysis. You will explain how your
observations relate to a chosen topic taken from class readings or other sources. There
are two observation papers. For the first observation paper, you are to choose one of
the topics we have already covered and use the Observation paper directions found in
Canvas Modules to guide your writing. For the last paper, you may choose any other
second topic from the course, including those we have not yet covered.
ALD 328                                             `                               Spring 2019
Unique # 09425 Richards                                                                 Syllabus


                               Service Learning Project (40%)
Service learning encompasses projects focus on improving individuals, classrooms, and
schools for children, their families, and their community. Some examples of prior service
learning projects include planting plants or painting rocks to beautify the school
campus, collecting towels or making dog toys for animal shelters, writing letters to
soldiers, and teaching kids how to recycle or conserve water. The service learning
project is broken into three parts; proposal, data and conclusions, and presentation.
Please see Canvas for further explanation and examples from prior students.
                                    Critical Incidents (20%)
A critical incident is any positive or negative incident or situation that has significance for
you. It is often one that makes you stop to think because it exceeds your expectations,
raises questions for you, or raises issues regarding communication, existing knowledge,
or professional relationships. Perhaps it's a situation that's inconsistent with your current
beliefs, values, attitudes, or behaviors. It is an incident which in some way has had a
significant impact on your professional learning and/or teaching. You will write two
critical incident reports to reflect on something that has transpired in your internship
classroom. You will use the guidelines found on the Canvas assignment.
                                       Writing Standards
Each piece of written work must be double-spaced, using at least 1-inch margins and
standard font.
                                           Late Work
I reserve the right to accept and deduct points for late work, up to a 10-point deduction
per day. If you need to turn in late work, you must contact me by emailing me in
advance of the due date. I will determine if you will be granted the extra time for the
assignment and will email you to confirm.
                                  Writing Flag Requirements
You will get credit for a writing flag course and so will do a significant amount of your
work in formal, written form. Another condition is that at least one of your papers is to be
edited by your instructor and your peers. The Service Learning Project part 1 will be
used to fulfill this requirement. You will edit each other’s work in class and your
instructor and/or TA will offer other suggestions to improve the written work. After
rewriting, formatting, and other suggested edits have been considered, you will resubmit
it on Canvas.
                      Online Behavioral Management Certificate - TBSI
You will complete an online module, called the Texas Behavior Support Initiative (TBSI)
through Region 4 that will fulfill a Texas legislative requirement. You will be introduced
to the website in class, but you will have to complete the module on your own, which
takes about 2 hours. Full instructions about how to access the module are in the
assignment on Canvas. You will not get credit for ALD 328 until you have uploaded a
ALD 328                                              `                                Spring 2019
Unique # 09425 Richards                                                                   Syllabus


PDF copy of your certificate of completion to Canvas. Your certificate is due on the last
day of class by midnight.
                                          Grades
The following scale will be used to determine grades:
          A                94-100
         A-                 90-93
         B+                 87-89
         B                  84-86
         B-                 80-83
         C+                 77-79
         C                  74-76
         C-                 70-73
         D                  60-69
          F              Below 60%
COURSE EXPECTATIONS
Participate
This course will improve your teaching practice. Be reflective as you read materials and
interact in discussions. In-class discussion and activities are designed to maximize the
value of our time together and leverage the educational benefits of having a cohort of
peers to learn alongside, so please come prepared and contribute to the learning
experience during class.
Stay up-to-date
Unless otherwise stated, all readings, class materials, supplemental resources, grades,
emails, and announcements will be posted on the course Canvas site. You are
responsible for keeping up with information and communication via Canvas.
Treat others with respect
Our class sessions are a time and place for learning. Behaving respectfully toward
everyone in the class means engaging the learning activities at hand and refraining from
doing anything not directly related to them (e.g., studying for other classes, checking
email, using cell phones, carrying on side conversations, etc.).
Communicate with me
If you have questions or concerns about the course, need some help with a difficult
concept or assignment, or anything else, I am always willing to listen and do what I can
to help you. The best ways to reach me are to email me via Canvas or visit me in office
hours. I usually do not respond to emails between the hours of 6pm to 8am.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
University Code of Conduct
ALD 328                                           `                               Spring 2019
Unique # 09425 Richards                                                               Syllabus


The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of
the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at
UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism
and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code
which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop
before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester.
Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any
public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities.
If there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if
you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only
do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students
with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester. All of us benefit from support
during times of struggle. You are not alone. If you or anyone you know experiences any
academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, I strongly
encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
CARE Counseling is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health
Center. It is common to need support when dealing with feelings and problems that
seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are available to help with a variety of
issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in
the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I.
Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask
to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please include your name,
ALD 328                                             `                                 Spring 2019
Unique # 09425 Richards                                                                   Syllabus


  EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available. You will check-in at the
  College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let Danie know you’re
  waiting. All services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without
  your written consent.
  Important Safety Information:
  If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
  Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your
  call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust
  your instincts and share your concerns. The following are recommendations
  regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
  512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
  Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
  evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
  requires exiting and assembling outside.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
       occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
       entering the building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
       during the first week of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
       Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
       Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
       Prevention Services office.
    • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
       procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
SUPPORT RESOURCES
  Canvas Support: Student Tutorials: http://edutech.ctl.utexas.edu/students/
  Technology Support & Equipment Check-out (SZB 536):
  http://www.edb.utexas.edu/education/ito/services/checkout/
  The College of Education has equipment, including laptops, available for check-out
  upon approved reservation. The Information Technology Office (ITO) desk is also
  available to help answer any basic technology questions you have.
  Undergraduate Writing Center (FAC 211): http://uwc.utexas.edu/
  I strongly encourage you to use the Writing Center, which offers free, individualized,
  expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis.
  Whether you are writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an
  application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants will be happy to work with you. Their
  services are not just for writing with “problems.” Getting feedback from an informed
  audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help students
  develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is intended to
  foster independence. Each student determines how to use the consultant’s advice. The
  ALD 328                                            `                              Spring 2019
  Unique # 09425 Richards                                                               Syllabus


consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that preserve the
integrity of your work. Additional writing resources are available.
Sanger Learning Center (JES A315A) http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/support
Sanger Learning Center’s resources can help you achieve your academic goals. Visit
their office or website to learn how to:
    • get help with course content (e.g., drop-in and by-appointment tutoring, free
        refresher classes, etc.)
    • improve your study skills (e.g., access helpful information, meet with an
        academic coach, attend workshops, etc.)
    • attend course-specific study groups (e.g., supplemental instruction, peer-led
        study groups, etc.)
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ALD 328                                           `                             Spring 2019
Unique # 09425 Richards                                                             Syllabus


                         COURSE SCHEDULE (subject to change)
 Date              Topics/Packet Readings for the Due
                   week
 Jan. 24           Introduction to course
 Jan. 31           Teaching & Learning
 Feb. 7            Constructivism/Critical Thinking
 Feb. 14           Creativity
 Feb. 21           Social and Emotional Learning      Service Learning Project Part
                                                      1 draft
 Feb. 28           Self-Regulated Learning            Service Learning Project Part
                                                      1 edited by Dr.
                                                      Richards/Jendayi
 Mar. 7            Motivation                         Service Learning Project Part
                                                      1 final draft due
 Mar. 14           Mindfulness and Stress             Critical Incident 1
 Mar. 21           Spring Break!
 Mar. 28           Resilience                         Observation paper 1
 Apr. 4            Stereotypes
 Apr.11            Special Education and RTI          Service Learning Project Part
                                                      2
 Apr. 18           Standardized Testing               Critical Incident 2
 Apr. 25           Classroom Assessment               Observation paper 2
 May 2             Parent Involvement
 May 9             Service Learning Presentations     Service Learning Project Part
                                                      3; TBSI certificate
ALD 328                                             `                              Spring 2019
Unique # 09425 Richards                                                                Syllabus
