                                                      Syllabus
                                  Global Economies: Asia and the U.S.
ANS 361, unique number 32260
AAS 325, unique number 32085
Flag: Global Cultures
Location: RLP 1.102
Date, Time: Wednesdays 3-6pm
Course website on Canvas, see: https://utexas.instructure.com
Instructor: Susan Mays, Ph.D.
Email: smays@utexas.edu
Mobile: 917.828.1032
Office Hours Location: BEL 220J
    Sign up at: https://www.signupgenius.com/go/70A0D4AACAA23A02-office (Links to an external site.)
    Wednesdays 1-3pm and 6-7pm
    Or email me to meet or talk by phone on another day/time.
Course Description:
This course introduces key trends and norms in the economies of the US and Asia, with emphasis on the links
between these two major trading blocs. The course has three Modules. Module One addresses the
development of the global economy, with emphasis on Asia. Module Two address the rise of China and India
as well as the development of Japan, the “Tiger” economies (South Korea, Taiwan, Singapore, Hong Kong),
and Southeast Asia. The third Module examines the connections between Asia and the U.S., for example, in
human resources, trade, technology, education and knowledge transfer. The course covers economy broadly
defined to include infrastructure, institutions, societal organization, and cultural expectations, all of which
impact the economy. Importantly, the class addresses professional and labor migration between Asia and the
US, including the growth of the Asian American population and the globalization of the professional and
working class. The approach is historical and comparative (quantitative analysis is not required), and the
reading includes scholarly works and case studies as well as articles by policy makers, business leaders,
analysts, and journalists.
The course features three modules: (Weekly assignments are detailed in Canvas under Modules)
I. The Making of the Global Economy


II. Asia as the World's Largest Regional Trading Block
III. Global Economies: Asia and the U.S.
Texts:
Students are recommended to purchase:
1. Bardhan, Pranab, Awakening Giants, Feet of Clay: Assessing the Economic Rise of China and
      India, Princeton University Press, 2010, via Co-op or Amazon <$20, also on reserve at PCL.
2. Boo, Katherine, Behind the Beautiful Forevers: Life, Death, and Hope in a Mumbai Undercity, Random
      House, 2014, via Co-op or Amazon ~$12.
Do not purchase the texts below. They are on Canvas as PDFs. They are also on reserve at PCL, reserved
for several UT courses, not just ours. Perhaps call PCL to check availability before walking over.
1. Ravenhill, John, editor, Global Political Economy, 4th edition, 2014.
2. Frieden, Jeffry, Global Capitalism, Norton Press, 2006 (only via Canvas PDF; not at PCL.)
3. Gilpin, Robert, Global Political Economy, Princeton University Press, 2001.
Prerequisites: None
Grading:1
15% -- Reading Responses2
15% -- Activities3
45% -- Three Quizzes (no final exam)4
25% -- Group Project5
__ % -- Attendance6
Note 1) Graded work: More detailed instruction for graded items will be provided during the term.
Note 2) Reading Responses (RRs) and Class Discussion: All readings are required unless marked “optional”
on the syllabus. Each student will submit a Reading Response (RR) (~150-300 words) by 5pm on Tuesday via
Canvas under Discussions for viewing by classmates. Your RR should be your original thoughts on the
reading, not a response to classmates' RRs. Your RR will comment on or question or interpret the week’s
readings, and you are welcome to also reflect on your own experiences in relation to the reading. Prior to
class, perhaps read a few of your classmates' RRs to prepare for class discussion. At the end of Module 1,
you'll submit all your RRs for M1, and I'll assign a score by looking at the quality of your RRs across Module
1. As in any academic or professional environment, all written and verbal communication should be on-topic,
constructive, and respectful.


Where are the readings? -- Readings are listed under Modules, and the reading files (PDFs, etc.) are found in
Files (e.g., the folder "M1 week 2" is for Module I, week 2.)
Note 3) Activities: Most class days, I'll provide topics for student groups to explore during "activity time,"
which will be roughly the middle hour of class. I'll assign groups to foster collaboration and integration. Each
group will have one topic to review. In the 3rd hour of class, a few groups will present. When a group presents
their topic, they will lead a 5-8 minute discussion with the class, with no PPT needed. At the end of each
Module, you will submit your output from each activity (via Canvas Assignments), and I'll assign a score based
on the quality of the activity outputs across Module 1. On quiz days we will not have activities.
Note 4) Three Quizzes: At the end of each Module, we will have an in-class, non-cumulative quiz. Quizzes will
cover lectures, readings, and any other class materials/activities. Quizzes will focus on main ideas. If you miss
a quiz with an excused absence (email me before class for an excused absence), then it is your responsibility
to contact me to make-up the missed grade.
Note 5) Group Project: Students will form groups (3 students/group), and groups can choose their project
topic. The project will primarily entail delivering an ~10-12 minute PPT presentation to our class during Module
3 of the class. There is not a written report for the Group Project, but you will submit your group's PPT. See
Canvas, Files, Group Project Folder for two Word documents on project instructions and sources.
Note 6) Attendance Policy: Attendance will be taken. Please email the professor prior to class to request an
excused absence. Excused absences include illnesses, job interviews, or religious holidays. Most other
absences will be unexcused. After 3 unexcused absences, each additional absence will result in 3 percentage
points being deducted from the final overall course score. It is the student’s responsibility to track her/his
absences and be aware if they exceed 3 un-excused absences.
Laptop and device policy: Please silence devices and do not use during class, except when the class
explicitly requires e-use. Students should take handwritten notes in order to remain engaged with class.
Grade Ranges:
A        100-93
A-       92-90
B+        89-87
B         86-83
B-       82-80
C+        79-77
C         76-73
C-        72-70
D+        69-67


D         66-63
D-        62-60
F         59 and lower
Religious Observance:
According to UT policy, “By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete
the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence."
Documented Disability Statement:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the professor and from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice),
232-2937 (video phone) or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd).
Emergency Evacuation:
Instructions from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
•    Occupants of buildings at UT are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm
     activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
•    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
     nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
•    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
     class.
•    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
•    Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University
     of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Academic Integrity and Plagiarism:
For full information, students are expected to be familiar with the
following: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
The following is an excerpt from UT Website.
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is highly valued and seriously
regarded at UT. More specifically, you and other students are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high
standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. This is a very basic expectation that
is further reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments,
exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
•    acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
•    complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in
     preparing them;
•    follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic discipline;
•    avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.


For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to Chapter 11 of
the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities.
The University broadly defines academic dishonesty—basically, all conduct that violates this standard,
including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
•    Cheating
•    Plagiarism
•    Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
•    Falsifying Academic Records
•    Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended deadline
     for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
•    Multiple submissions (e.g., submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
     authorization to do so)
•    Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
For the University's official definition of academic dishonesty, see Section 11-402, Institutional Rules on Student
Services and Activities.


MODULE I, 5 weeks
In this module, we discuss key economic and historical events and trends that
resulted in our current global economy. Further, we explore basic macro-economic
indicators, relationships, and institutions. Goal: Students should become conversant
about the formation of the global economy and be able to think critically about current
economic events and trends.
Week 1
Course and Class Introductions and The Making of the Global Economy
Week 2
The Making of the Global Economy (continued)
Reading Due:
Read first: Oxford History of the 20tth Century, 1998, PCL/Canvas, 18 pages.
Read second: Global Capitalism, Frieden, 2006, PCL/Canvas, “Countries Catch Up.”
Week 3
The Making of the Global Economy (continued)
Reading Due:
Finish reading from Week 2 above.
Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Prologue and Chapters 1 and 2.
Week 4
Capital Connections -- International Monetary and Financial Systems
Reading Due:
Global Capitalism, Frieden, 2006, PCL/Canvas, “Globalizers Victorious.”
Brief Principals of Macroeconomics, Mankiw, Chap 1, pages 3-16.
Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Chapters 3 and 4.


Week 5
Capital Connections -- International Monetary and Financial Systems
Module 1 quiz; sign up for a date for your group project presentations
Optional: Film "Inside Job", available on Netflix, Amazon for $0.99, and other sources.


MODULE II, Asia as the World's Largest Regional Economy, 5 weeks
In this module, we study the significant changes in Asian economies in recent years to
the present. We look at similarities and differences in political economies, and we
consider trends in technology, trade, and human resource development in Asia. Goal:
Students should develop a working knowledge of the major Asian economies and their
development paths.
Week 6
U.S. Allies -- Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan
Reading Due:
Gilpin, Global Political Economy, Chapter 7 on US and Japan systems, pages 148-168.
Chose one of these 2: 1) McKinsey, “South Korea Finding Its Place on the World Stage”
or 2) Powers, "The Changing Role of South Korea's Chaebol"
Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Chapters 5-6.
Optional reading on the TTP: Stanford University, "TPP - A Discussion with Legal/Econ
Expert"; NYT, What is the TPP?", January 2017; a report from the US International Trade
Commission.
Week 7
Financial Centers and Trade Depots -- Singapore and Hong Kong as “City-States”
Reading Due:
SKIM the "Forward" & "Overview" of this classic World Bank report The East Asian Miracle.
A response to the East Asian Miracle above: “Why Isn't Whole World Experimenting w/ Asian
Model?,” World Development, Amsdem, 1994, 6 pages.
Brown, "HK in the Global Economy: How HK Rises to Challenges Posed by China," 18
pages.
Atlantic, "Lee Kuan Yew’s Challenge to Democracy" (in Singapore), 2015, 4 pages.
Time, “’Father of Singapore’ Lee Kuan Yew Dies at 91,” 2015, 5 pages.
Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Chapters 7-8.
Optional, "Hong Kong's Political Peacemaker," TIME...good overview on HK-China


Week 8
The Rise of China
Group project topic due. Send one email per group with "subject" as the group's
name, and do NOT email "attached" files. Just put your proposed topic in the body of
the email.
Reading Due:
Awakening Giants, Chapters 1-3, PCL or purchase.
Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Chapters 9-11.
Week 9
Spring Break
Week 10
China and India
Reading Due:
NYT, recent article on China abolishing term limits.
Awakening Giants, Chapters 4-6, PCL or purchase.
Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Chapters 12-14.
Week 11
1.7+ Billion -- Economic Challenges in India/South Asia
Quiz Module 2
Reading Due:
Awakening Giants, Chapters 7-9, PCL or purchase.
Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Chapters 15-16.


MODULE III, 5 Weeks
In this module, we consider specific topics in US-Asia economic relations, including
the global workforce and migration. Goal: Students will analyse current issues from
historical, cultural, and economic perspectives.
Week 12
Southeast Asia in the Global Economy
FYI: Non-required reading but a great book on the various Southeast Asian nations
is Southeast Asia In The New International Era by Clark D. Neher. The book is formatted by
nation, but it also makes comparisons among nations.
Reading Due:
1. Heritage Foundation, "Beating the Middle Income Trap in Southeast Asia," 2014, on
Canvas under Files.
2. Harvard Business Review cases are available via on-line coursepak at $4.25/case. Use
the following link to access: http://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/cbmp/access/78802304 (Links to an
external site.)Links to an external site.
Please read "Indonesia..." and "Vietnam..." Optional (but not required): "MobiVi" and "Arvin"
for main ideas.
    “Indonesia: Attracting Foreign Investment,” 2006, 20 pages.
    “Vietnam: Sustaining the Growth of an Asian Tiger,” 2013, 15 pages.
    “MobiVi: Credit, Micro Donations, & Allied Services in Vietnam...,” 13 pgs.
    "Arvin Exhaust Thailand: Building an Asian Supply Base,” 2014, 13 pages.
3. Behind the Beautiful Forevers, Boo, Chapter 17.
Week 13
Education and the Global Talent Pool
Group Presentations
Reading Due: There are several readings, but many are short.
US Higher Education:
1. New York Times, “The Practical University,” 2 pages.


2. Chronicle of Higher Ed, “MOOCs as Neo-Colonialism," 2 pages.
3. Chronicle of Higher Ed, Special Report: "Diversity in Academe" regarding "first
   generation" students, see UT library on-
   line http://chronicle.com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/section/Diversity-in-Academe-
   2015/877/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. This Special Report has
   about 10 articles. Please select 2 articles that interest you for reading. "First generation"
   usually refers to being the first generation in the family to attend college, but similar
   issues arise for students whose parents are from another country and thus are not as
   familiar with US higher ed.
Asia Education
1. The Economist, "India has made Primary Education Universal but not Good," 2017.
2. The Economist, “The One-Shot Society,” re school exams in South Korea, 6 pages.
3. New York Times, “Test That Can Determine the Course of Life in China…,” 3 pages,
   and “China’s Education Gap,” 4 pages.
Global Talent Pool
1. McKinsey Global Institute, “The World at Work,” read the Executive Summary.
2. New York Times, “US Banks Hire Chinese Connections,” 2013-2014, several articles in
   the series; read a few to get a sense of the issue.
Week 14
Workforce Interdependence -- South Asia and the US
Group Presentations
Low-skill, focus on child labor in Pakistan:
The Atlantic, Silvers, "Child Labor in Pakistan," 26 pages, 1996.
U.S. Dept of Labor, "Pakistan Child Labor," 7 pages, ~2014 report.
Pakistan Medical Research Council, "Child Labor in Pakistan," 3 pages, 2013.
TED, Hasan, on innovations in worker healthcare in Pakistan, 9 pages.
High-skill, focus on H-1B Visas in the U.S.:
Harvard Business Review, H-1B Visa Debate, 2017.


Atlantic, Fixing the H-1B Visa Loophole, 2016.
Brookings Institute, “H-1B Visas and the STEM Shortage,” and “Demand for H-1B Immigrant
Workers in U.S.,” 13 pages.
Skim: SSRN, “…American’s New Immigrant Entrepreneurs,” 2007, 13 pages.
Week 15
Asian Americans and the Myth of the “Model Minority”
Group Presentations
Reading Due:
SKIM, US Government, “Munson Report,” 1941, 18 pages, SKIM.
US News and World Report, “Success of One Minority Group,” 1966, 3 pages.
Contemporary Asian America, Chapters 6 and 24, 2007, 32 pages
American Prospect, “The Myth of the Model Minority,” 2002, 6 pages.
New York Times, “The Price of Nails,” 2015, 15 pages.
The readings below are optional:
1. Chang, "One Step Back, Two Steps Forward" (on AA education and health policy), 2016
2. NYT, "It Takes a Suburb: A Town Struggles to Ease Student Stress", 2017 (elite public
school w/ large Asian American population) and "Why Won’t Hollywood Cast Asian
Actors?", 2016
3. New York Magazine, essays on Asian American youth attitudes,
click http://nymag.com/news/features/asian-americans-2011-5/ (Links to an external
site.)Links to an external site.
 (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
4. Eddie Huang, Fresh Off the Boat, a memoir (book). Huang is a brilliant and renowned
restauranteur, former small-time hip-hop designer (and drug dealer), law school graduate,
semi-juvenile delinquent, childhood food prodigy, and overall challenge to the "model
minority" stereotype. He chafed against the system and family expectations for years before
finding his own truth....in food.
Week 16
TBD
Module 3 Quiz
