                          MUS 334/LAS 326/AFR374F
                     Music of Mexico and the Caribbean
                                                                  Instructor: Dr. Robin Moore
                                                               robin.moore@austin.utexas.edu
                                                       Meeting times: T-TH 11AM-12:15 PM
                                                                        Classroom: MRH 2.634
                                                               Instructor’s office: MBE 3.210
                                                        Instructor’s telephone—512 471-0373
                                        Office hours: Tues-Thurs 1:30-2:30 PM, or by appt.
                                                           Teaching Assistant: John Bimbiras
                                                                     johnbimbiras@gmail.com
                                                                                     MUS 334
                                                         22570 (lab Mon 5-6PM, MRH 4.126)
                                                         22575 (lab Mon 6-7PM, MRH 4.126)
                                                                                    AFR 374F
                                                         30775 (lab Mon 5-6PM, MRH 4.126)
                                                         30780 (lab Mon 6-7PM, MRH 4.126)
                                                                                      LAS 326
                                                         39745 (lab Mon 5-6PM, MRH 4.126)
                                                         39750 (lab Mon 6-7PM, MRH 4.126)
                                                                           MUS 380 (graduate)
                                                                           22820 (lab optional)
        Description
        This course provides an introduction to the history of Mexican and Caribbean
music within a broad cultural and historical framework. All inquiries are framed by a
range of terms and concepts pertinent in Latin American contexts such as colonialism and
its repercussions, hybridity, migration, diaspora, and cultural exchange. Class meetings
are divided into lecture/discussion segments, videos, listening, and performance/
demonstration. It is hoped that students will leave the course with a better understanding
of the history, musical styles, and local meanings of numerous Latin American musical
forms, as well as with stronger listening skills and new ways of discussing music.
        The course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed
to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
        Reading Materials


                                                     Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 2
        One book has been ordered for the class, Music of the Hispanic Caribbean
(Oxford University Press, 2010). In addition, a selection of readings and listening has
been assembled that contains articles on other topics of interest. These have been
uploaded to Canvas. Please check the site and let the instructor or TA know if you have
any problem accessing materials there.
        Listening
        Students are asked to listen to assigned musical selections each week and will be
responsible for recognizing and identifying them on exams; two or three songs per lecture
will be expected of you. Supplemental listening is available on Canvas. Other required
listening is available on the CD accompanying your textbook (pieces on the textbook CD
are marked in bold on the weekly class descriptions below).
        You will be asked to remember something about the histories, contexts, functions,
and social significance of assigned music. Your TA will help with preparation for
listening tests by conducting practice exams in lab sections. For each musical example
assigned, consider making a list for test review that includes as much of the following
information as possible:
        —The title of the piece and the composer, if known
        —The approximate date it was written, within a decade
        —The culture area/country with which it is associated
        — The lyrics of the piece, what they discuss
        — The instrumentation of the piece
        — The typical contexts in which it is performed
        — The formal musical characteristics that define the music
        —The broader social’ issues discussed that relate to the piece
        Grading Policy
        Students are required to attend classes and labs, to keep up with the reading and
listening, to respond with comments to readings on Canvas posts, to participate actively
in discussion in class, to take exams on the assigned day, and to complete all assignments
punctually. Grades for undergraduates will be determined on the basis of three in-class
exams, other small assignments (postings to Canvas, a concert review), a final brief oral
presentation, class participation, and attendance. The three exams will constitute 60% of
the student’s overall grade, the minor assignments 15% (postings 10%, concert review
5%), the oral presentation 10%, attendance 10%, and class participation 5%.
        In-class exams for students will consist of three parts: (1) the identification of key
terms, ideas, or people; (2) discussion of assigned listening examples; and (3) the writing
of a short essay on a topic related to class assignments. Students will be provided with a
review sheet prior to a given test that lists key terms they are to be responsible for, and
possible essay topics. The essay will be evaluated in terms of the following categories:
organization, grammar/syntax, reference to musical examples in support of arguments,
use of relevant musical terminology, and full response to all aspects of the question
posed.
        Students may opt to write an 8-10 pp. paper instead of taking one of the midterm
exams or the final. If they choose the paper option, they should refer to the writing


                                                    Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 3
guidelines below for graduate students. Those planning to write a paper must provide the
instructor and TA with a proposed topic and bibliography no later than week 5 and an
outline of the paper by week 7.
        Missed Test Policy
        You are required to keep track of scheduled test days on the syllabus and to take
tests when they are scheduled. Students missing tests without a medical excuse will not
be allowed to make them up, so please don’t forget to come.
        Attendance
        Regular attendance is important because various activities that take place in class
(the screening of video clips, musical demonstrations or performance opportunities,
collective discussion, guest presentations, and so on) cannot be experienced through
individual work at home. The same is true for attendance in discussion section. For that
reason, attendance in both class and sections is mandatory and will be monitored.
Attendance will be assigned 30 points and after the first 3 unexcused absences by a given
student each absence will result in 3 lost points.
        Class participation
        Your participation grade will be based on meaningful participation in collective
discussions. Meaningful participation is taken to be analytic engagement with the texts
and course themes. Each student is expected to come to class prepared to participate
actively. Those who take the initiative to engage critically with the readings and themes
of the class and actively participate by sharing their thoughts on a regular basis will
graded highly in this area. Those who participate infrequently in class discussions will be
graded down.
        While you may bring your electronic devices to class for the purposes of note-
taking or web browsing related to class activities, please do not abuse the privilege by
using your device to email, IM, text message, update your social media, or browse the
web in ways not related to class activity – it distracts your classmates and detracts from
their learning experience as well as yours.
        Concert Reviews
        As noted above, one written concert review is required of all students. The review
should be 3 or 4 pages in length, typed and double-spaced. The overall goal of the
assignment is that you experience music making live and develop an appropriate
vocabulary with which to describe/discuss it. Please consult at least two authoritative
written sources (in addition to class readings) in order to acquire background information
on the styles of music you hear at the concert; the sources should be formally cited and
referenced in the review. You should also conduct a brief interview with one of the
performers following the event and incorporate what you learn from them into your
review. See the “Extra Credit Options” section below about concerts for a listing of
possible events to attend. Other concerts may be appropriate, but require approval in
advance from either the Instructor or TA. Please hand in your review no later than
Tuesday of Week 15 unless special arrangements are made.


                                                    Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 4
         Ensamble Congrí Performance
         Texas Performing Arts has invited the Cuban-American performer Pável Urkiza
to perform on the UT campus, together with the Ensamble Congrí, on Friday Nov. 9th at
8pm in the McCullough Theater. TPA has agreed to sell tickets to our class for this event
for $10. Given its relevance to class content, and the fact that the group will visit our
class earlier in the week to discuss the show, attendance at this event is required. Please
mark your calendars; more info about the performance is available here:
https://texasperformingarts.org/season/pavel-urkiza-mccullough-theatre-2018
         Individual Projects
         You will prepare a final class presentation on music by researching a particular
musical artist, genre, or national or regional musical style of your choice. Focus on
particular aspects of Mexican/Caribbean music making as appropriate and discuss it with
the class for 10 minutes. Some portion of the presentation should discuss or analyze
music per se: instruments, sounds, rhythms, etc., and the remainder can focus on topics
such as historical background/development, contemporary social meanings of the
repertoire, changes in style, accompanying dance, etc. You will begin planning these
presentations later in the course in section.
         The presentation of your individual research should be accompanied by visual
aids. These may consist of images on Powerpoint or Keynote. These files (including any
mp3 music files to be played) should be given to the TA at the class meeting prior to the
presentation so that they can be uploaded to the class computer. The talk should also
include audio examples: recorded music, youtube video, or other sources. Up to two
minutes of your talk may be devoted to playing music.
         Assignments for Graduate Students
         Graduate students who enroll for independent study (MUS 380) will complete an
individual project on a topic of their choice that relates to course content as well. It may
consist of a performance (learning a new piece of music), musical analysis, a research
paper, or any other project approved by the instructor. If written, individual projects
should be roughly 12-15 pp. in length, excluding notes and bibliography.
         In addition, graduate music students are required to complete two additional
assignments: First, they must transcribe and analyze at least one minute’s worth of music
related to the class listening. This task may be incorporated into and/or support their final
project, or it may be separate from it. Second, they must learn to play and/or sing a
representative piece or rhythm of Mexican/Caribbean repertoire unfamiliar to them.
Again, this may be incorporated into to their final project or not, as they choose. Students
may demonstrate their performance skills to the class as part of final class presentations if
they wish.
         A two-page description/outline for the written project and an accompanying
bibliography is due during week 5, and a draft of the project is due week 11. The final
version of the paper (assuming additional revisions are necessary) as well as the
transcriptions and recording of musical performance (in the case of graduate music
students) will be due on Tuesday of the last week of classes. This schedule will ensure
that the instructor has time to interact with you as you define the project and conduct your
research. Graduate students are welcome to combine the topic of their individual research


                                                     Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 5
paper and/or musical transcriptions and performance work with their final class
presentation.
        For graduates, the midterms will constitute 25% of the overall grade, the final
15%, the individual project 30%, the transcription and performance/recording 10%, the
postings/oral presentation 10%, and attendance 10%.
        Extra Credit Options
        1. Performance Ensembles. It is the intent of this course to encourage active
participation in musical experiences to the greatest extent possible. Therefore, any
student interested in formally enrolling and participating in an appropriate one-unit world
music performance ensemble within the Music School in conjunction with this course
will have their lowest test score raised to an A. If all test scores are already an A, they
will be allowed skip exam #3 and receive full credit for it. If you decide to pursue this
option, please notify your instructor and TA. You will need to formally enroll in the
ensemble by the 12th day of classes.
    Ensemble options in the Music School:
         (1) The Mariachi Paredes. Meets Wed evenings from 7-10pm in MRH 2.604.
The instructor is Monica Fogelquist (musiczc@suddenlink.net).
        (2) The Conjunto Ensemble (meets Tues and Thurs afternoons from 5-6:30pm in
MRH 6.252. The instructors are JJ Barrera (jjbarrer@austin.rr.com) and Joel Guzmán
(jguzman4@austin.rr.com).
        (3) The Hispanic Caribbean Ensemble, directed by your instructor, meets Wed
evenings 5-8pm in MRH 6.252.
        (4) The UT Steel Pan ensemble, supervised by Diana Loomer
(dloomer@utexas.edu), meets Mon and Wed afternoons 5-6pm in MRH 6.222.
        Other groups may be appropriate for extra credit as well, subject to instructor
approval. Students may opt to join other groups for the semester or to take private lessons
on an instrument. In such a case, they must attend rehearsals regularly for the semester or
take at least five private lessons. Participation in alternate groups will not result in
replacing students’ lowest test grade with an A as in the case of the organized ensembles,
but it will generate substantial credit depending on the extent and length of the
commitment.
        Additional performance options:
        —UT’s Ballet Folklórico teaches traditional Mexican dance:
                 http://studentorgs.utexas.edu/utbf
        —Zapateado dance classes may be available through the music/dance group Flor
                 y Canto: grupoflorycanto@yahoo.com
        — Salsa dance lessons available through Longhorn Salsa. Contact Bradley Arthur
                 McConnon, bradley.mcconnon@yahoo.com
        —Buscando el Monte is a Cuban comparsa or carnival drumming group in
                 Austin: http://www.myspace.com/buscandoelmonte)
        —Puerto Rican Folkloric Dance (http://www.prfdance.org/)
        —Gerard Villanueva offers private conga lessons: carambolita@hotmail.com


                                                    Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 6
**All students participating in an ensemble or private lessons for extra credit must send
the instructor or TA a brief email by the beginning of Week 15 documenting their
participation in the group, discussing the material covered, and providing contact info for
someone who can vouch for their participation.
        2. Extra Concert Reviews. Although one concert review is required, those
interested in attending additional concerts of music related to the music of Mexico or the
Caribbean and writing reviews of their experiences will receive up to 7 additional points
added to one of their exam scores. Up to two additional reviews may be submitted by any
student through Tuesday of week 15, unless late submission is authorized. The reviews
should be 3-4pp. in length, typed and double-spaced, and follow the format described for
the required concert review above. A list of concerts that students may attend and review
is included below. Other concerts may also be appropriate, but check with your
instructor and/or TA to confirm.
        —The UT Ensembles (Mariachi, Conjunto, Hispanic Caribbean, steel pan) have
                performances scheduled in the Recital Studio of the School of Music
                (MRH 2.604) during week 12 or 13 of the semester. Consult the on-line
                calendar for the School of Music and choose the “week view” for mid-
                November
        —The Jordi Savall “Routes of Slavery” baroque concert is scheduled in Bates
                Hall on Thursday Nov. 8th at 8pm. Student tickets are $10.
        —Reggae is played regularly at Flamingo Cantina (www.flamingocantina.com)
                and elsewhere.
        —Salsa Bands in Austin include: O Positivo, Grupo Fantasma, Cienfuegos, El
                Tule, and The Brew.
        —Joel Guzmán, instructor of the Conjunto ensemble, plays regularly in Austin:
                http://www.guzmanfox.com/
        —Live conjunto music played by Los Pinkies is often heard on Sundays
beginning around 5pm at the White Horse Saloon, http://www.thewhitehorseaustin.com/.
        —Cerronato is a local Colombian vallenato band. They can be contacted about
                upcoming shows: http://cerronato.com/contact.htm
        Undergraduate Writing Center
        Don’t forget to take advantage of writing help on campus as needed. The UGC
(Located in FAC 211) is typically open from 9 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday-Thursday and 9
a.m. to 3 p.m. on Friday. They serve students on a walk-in or appointment basis (512
471-6222).
        Academic Dishonesty
        Each student is expected to uphold the institution’s core values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Scholastic dishonesty
includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, and any other act designed to give


                                                  Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 7
unfair academic advantage to the student, or the attempt to commit such an act. Any
incident of cheating or plagiarism may result in a failed individual exam score or a failing
grade in the course.
        Religious holidays
According to UT Austin policy, you must notify your instructor of a pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within
a reasonable time after the absence.
        Disability policy
        Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
    _________________________________________
                            Weekly Topics and Readings
Note: The dates on the syllabus indicate the day by which you are expected to have read
the assignments in question and be ready to discuss them. Again, bolded musical
examples indicate those available on the CD accompanying your book rather than on the
supplemental mp3s provided through Canvas.
Week 1. Introductions.
Subjects to be addressed: Introductions.
Discussion topics: none
Thurs Aug 30—Overview of course content.
Listening/performance: Contigo en la distancia; Contigo
Week 2. Defining Music of Mexico and the Caribbean.
Subjects to be addressed: Week 2 focuses first on defining Latin American and Caribbean
music. It continues with an introduction to the cultural history of Mexico and the diverse
musical forms associated with that country during the colonial period.
Discussion topics: Are there any common characteristics that help define the Caribbean
or Mexico in musical or social terms? Also: what is known about Mexican music prior to
the Spanish conquest? What creolized or mestizo music, and how did it emerge?
Tues Sept 4— Mexico and the Caribbean as a culture area
Reading: Music in the Hispanic Caribbean (MHC), Chapter 1.
Listening: Lecuona, “La comparsa”; Irakere, “La comparsa”; “Mi gente”
Thurs Sept 6—Introduction to Mexico: Music of the Colonial Era


                                                  Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 8
Reading: Excerpts from Musics of Latin America (MOLA), pp. 25-30 (background), 31-
39 (pre-conquest indigenous music, music and conversion), 40-45 (on the mass), 45-50
(on the villancico), 45-69 (early dance music), and 71-73 (conclusion).
Optional reading for section discussion: MOLA appendix, “The Elements of Music,” pp.
434-53.
Listening: “Xicochi conetzintle” (Sleep Revered Baby), “Missa ego flos campi”; “Jácaras
por la E.
Week 3. Indigenous Music, Con’t. Mariachi Music History
Subjects to be addressed: Week 3 begins with a case study of music making among the
Totonac Indians living near Puebla. It continues with an overview of the development of
mestizo mariachi ensembles from the late nineteenth century to the present.
Discussion topics: What are the musical and social characteristics of indigenous Mexican
music? How/why was mariachi music transformed from a regional tradition into national
heritage? How did the music change in the process?
Tues Sept 11— Indigenous music. Film excerpt, The Tree of Life.
Readings: MOLA 77-85 (on contemporary indigenous music)
Listening: Indigenous instrument examples; “Huistan, fiesta of San Miguel.”
Thurs Sept13 — Introduction to mariachi music. Mariachi sheet music to performers.
Readings: Sheehy, Daniel. 1999. Excerpt from “Popular Mexican Musical Traditions:
The Mariachi of West Mexico and the Conjunto Jarocho of Veracruz.” Music in Latin
American Culture pp. 40-52.
Listening: “Jarabe tapatío,” “La ensalada,” “Ojos tapatíos,”
Week 4. Mariachi in film. Mariachi repertoire/sones
Subjects to be addressed: Week 4 focuses first on representations of mariachi music in
Mexican film of the mid-20th century and its circulation in stylized form. It then examines
the history and musical characteristics of the son huasteco, the son jalisciense, and son
jarocho.
Discussion topics: What role did film play in creating national forms of music making in
Mexico? How did the music change in the process? What is the Mexican son and how
does it vary by region?
Tues Sept. 18 — Mariachi in film. Allá en el rancho grande, Aventurera
Reading: none
Listening: “Allá en el rancho grande,” “Aventurera”
Thurs Sept. 20—Mariachi repertoire/sones
Reading: Music in Latin America, 85-88 (on traditional dance music), 93-96 and 98-100
and 102 (on sones).
Listening: El son de la negra,” “La calandria,” “La iguana”


                                                  Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 9
Week 5. Bolero, Ranchera. Exam #1
**Outline of grad student projects due
Subjects to be addressed: Week 5 examines some of the most widely popular song styles
in Mexico: the bolero and its working-class counterpart, the canción ranchera.
Discussion topics: Do the characteristic elements of the bolero derive from Mexico, the
Caribbean, international pop, or elsewhere? What does the popularity of the canción
ranchera tell us about the aesthetics of romantic music in Mexico today, and its various
audiences?
Tues Sept. 25 — The Latin American bolero and ranchera
Optional reading: Gradante, William, “El Hijo del Pueblo. José Alfredo Jiménez and the
Mexican Canción Ranchera.” Latin American Music Review vol. 3 no. 1 (Spring/Summer
1982), 36-59.
Listening: “Contigo” (see week 1 module), “Ella,” “Inolvidable” (Luis Miguel version)
Thurs Sept. 27— Exam #1 (covering material through Week 4)
Week 6. Border Traditions
Subjects to be addressed: During Week 7 we examine accordion-based conjunto music
associated with the Texas-Mexico border region, as well as other forms including
orquesta music, the corrido, and nortec electronica.
Discussion topics — What do the differences between conjunto and orquesta music tell
us about divisions within Texas’ Chicano community in the mid-twentieth century? What
significance does the corrido have in Mexico? How does the style of recent Chicano
popular music suggest broader social trends or realities in the United States?
Tues Oct. 2— Conjunto/orquesta/corrido
Optional reading: Peña, Manuel. “From Ranchero to Jaitón: Ethnicity and Class in
Texas-Mexican Music (Two Styles in the Form of a Pair).” Ethnomusicology 29:1
(Winter 1985), 29-55.
Listening: Hermosísimo lucero”; “Río Grande”; “Contrabando y traición”
Thurs Oct 4— Mexican-American pop music, Nortec
Reading: assign reading from MOLA Chpt. 10 pp. pp. 397-99, 407-16 and 420-25 (on
Chicano pop).
Listening: “De paisano a paisano,” “El presente”; Dandy del Sur”
Week 7. Chicano Rock. Mexican Classical Music
Subjects to be addressed: During Week 7 we examine rock music performed by Mexican
Americans, as well as the history of classical music making in Mexico.


                                                Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 10
Discussion topics — Why does George Lipsitz suggest that Chicano rock in LA and
elsewhere evokes postmodern sensibilities? How have Mexican classical composers
negotiated tensions between cosmopolitanism and local realities in their compositions?
Tues Oct. 9 — Mexican and Mexican-American Rock (guest presenter Luis Zapata)
Reading: Lipsitz, George. Chapter 6, “Crusin’ Round the Historical Bloc.” Time
Passages, Univ. of Minnesota Press, 1990, 133-160.
Listening: “Tequila,” The Champs (1958); “Evil Ways,” Santana (1969); “Heaven,” Los
Lonely Boys (2006)
Thurs Oct. 11 — Mexican Classical Music
Reading: Musics of Latin America pp. 111-21
Listening: Ponce, “Instantáneas mexicanas: Baile del bajío.” Moncayo, “Huapango,”
Ortiz, “Río de las mariposas”
Week 8. Introduction to Music of the Caribbean
Subjects to be addressed— Week 8 discusses musical styles in the Caribbean of African
origin, using güiro/chekeré and rumba music as case studies. It then analyzes creolized
music exhibiting influences from both Europe and Africa.
Discussion topics— How are rumba and güiro music representative of Afro-diasporic
repertoire? How are they linked to the history of the Atlantic slave trade? Also: what are
the musical characteristics of the Cuban son? Why might it be described as a “cultural
bridge”? What does son history teach us about creolization and its politics in ethnically
divided societies?
Tues Oct. 16 — Afro-Caribbean music and rumba
Reading: MHC, pp. 52-67 (on slavery in the Caribbean, and on toques de güiros); MOLA
pp. 189-94 (on rumba).
Listening: “Tratado for Elegguá, Oggún, Ochosi, and Inle”; “En opuestas regiones,”
“Obsession”
Thurs Oct. 18 — Creolization and the Cuban son
Reading: MHC, pp. 91-102 (on son).
Listening: “Mueve la cintura,” son percussion exs. 1, 2, and 3. “El rumbón de Luyanó”
Week 9. Spanish-Influenced Traditions of the Caribbean. Exam #2
Subjects to be addressed: Week 9 continues discussion of Caribbean musical forms,
emphasizing traditions derived primarily from Spain.
Discussion topics: What characterizes European-derived traditional music in the
Americas? How is it similar to or distinct from African-influenced repertoire? How can
we define Cuban punto, Puerto Rican seis, and Dominican salve?
Tues Oct. 23 — European-influenced heritage. Instructor away.
Reading: MHC, Chpt. 2 pp. 32-51.


                                                  Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 11
Listening: Una viagra que camine,” “Controversia”
Thurs Oct. 25 —Exam #2 (covers Weeks 5-8). Instructor away.
Week 10. Puerto Rican Traditions: Bomba, Plena, Salsa
Subjects to be addressed: Week 10 considers the development of unique folkloric musical
forms in Puerto Rico and their eventual influence on salsa and other urban musical forms.
Discussion topics: What are bomba, plena, and when/how did each develop? What do
their histories tell us about cultural dynamics in the Hispanic Caribbean? Also: who
claims ownership of salsa, and on what basis? What stylistic elements tie it to particular
communities? How does its history in New York reflect unique cultural and political
moments?
Tues Oct. 30 — Bomba and plena
Film excerpt: Plena is Work, Plena is Play
Reading: Music in the Hispanic Caribbean pp. 76-82 (on bomba) and 102-08 (on plena)
Listening: “Bomba sicá rhythms,” “Plena rhythms,” “Patria Borinqueña”
Thurs Nov. 1 — New York Salsa
Film excerpt: Salsa: The Rhythm of Latin Music
Reading: MHC, pp. 108-120 (on salsa); MOLA pp. 425-429 (on salsa romántica and
“Sedúceme”)
Listening: “Anacaona,” “Cáscara patterns with clave,” “Salsa bell patterns with
clave,” “Piano montuno pattern from Anacaona”; Sedúceme”
Week 11. Guest artist Pável Urkiza. Music in the Dominican Republic.
**Draft of grad student papers due
**Pável Urkiza optional additional lecture/demo Eastwoods Room (UNB 2.102) 3pm
**Ensemble Congrí concert at the McCullough Theater, Fri Nov. 9, 8pm.
**Jordi Savall concert, “The Routes of Slavery,” Thurs Nov. 8, 8pm, Bass Hall
**Conjunto Ensemble show Sun Nov. 11, 7:30pm, MRH 2.608
Subjects to be addressed: Week 11 begins with a visit by Cuban artist Pável Urkiza who
will discuss his recent projects and his Friday concert with the Ensemble Congrí.
Thursday’s class will focus on traditional repertoire from the Dominican Republic.
Discussion topics: What are merengue and bachata, and when/how did each develop?
How are merengue, Cuban son, and Puerto Rican plena similar or different? How are the
bolero and bachata similar or different?
Tues Nov. 6 —Visit by Pável Urkiza
Reading: none
Listening: Aixa; [Mayeya; Longina]
Thurs Nov. 8—Dominican merengue, bachata


                                                 Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 12
Reading: Music in the Hispanic Caribbean pp. 83-91 (on merengue) and 133-38 (on
bachata).
Listening: Merengue percussion rhythms; “Homenaje a Santiago,” “Amores de
Colores,” “Que vuelva”
Week 12. Jamaican Music and Reggaeton
**Hispanic Caribbean Ensemble show, Wed Nov. 14, 7pm, Bates Recital Hall**
**Mariachi Paredes show Sun Nov. 18, 7:30pm, MRH 2.608
Subjects to be addressed: During Week 12, students consider differences between cultural
forms that have developed in the “Latin” countries of Latin America and those from the
British colonies such as Jamaica. Week 12 also considers the transnational development
of reggaeton in Jamaica, Panama, Puerto Rico and the U.S.
Discussion topics: How does Peter Manuel characterize the overall development of
Jamaican popular music? To what does he attribute the trend toward “slackness”
beginning in the 1980s? What controversial themes does Manuel discuss in dancehall,
and what is your reaction to them? Similarly, what have you learned about dancehall-
influenced reggaeton and its controversies?
Tues Nov. 13 — Jamaican popular music: mento, ska, reggae, dancehall
Reading: Caribbean Currents, Jamaica chapter excerpt, 187-215.
Listening: “Simmer Down,” “Get Up, Stand Up,” “Boom Bye Bye”
Thurs Nov. 15— Film screening, Straight Outta Puerto Rico (Instructor Away)
Reading: MHC pp. 138-146 (on reggaeton)
Listening: “Dem Bow,” “Muévelo,” “Oye mi canto”
Week 13. Protest Song/Thanksgiving
Subjects to be addressed: Week 13 discusses political protest music in Latin America, a
style of performance that first gained widespread popularity in the 1960s and 70s. It uses
musical works by Cubans and Puerto Ricans as a point of entrée into this diverse
repertoire.
Discussion topics: How can protest music be defined? If all music is politically situated,
is this category useful? What particular historical conflicts and debates are referenced in
the assigned reading and listening examples?
Tues Nov. 20—Political Song
Reading: MHC chpt. 147-176
Listening: “Son de Cuba a Puerto Rico”; “Libertad y soberanía”; “La llaman puta”
Thurs April 22 — Thanksgiving Holiday
Week 14. Student Presentations
Tues Nov. 27 — Individual oral presentations
Thurs Nov. 29 — Individual oral presentations


                                                  Music of Mexico and the Caribbean, p. 13
Week 15. Student presentations. Exam #3
**Combined UT world music ensembles, Friday December 7, Central Market
North, 4-9pm.
Tues Dec 4 — Student presentations.
Thurs Dec 6 — Exam #3 (covering weeks 9-15)
_____________________
Research Materials in English on Mexican and Caribbean Music
Please ask your instructor if you are interested in additional references pertaining to:
       —additional sources in English on Cuban popular music
       — sources in Spanish on Cuban music
       —sources on Afrocuban religious music
       — sources on Puerto Rican music
       —sources on music of the French Caribbean
       —sources on the English-speaking Caribbean
       —Mexican music
       —Hispanic music in the U.S.
    __________________________________
Basic Reference Guides
       The New Grove’s Encyclopedia of World Music (esp. articles on countries)
       The Garland Encyclopedia of World Music (organized by continent)
       The Garland Handbook of Latin American Music
Databases
       The Music Index
       RILM
Journals
       Latin American Music Review
       Ethnomusicology
       Journal of Latin American Popular Culture
