                                    CULTURES IN CONTACT
                             ANT 326L (31775)/LAS 324L (39715)
                                                      Fall 2018
                 Class Meeting: RLP 0.112 (Formerly CLA), T/Th 11-12:15
Professor R. Alan Covey
Email: r.alan.covey@austin.utexas.edu Tel.: 512-232-2084
Office: RLP 4.406 (formerly CLA) Office Hours: T 8:30-10 am (schedule through
Canvas), and by appt; Open coffee hour: T 10-11 am at Jackson Geosciences coffee bar
Teaching Assistants
Angelina Locker
Email: angelina.sweeney@utexas.edu
Office: SAC 4.192 Office Hours: W 10 am-12 pm, and by appointment
Anya Gruber
Email: anyagruber@utexas.edu
Office: SAC	  5.114	  (Desk	  #14)	  	  Office Hours: T/Th 9:30-10:30 am, and by appointment
Table of Contents
 I. Rationale……….1                              VI. Course Requirements….5       IX. Other University
 II. Course Aims and                                • Attendance and           Notices and Policies………9
 Objectives…2                                  participation                       • Use of e-mail
       • Aims                                       • Religious Holy Days          • Documented Disability
       • Specific Learning                          • Readings/Materials              Statement
 Objectives                                         • Assignments and             • Behavior Concerns
 III. Format and                               Assessment                      Advice
 Procedures………2                                     • Use of Canvas and               Line (BCAL)
 IV. Tentative Course                          Squarecap                           • Q-drop Policy
 Schedule.....2                                VII. Grading
 V. My Assumptions…..5                         Procedures………..8
                                               VIII. Academic
                                               Integrity…….….8
                                                     • UT Honor Code
I. Rationale: America’s cultural diversity was already well along in the process of
formation in 1776, and it is important to understand how culture contacts and European
colonization after 1492 continue to influence our society in the 21st century. This course
is designed to provide a large-scale context for thinking about the roots of American
diversity. We will begin by looking at Europe and the Americas before 1492, and then
will trace patterns of European colonization, indigenous responses, experiences of the
African diaspora, and the treatment of new immigrant populations over time. The course
                                                          1


will also consider how American policies toward Native Americans have changed since
the time of independence.
Cultural Diversity Flag: This course carries the Cultural Diversity flag. By definition
“[t]he Cultural Diversity requirement increases your familiarity with the variety and
richness of the American cultural experience. Courses carrying this flag ask you to
explore the beliefs, practices, and histories of at least one cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization. Many of these courses also encourage you to
reflect on your own cultural experiences.”
II. Course Aims and Objectives:
Aims: Required readings, lecture slides, and class activities are designed to work
together to achieve several core aims. These include the consideration of the broader
historical context of European colonization in the Americas, discussion of colonization
strategies and responses by marginalized groups, and consideration of how the early
centuries of European expansions have shaped cultural diversity in the US today.
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
        •   develop skills in information access and management by working with class
            readings, lecture slides, and internet sources to answer key questions that will
            appear on in-class exams.
        •   demonstrate mastery of the key facts of culture contact and colonization in the
            Americas through three in-class exams.
        •   establish and communicate in writing critical stances about important issues in
            American cultural diversity, reflected in regular short response activities.
III. Format and Procedures: There are three important parts of this course. The first is
individual review of class readings and PowerPoint lectures prior to the class
meeting. Each student is expected to come to class having already read the required
reading for that day and reviewed class materials posted on Canvas. The second is active
participation in class activities. Rather than repeat the lectures posted on Canvas, we
will carry out different activities, including class discussions, collaborative conversations
to answer reading questions, and work to develop skills in accessing and assessing web-
based information. The third is timely completion of graded work. Attendance is
required, and graded work is assigned for each week, either a short writing assignment or
an in-class exam. Consulting Canvas in advance and using the resources there will aid in
the successful completion of work.
IV. Tentative Course Schedule: * Required article **This syllabus represents my
current plans and objectives. As we go through the semester, those plans may need to
change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes, communicated
clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
                                                2


                                        WEEK 1
Thursday, 8/30: Introduction; Power in Europe from AD 1000-1500
                                WEEK 2: Before Contact
Tuesday, 9/4: Roots of Early Modern Empires
       Readings: Rubiés 2011
Thursday, 9/6: Indigenous Social Organization in North America before Contact
       Due: Activity 1
       Readings: Wesson 2016, and ONE of the following: Bauer 2016; Brooks 2016;
Doerfler and Redix 2016; Fisher 2016; Ostler 2016; Shannon 2016; Smoak 2016; Snyder
2016; Worl 2016;
                  WEEK 3: Early European Exploration and Conquest
Tuesday, 9/11: Early Voyages and Coastal Conquests
       Readings: Reséndez, Introduction and Chapter 1
Thursday, 9/13: Spanish Interior Expeditions and Challenges to Spanish Claims
       Due: Activity 2
       Readings: Schwartz 2011; Skim “Ship of Fools,” “Utopia,” “Four Elements,”
“Durer,” and “Fortunate Isles” in Primary Sources folder on Canvas
                     WEEK 4: Spanish Colonial Political Economy
Tuesday, 9/18: Spanish Expansion and Colonial Policy
       Readings: Reséndez, Chapter 2-3
Thursday, 9/20: Slave Trading and the Spanish Colonial Economy
       Due Date: Activity 3
       Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 4-5
                                       WEEK 5:
Tuesday, 9/25: Indigenous Adaptations to Spanish Empire-Building
       Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 6-7
Thursday, 9/27: Contact and Expansion in Texas and the US Southwest (Guest: Brad
                 Jones, Texas Historical Commission)
       Due: Activity 4 (Grading begins for Portfolio 1 submissions)
       Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 8-9
                WEEK 6: European Responses to American Discoveries
Tuesday, 10/2: FILM: “After the Mayflower”
       Readings: Salisbury 2016
Thursday, 10/4: Midterm Exam 1
                    WEEK 7: European Expansion in North America
Tuesday, 10/9: European Colonization in North America
       Readings: Ethridge 2016; “Mingled Like Fish at Sea,”
Thursday, 10/11: Indigenous Responses to Contact and Colonization
       Due: Activity 5
       Readings: DuVal 2016
                                           3


                   WEEK 8: American Displacement and Removal
Tuesday, 10/16: FILM: “Tecumseh’s Vision”
       Readings: Saunt 2016
Thursday, 10/18: The Indian Removal Act and the Trail of Tears
       Due: Activity 6
       Readings: Calloway 2016; Smith 2016
                           WEEK 9: The African Diaspora
Tuesday, 10/23: Slavery, White Race-Making, and African Resistance
       Readings: Diouf 2003; McCusker and Menard 2010
Thursday, 10/25: Archaeology and the African-American Experience (Guest: Dr. Maria
                 Franklin, UT)
       Due: Activity 7
       Readings: Ferguson 1992; Franklin 1997
                                      WEEK 10:
Tuesday, 10/30: American Diversity at the Time of the Civil War
      Readings: Parrillo 1994
Thursday, 11/1: Midterm Exam 2
Saturday, 11/3: Austin Powwow (Extra Credit)
               WEEK 11: U.S. Expansion and 19th Century Indian Policy
Tuesday, 11/6: Westward Expansion and American Diversity
       Readings: Reséndez, Chapters 10-12
       ELECTION DAY!
Thursday, 11/8: The Closing Frontier
       Due: Activity 8 (Grading begins for Portfolio 2 submissions)
       Readings: Bowes 2016
     WEEK 12: Changing Native American Societies and the Rise of Anthropology
Tuesday, 11/13: FILM: “Geronimo”
       Readings: Scott 2003
Thursday, 11/15: U.S. Indian Policy after the Closing of the Frontier
       Due: Activity 9
       Readings: Rosier 2016
                          WEEK 13: Representing “Indians”
Tuesday, 11/20: Native Americans in Anthropology and Popular Culture
       Readings: Stevens 2016, pp. 1-12
Thursday, 11/22: NO CLASS (THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY)
             WEEK 14: U.S. Native American Policies in the 20th Century
Tuesday, 11/27: The Native American Rights Movement
       Readings: Warrior 2016
Thursday, 11/29: FILM: “Wounded Knee”
                                            4


         Due: Activity 10
         Readings: Thrush 2016
                       WEEK 15: Ethnic Pluralism in the United States
Tuesday, 12/4: Diversity and Representation in 21st-century America
         Readings: DeMain 2016; Stevens 2016, pp. 13-to end; Warren and Twine 1997
Thursday, 12/6: Midterm Exam 3
THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM FOR THIS COURSE
V. My Assumptions
         I am approaching this class with the assumption that most students have learned
the basics of European and American history, although they may be fuzzy at this point in
the academic career. Because we are moving from the familiar contours of history into
more unfamiliar disciplines—archaeology, indigenous studies, and anthropology—I have
prepared lecture slides that give general context for what we will be covering in class. I
want to spend class time answering questions that the readings and materials bring up,
and doing activities that will help to reinforce the central concept of the course: that
diversity is the great strength of the United States, but something that Americans have
wrestled with for centuries. Some of today’s biggest cultural challenges are legacies of
the earliest cultural contacts between the New World and the Old.
VI. Course Requirements:
         1.   Attendance and participation policy:
Class attendance is required, and a part of your course grade (see section VII below), and
advance preparation and on-time attendance are important for doing well. In class
meetings we will review required readings, answer unresolved questions about the
week’s content, and carry out activities to reinforce learning. Respect is a central
expectation for this class. This course studies a broad range of human culture over time,
and the principle of respect extends to every individual in our class, and to all human
societies that we will learn about. Respect also extends to the appropriate use of
technology, and refraining from distracting or disruptive behavior. Laptops and tablets
are permitted in the classroom for note-taking, taking quizzes in Squarecap, and
accessing information for some class activities. Please limit your device use to class
activities. Mobile phones should be switched off or into silent mode and should not be
used in the classroom. Inappropriate use of technology may result in you being asked to
leave the lecture.
         Religious Holy Days
         By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
         fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
         miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
         religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
         within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                               5


         2.   Course Readings/Materials: Most class readings will be articles posted on
              Canvas, but we also have one required book, which should be available from
              the Co-op:
Andrés Reséndez (2016) The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of Indian
    Enslavement in America. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
In addition to the required books, the following articles are required readings for the
course. Many of these are freely available through UT’s electronic journals
subscriptions. If possible, a pdf file of each reading will be placed on Canvas prior to the
class meeting. Students are responsible for accessing these readings.
Bauer, Jr., William J. “California.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Bowes, John. “US Expansion and Its Consequences, 1815-1890.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.),
    The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Brooks, James. “The Southwest.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Calloway, Colin G. “Treaties and Treaty-Making.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford
    Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
DeMain, Paul. “Contemporary History: Native America in the Twenty-First Century.” In
    Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford
    University Press.
Diouf, Sylviane A. “Introduction.” In Sylviane A. Diouf (ed.), Fighting the Slave Trade: West
    African Strategies (2003) Ohio University Press.
Doerfler, Jill, and Erik Redix. “The Great Lakes.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford
    Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
DuVal, Kathleen. “Living in a Reordered World, 1680-1763.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The
    Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Ethridge, Robbie. “European Invasions and Early Settlement, 1500-1680.” In Frederick E.
    Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University
    Press.
Fisher, Andrew. “The Pacific Northwest.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Franklin, Maria. "Why are there so few black American archaeologists?" Antiquity 71, no. 274
    (1997): 799-801.
McCusker, John J., and Russell R. Menard. “The Origins of Slavery in the Americas.” In Mark
    M. Smith and Robert L. Paquette (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Slavery in the Americas
    (2010). Oxford University Press.
Ostler, Jeffrey. “The Plains.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American
    Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Parrillo, Vincent N. “Diversity in America: A Sociohistorical Analysis.” Sociological Forum
    9(4):523-545.
Rosier, Paul C. “Surviving the Twentieth Century, 1890-1960.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The
    Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Rubiés, Juan Pau. “The Worlds of Europeans, Africans, and Americans, c. 1490.” In Frederick E.
    Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University
    Press.
Salisbury, Neal. “The Atlantic Northeast.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
                                                 6


Saunt, Claudio. “The Age of Imperial Expansion, 1763-1821.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The
    Oxford Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Schwartz, Stuart B. “The Iberian Atlantic to 1650.” In Nicholas Canny and Philip Morgan
    (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of the Atlantic World: 1450-1850 (2011). Oxford University
    Press.
Scott, Douglas D. “Oral Tradition and Archaeology: Conflict an Concordance Examples from
    Two Indian War Sites.” Historical Archaeology 37(3):55-65.
Shannon, Timothy. “Iroquoia.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American
    Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Smith, Troy. “Indian Territory and Oklahoma.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford
    Handbook of American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Smoak, Gregory E. “The Great Basin.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Snyder, Christina. “The South.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American
    Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Stevens, Scott Manning. “Collectors and Museums: From Cabinets of Curiosities to Indigenous
    Cultural Centers.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian
    History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Thrush, Coll. “Urban Native Histories.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Warren, Jonathan W., and France Winddance Twine. "White Americans, the new minority?:
    Non-blacks and the ever-expanding boundaries of whiteness." Journal of Black Studies 28,
    no. 2 (1997): 200-218.
Warrior, Robert. “The Indian Renaissance, 1960-2000: Stumbling to Victory, or Anecdotes of
    Persistence?” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of American Indian History
    (2016). Oxford University Press.
Wesson, Cameron. “America in 1492.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Worl, Rosita Kaaháni. “Alaska.” In Frederick E. Hoxie (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
    American Indian History (2016). Oxford University Press.
Squarecap: This course will use Squarecap (www.squarecap.com) to administer in-class
quizzes and take attendance. Each student will need to purchase a subscription by the
end of the trial period for the software. Students should report any technical problems
with the software to the software maker, but should advise the professor of the issue.
        3.       Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
Make-Up Exams: Ordinarily, there will be no make-ups for exams. If you anticipate
missing a scheduled exam date for a valid reason, it is your responsibility to speak with
the professor in advance about making alternative arrangements. You should bring
documentation of your reason for missing class so that we can discuss whether a make-up
is warranted. Please feel free to redact sensitive personal information (e.g., medical
diagnosis, SSN) from your documentation.
Late Assignments: Assignments that are not submitted by their deadline will be
considered late, and will have 10% of their total value deducted per 24-hour period,
including weekends. Late assignments will not be accepted more than one week after the
deadline.
                                                7


Grade Issues: If you feel that your work has been evaluated inaccurately or unfairly, it is
your responsibility to bring this to the attention of the TA who graded it within one week
after your graded work is returned to you or posted on Canvas. Please review your
graded work when it is returned or posted, and let us know if you feel that there are any
problems.
         4.     Use of Canvas in class: This class uses Canvas for Web-based course
management functions. Canvas can be accessed at http://canvas.utexas.edu/. The
university provides support and tutorials for interested students. It is your responsibility
to learn and access the site in order to prepare for classes, labs, and exams. For this
course, Canvas will be used primarily as a place to post the course syllabus, slides from
lectures, review sheets, required journal articles, and assignments
         .
         5.     Use of Squarecap in class: This class uses Squarecap to administer in-
class quizzes and to assess individual attendance. Squarecap can be accessed via
https://squarecap.com/, and you will need to purchase a subscription. You must be
present in the lecture hall for your attendance to be counted. Using another student’s
Squarecap account will be considered a violation of the Honor Code, and both students
will be sanctioned.
VII. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
         (a) Lecture Attendance (10%). On-time attendance is required at class
meetings, and will be assessed by Squarecap. You need to be in the classroom and
logged into Squarecap, or you will be flagged as absent. You are expected to be present
for the entire class meeting, and students leaving early without prior authorization may be
marked absent for the class meeting. Of the 28 scheduled class meetings, students are
expected to attend 26 to receive full credit. Each student may miss two class meetings
without penalty, but will be responsible for any graded activities and materials covered in
those classes.
         (b) Short Assignment Portfolios (30%). There will be 10 short assignments
related to class activities, with a target date for every Thursday when there is no exam
scheduled (excluding the first week). Assignments will be posted on Canvas in advance,
and most will consist of written responses to short readings or other media. Each student
will complete 8 of the activities, which will be submitted weekly. Activities will be
graded in clusters (Activities 1-4, 5-8, and 9-10), but students are welcome to seek
informal feedback from a TA if concerned about performance. TAs will evaluate short
assignments based on a rubric that will be posted on Canvas. When the first two batches
of graded activities (1-4 and 5-8) are returned, interested students will have the option to
revise and resubmit one activity for regarding. The revised text will need to be expanded
(2-3 pp) to reflect new knowledge from related class materials, and it will be due one
week after graded work has been returned to students.
         (c) Exams (20% each, total: 60%). Three in-class exams will be given at
intervals throughout the semester. Exams will include multiple choice questions, as well
as short answer and essay responses, tied to the questions posed for each class meeting.
A grading rubric will be made available prior to the exam to help students prepare.
                                                 8


Grade Scale:
A: 93.0+                                           C-: 70.00-72.99
A-: 90.00-92.99                                    D+: 67.00-69.99
B+: 87.00-89.99                                    D: 63.00-66.99
B: 83.00-86.99                                     D-: 60.00-62.99
B-: 80.00-82.99                                    F: Below 60.00
C+: 77.00-79.99                                    Note: Grades will not be rounded
C: 73.00-76.99
VIII. Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work,
unless it is assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment
whether collaboration is encouraged or not.
Study and Review: Students are encouraged to work in small study groups to prepare
for class meetings and to discuss course materials prior to lectures. Students should
prepare their own notes and review materials, and may NOT use materials prepared by
others. Notes may NOT be circulated (via social media or other means) without prior
permission from the professor. Copying the notes or review materials produced by
another student will be considered a violation of the Honor Code by both students.
Assignments: Students are solely responsible for completing their own assignments.
Always cite relevant sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you
have used in previous class), you must make that clear or you will be guilty of plagiarism
and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy, posted at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Exams: NO form of collaboration or copying is permitted during exams, and no outside
materials may be consulted during exams without the express permission of the
professor. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the examinations, nor may you
compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior
during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the
course and University disciplinary action.
IX. Other University Notices and Policies
Excused Absences for University Extracurricular Activities
Students participating in an officially sanctioned, scheduled University extracurricular
activity should be given the opportunity to make up class assignments or other graded
assignments missed as a result of their participation. It is the responsibility of the student
                                               9


to make arrangements with the instructor prior to any missed scheduled examination lab
for making up the work.
 Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
•        All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
•        Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
•        Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
accessible
•        Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors,
call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be
anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and
share your concerns.
Q drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Emergency Evacuation Policy
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official
representative.
                                               10


•       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building.
•       Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.
•       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
•       Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                             11
