Language Endangerment (ANT 320L [31620]/LIN 373 [39785])
Monday/Wednesday/Friday 2-3 pm, WCP 4.118
Instructor: James Slotta
Office: WCP 5.134
Email: jslotta@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesdays 1-3 pm or by appointment
Course Description
The 21st century, linguists say, could see the “death or doom” of 90 percent of the world’s languages. In response,
non-governmental organizations, academics, and communities have responded with campaigns to preserve and
revitalize “dying” languages. At the same time, sociolinguists and political theorists have tried to create the
groundwork for the recognition of “language rights” as a tool for defending small-scale and minority language
communities against the spread of national and global languages. In this course, we examine such efforts in order to
ask: why does the idea of language death inspire all of this work and attention? What is “a language” – what
properties are seen to inhere in language – that drives these activities? Here we will explore views of language that
underpin the anxieties and efforts of the language rights and revitalization movements: from the place of language in
the 19th and 20th century politics of national autonomy to the role of language as a repository of worldviews and
an emblem of our shared humanity. In the process, we see how “language” and distinct “languages” are situated at
the center of imaginations of community and moral anxieties over autonomy, with all of the political and ethical
implications that result for people who are recognized as having their own language as well as those who recognize
the “languagedness” of others.
Course Schedule (Subject to Change)
1. Language Diversity
  Jan 22      Introduction: How Many Languages?
  Jan 24      What is Language Diversity?
                  ○   Nicholas Evans. A Great Feast of Languages & A Galapagos of Tongues. In Dying Words, pp.
                      45-68
  Jan 27      Group Work: First Presentation
                  ○   Group A (Guugu Yimithirr)
                           −   Stephen Levinson. Language and Cognition: The Cognitive Consequences of Spatial
                               Description in Guugu Yimithirr. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 7 (1): 98–131.
                           −   John Haviland. Anchoring, Iconicity, and Orientation in Guugu Yimithirr Pointing
                               Gestures. Journal of Linguistic Anthropology 3 (1): 3–45.
                  ○   Group B (Pirahã)
                           −   Daniel Everett. Changing Channels with Pirahã Sounds. In Don’t Sleep, There are
                               Snakes, pp. 177-191.
                           −   Daniel Everett, Daniel Leonard. Phonetic Rarities in Pirahã. Journal of the
                               International Phonetic Association 12 (2): 94–96.
                           −   Peter Ladefoged and Daniel Everett. The Status of Phonetic Rarities. Language 72 (4):
                               794–800.
                           −   http://archive.phonetics.ucla.edu/Language/MYP/myp.html


                                                                                                              2
              ○   Group C (Tuyuca)
                       −   Janet Barnes. Evidentials in the Tuyuca Verb. International Journal of American
                           Linguistics 50 (3): 255–71.
              ○   Group D (Inuit languages)
                       −   Shanley Allen. Polysynthesis in the Acquisition of Inuit Languages. In The Oxford
                           Handbook of Polysynthesis, pp. 449-472.
              ○   Group E (Kalam)
                       −   Andrew Pawley. A Language Which Defies Description by Ordinary Means. In The
                           Role of Theory in Language Description, pp. 87-129.
              ○   Preparation for presentations
 Jan 29   The Range of Linguistic Diversity
              ○   Presentations on different languages
 Jan 31   The Range of Linguistic Diversity
              ○   Presentations on different languages
 Feb 3    The Range of Linguistic Diversity & Its Value to Linguists
              ○   Colapinto, John. 2007. The Interpreter: Has a remote Amazonian tribe upended our
                  understanding of language? The New Yorker. Apr. 16.
              ○   RMW Dixon. Today’s Priorities. In The Rise & Fall of Languages, pp. 116-127
              ○   Quiz (Presentation-based): Language Diversity and Its Value to Linguists
 Feb 5    Project Time: Pick a Language
              ○   Come to class with 2 possible languages for your group project
2. Language, Culture, Thought
 Feb 7    Language, Thought, and Culture
              ○   Franz Boas. Introduction to the Handbook of American Indian Languages (Grammatical
                  Categories, Discussion of Grammatical Categories, Interpretation of Grammatical Categories,
                  pp. 20-23, 31-39)
              ○   Benjamin Lee Whorf. Language, Thought, and Reality. (Language, Mind, and Reality, pp.
                  246-270).
 Feb 10   Is Language Loss, Culture Lost?
              ○   Kwachka & Basham. Literacy acts and cultural artifacts: on the extension of English modals.
                  (Pp. 413-429)
              ○   Anthony Woodbury. Documenting rhetorical, aesthetic, and expressive loss in language shift.
                  In Endangered Languages, (pp. 234-238)
              ○   Anthony Woodbury. A Defense of the Proposition, ‘When a Language Dies, a Culture Dies.’
                  (pp. 8-16)


                                                                                                             3
 Feb 12   Project Time: Second Presentation
              ○   Quiz: Language, Culture, and Thought
 Feb 14   Language Loss is Culture Preserved?
              ○   Don Kulick. A Death in the Rainforest (Forward, Chapters 1-6)
 Feb 17   Language Loss is Culture Preserved?
              ○   Don Kulick. A Death in the Rainforest (Chapters 7-13)
 Feb 19   Language Loss is Culture Preserved?
              ○   Don Kulick. A Death in the Rainforest. (Chapter 14-17, Postscript)
              ○   Debate Prep
 Feb 21   Debate: Language Loss is Culture Lost
              ○   Debate
3. Language, Self-Determination, and Nationalism
 Feb 24   Kultur, Language, and the Politics of Self-Determination
              ○   Norbert Elias. Sociogenesis of the difference between Kultur and Zivilisation in German
                  Usage. In The Civilizing Process, pp. 3-28
              ○   Benedict Anderson. Old Languages, New Models. In Imagined Communities.
 Feb 26   Language & the National Self
              ○   Richard Handler. Nationalism & the Politics of Culture in Quebec (Chapter 2 and Chapter 7,
                  pp. 159-75 only)
 Feb 28   Project Time: Second Presentation
              ○   Quiz: Language, Self-Determination, and Nationalism
              ○   Presentation Prep
 Mar 2    Second Group Presentations
 Mar 4    Second Group Presentations
 Mar 6    Decolonization and the Difficulties with National Languages
              ○   Abram De Swaan. Words of the World (pp. 6-17)
              ○   Joshua Fishman. The Impact of Nationalism on Language Planning. In Can Language Be Planned?
              ○   Midterm Prompts


                                                                                                             4
 Mar 9    Language, Identity, and the Politics of Indigeneity
             ○    Sam L. No'eau Warner. Kuleana: The Right, Responsibility, and Authority of Indigenous
                  Peoples to Speak and Make Decisions for Themselves in Language and Cultural Revitalization
                  (Pp. 68-93)
             ○    Jane Hill. “Today there is no respect”: Nostalgia, “Respect” and Oppositional Discourse in
                  Mexicano (Nahuatl) Language Ideology. In Language Ideologies.
             ○    Film
 Mar 11   Language, Identity, and the Politics of Indigeneity
             ○    Discussion of Film and Readings
 Mar 13   Midterms Due
4. Language, Globalization, and Neoliberalism
 Mar 23   Global Languages & the Neoliberal Logic of Communication
             ○    Abram De Swaam. The political economy of language constellations & Conclusion. In Words
                  of the World, Introduction (pp. 25-40) and Conclusion (pp. 176-193)
 Mar 25   Neoliberal Globalization & the International Market of Languages
             ○    Film
 Mar 27   Neoliberal Globalization & the International Market of Languages
             ○    Heller: Globalization, the new economy, and the commodification of language and identity.
             ○    Quiz: Language, Globalization, and Neoliberalism
 Mar 30   The Ethics of Language Endangerment
             ○    Peter Ladefoged. Another View of Endangered Languages. (pp 809-811)
             ○    Nancy Dorian. Discussion note: A response to Ladefoged’s other view of endangered
                  languages. (pp. 575-9)
             ○    Debate Prep & Group Work
 Apr 1    Debate: Let Languages Die
             ○    Debate
 Apr 3    Project Time: Third Presentation
             ○    Work on Presentations
 Apr 6    Third Group Presentations


                                                                                                                      5
 Apr 8    Third Group Presentations
5. Language Rights, Revitalization, and Authenticity
 Apr 10   Linguistic Human Rights
             ○     Robert Phillipson, Mart Rannut, Tove Skutnabb-Kangas. Linguistic Human Rights.
                   (“Introduction” pp. 1-22)
             ○     Quiz (Presentation-based): Comparison of Social and Political Situation of Languages
 Apr 13   The Limits of Language Rights
             ○     Kymlicka & Patton Language rights and political theory. (pp. 9-17)
             ○     Joshua Fishmann. On the Limits of Ethnolinguistic Democracy. In Linguistic Human Rights:
                   Overcoming Linguistic Discrimination, pp. 49-53
             ○     Philippe van Parijs. Linguistic Justice for Europe and the World. (Linguistic Justice as Parity of
                   Esteem, pp. 117-132)
 Apr 15   The Language of Language Rights
             ○     Jan Blommaert. The Asmara Declaration as a Sociolinguistic Problem: Reflections on
                   Scholarship and Linguistic Rights (Pp. 131-142)
             ○     Skutnabb-Kangas & Phillipson with Kontra. Reflections on scholarship and linguistic rights: A
                   rejoinder to Jan Blommaert. (Pp.143-155).
 Apr 17   Project Time: Briefing Paper
             ○     Quiz: Language Rights & Their Limits
 Apr 20   Possessive Individualism & Language Rights: Are Language Rights Cultural Wrongs?
             ○     Peter Whiteley. Do "Language Rights" Serve Indigenous Interests? Some Hopi and Other
                   Queries. (Pp. 712-722)
             ○     M. Eleanor Nevins. “Learning to Listen: Confronting Two Meanings of Language Loss in the
                   Contemporary White Mountain Apache Speech Community.” (Pp. 269–88)
 Apr 22   Revitalization: Preservation and/or Transformation?
             ○     Hinton & Ahlers. The Issue of "Authenticity" in California Language Restoration. (Pp 56-67)
             ○     Peterson & Webster. Speech play and language ideologies in Navajo terminology development
                   (pp. 93-116)
 Apr 24   Group Briefing Paper Due
             ○     Quiz: Language Revitalization and Authenticity


                                                                                                                  6
6. Language Vitality
 Apr 27      Language Vitality
                 ○   John McWhorter, Our Magnificent Bastard Tongue (Introduction, Chpts. 1-2)
 Apr 29      Language Vitality
                 ○   John McWhorter, Our Magnificent Bastard Tongue (Chpts. 3-4)
 May 1       Why Save Endangered Languages?
                 ○   John McWhorter, Our Magnificent Bastard Tongue (Chpt. 5)
                 ○   Debate Prep
 May 4       Debate: Language Preservation is Impossible
                 ○   Debate
 May 6       The Heroic Age of Linguistics
                 ○   Bernard Perley. Zombie linguistics: Experts, endangered languages and the curse of undead
                     voices. (Pp. 133-149)
                 ○   Film: The Linguists
 May 8       The Interests in Language Endangerment
                 ○   Discussion
                 ○   Policy Proposals Due
Course requirements and general policies
Required Materials. There are two books you will need to purchase for the course, both available at the
University Co-op:
         Kulick, Don. 2019. A Death in the Rainforest: How a Language and a Way of Life Came to an End in Papua
                   New Guinea. Chapel Hill: Algonquin Books.
         McWhorter, John. 2008. Our Magnificent Bastard Tongue: The Untold History of English. New York:
                   Avery.
All the other readings are available electronically through Canvas at: https://utexas.instructure.com/
Preparation for Class. To assist your reading for each class session, questions for most readings will be posted
on the Canvas website. You should use these questions to guide your reading; they point out the particular issues
and data that you need ultimately to take away from the reading. I recommend that you do your best to answer
these questions as you do the reading before class. You are welcome to work with classmates to develop your
answers to these questions. Then, bring your answers along with the reading to the class, where the reading will be
discussed further. Following class, you should be comfortable answering the questions on the reading. Again, I
encourage you to speak with your classmates about the answers to these questions before and after class. If you
are uncertain how to answer some of the questions, please raise your questions in class. I am not here to provide


                                                                                                                        7
answers to these questions, though I will facilitate discussion and ask questions that help you to answer the reading
questions.
Student Evaluation. Your grade consists of a number of components:
          Quizzes (best 6 out of 7)                                         25%
          Participation (includes: class discussion, group projects,        25%
                   picking a language, presentations, research,
                   writing, debates, and online “discussions”)
          First Group Presentation                                          5%
          Midterm Essay                                                     15%
          Group Project                                                     30%
                   Group Presentations & Briefing Paper (15%)
                   Policy Proposal (15%)
Quizzes. There will be 7 quizzes over the course of the semester and your lowest quiz grade will be dropped
before calculating your final grade. Your 6 best quiz grades compose 25% of your final grade. The topic of each quiz
is indicated on the syllabus and several of the quizzes will consist of reading questions provided ahead of time with
your readings. Quizzes are closed book. You are allowed—encouraged, in fact—to discuss the reading questions
and quiz topics ahead of time with classmates. There will also be time in class for groups to discuss reading
questions and present answers to the class. Along with participation, the quizzes are the centerpiece of the course.
They are your opportunity to integrate concepts and data from the readings and discussion, and demonstrate your
own synthesis of them. And so, I’m looking not only for “the right answer” to the quiz questions, but a
well-supported syntheses of course materials in your answers. Quizzes will be graded with a letter grade (no
pluses or minuses):
                           responses that are clear, thorough, and particularly thoughtful, drawing insightful
       Excellent (A)
                           connections to other readings or larger themes discussed in class
                           responses that offer an accurate answer to the question based on the reading and
       Good (B)
                           discussion
                           responses that show some familiarity with the reading but do not thoroughly answer the
       Acceptable (C)
                           question
       Unacceptable (0) missed quizzes and responses that show no familiarity with the reading will receive a zero
Participation. This course depends on your engagement and participation to succeed. Participation thus
composes a large portion of your grade (25%). Your participation grade rests on your informed, engaged, and
constructive participation in: 1) class discussion, 2) a semester-long group project, 3) three debates, 4) three group
presentations, 5) presentations on reading questions, and 6) four online “discussions” of our readings. Participation
will be graded with letter grades (A, A-, B+, etc.). To give you an idea of the grading, here is how grades will break
down in broad terms:
                           regular, respectful, and thoughtful participation that is informed by the readings and class
       Excellent (A)       discussions — for a grade in the A range, students will actively participate in at least 25
                           class meetings in one form or another
                           occasional and respectful participation that shows familiarity with the readings and class
       Good (B)            discussion — for a grade in the B range, students will actively participate in at least 15
                           class meetings


                                                                                                                        8
                            rare participation, disrespectful participation, or participation that does not indicate
       Acceptable (C)       familiarity with the readings or class discussion — for a grade in the C range, students will
                            actively participate in at least 5 class meetings
       Unacceptable (0) no participation or more than six absences will receive a zero
First Group Presentation. As part of our discussion of language diversity, each group will give a 10 minute
presentation on languages very different from English. You will be assigned a language and a reading with which to
develop your presentation. Presentations will be during the second week of classes and will compose 5% of your
grade.
Midterm Essay. There will be a 5-page midterm essay (double-spaced, 12 pt Times New Roman) based on a
prompt I will provide a week before it is due. Essays will be evaluated according to the clarity of the writing, the
strength of the reasoning, and the thoughtfulness with which course readings are incorporated. The midterm is
worth 15% of your final grade.
Group Project. Over the course of the semester you will develop an independent research project in groups on
a language of your choosing. The language you choose must be an endangered or minority language that is
sufficiently well documented for you to complete the project. You will research the grammar of the language, its
history, and the social and political context in which it is used today. This project has several graded components:
     ●    In the first half of the semester, each group will give a 10 minute presentation introducing the class to your
          language and some of its interesting linguistic features.
     ●    In the second half of the semester, each group will give a 10 minute presentation on the history and
          current social context of the language.
     ●    Toward the end of the semester, as a group you will submit an 8-page “briefing paper” outlining the
          interesting linguistic features of the language you have researched as well as its history and current
          political situation. Together, your presentations and briefing paper constitute 15% of your grade.
     ●    The briefing paper will provide background for individual “policy proposals” each student will turn in on
          the last day of class. In 5-6 pages (double-spaced, 12 point Times New Roman), these proposals will make
          a policy recommendation for the language you have researched. What is a major ethical, political,
          economic, social, or cultural issue that arises when you consider the future of this language? Develop an
          argument about the best way to deal with that issue and discuss the outcomes you expect if your proposal
          is adopted and if it is not. These proposals should engage with course readings in addition to research
          materials you have collected over the course of the semester.
Grade Ranges. Grade ranges are as follows. Decimal values will not be rounded up when calculating final grades.
                A        93-100 (95)           B-       80-82  (81)          D+    67-69 (68)
                A-       90-92 (91)            C+       77-79  (78)          D     63-66 (65)
                B+       87-89 (88)            C        73-76  (75)          D-    60-62 (61)
                B        83-86 (85)            C-       70-72  (71)          F     Less than 60 (50)
Excused Absences & Make-ups. The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays
and for extenuating circumstances due to an emergency (with a note from a doctor, nurse, or university official
documenting the emergency). If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday, you must notify the
instructor at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of the religious holiday. You will be given an
opportunity to complete missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. Otherwise, there will be no
make-up quizzes or other activities without a note from a doctor, nurse, or university official excusing your
absence.
Inside & Outside the Classroom. Readings for the day’s class should always be brought to class. I recommend
that you print out readings available electronically on Canvas so that you are not dependent on electronic devices


                                                                                                                      9
to do class readings. Computers, phones, and other electronic devices are allowed in class so long as they are not
disruptive to others. If these devices become disruptive, I will ask that they not be brought into class. As long as
these devices are not disruptive to others, you are solely responsible for how you use these devices in class. If you
miss a class, you should speak with your classmates to catch up on course announcements and notes. If you attend
class and still have questions about class materials, please see me during office hours. It is your responsibility to
ensure that you are keeping up with all that is being done in class. Do not hesitate to ask questions in class or
during office hours.
Academic Integrity. Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
       “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
       uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, quizzes and exams is all your own work, unless it is assigned as
group work. You are welcome to work with classmates to prepare for quizzes and exams, but you may not help
each other in any way while taking quizzes and exams. All quizzes and exams are closed book. Copying answers
from any source during a quiz is a serious offense and you will be subject to academic disciplinary action, including
failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at
the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Students with Disabilities. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
     ●    Please request a meeting as soon as possible for us to discuss any accommodations
     ●    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     ●    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you


                                                                                                                   10
University Policies
Religious Holy Days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy. If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students. The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance
and support for your learning. Use these to help you succeed in your classes.
     ○   The Sanger Learning Center: For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call
         512-471-3614 (JES A332).
     ○   The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by
         appointment or on a drop-in basis. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     ○   The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and
         prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and
         well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     ○   Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
     ○   ITS: Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
     ○   Libraries: Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     ○   Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the professor and
TAs for this course are required to report for further investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual
harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or employee.
Federal law and university policy also requires reporting incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and
sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information
about any such incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality,
please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental
Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these services for any needed
support and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office: https://titleix.utexas.edu/
