                             ADV 391K GRADUATE CAMPAIGNS
                                       Spring 2020 (#06810)
                                            BMC 4.206
                                      M 3:00 p.m.-6:00 p.m.
                                 The University of Texas at Austin
Instructor:             Dr. Jeeyun Oh
                        Assistant Professor
                        Stan Richards School of Advertising & Public Relations
Office:                 BMC 4.320
Office hours:           Mon/Wed 1:30 pm – 2:30 pm
Email:                  jeeyunoh@utexas.edu
Prerequisite:           Graduate standing
Course Description
As the capstone course in the advertising program, this class integrates all of the course work
within both the major and outside areas. This is the course in which students learn the most by
working in agency teams on a real project. In order to provide students with an appreciation of
what should be included in an integrated brand promotion (IBP) campaign plan, major campaign
development projects and a series of individual tasks are used during the semester. The major
focus of the course is on the development of IBP campaign plans for clients. The class does not
center on the development of new skills; rather, it is about the refinement and integration of what
you have already learned. In addition to an emphasis on developing and presenting a complete
campaign, the course is given direction and supplemented through the use of lecture, in-class
exercises, and readings.
Course Objectives
The objective of the course is to provide students with an in-depth understanding of the process
of planning, presenting, and implementing complete IBP campaigns. In order to accomplish this
objective, the emphasis in the course is on each individual learning-by-doing—that is, by
developing and presenting complete campaigns for real clients.
Secondary objectives of the course are to increase each student’s level of competence,
professionalism, and ethical thinking. Specifically, the course is designed to help students
sharpen the following skills: strategic and critical thinking; planning; organizational; written and
verbal communication; time management; interpersonal; and most importantly, group work -
bringing out the best in others.
                                                   1


Required Course Material
Hall, K. (2019). Stories that stick: How storytelling can captivate customers, influence
audiences, and transform your business. HarperCollins Leadership.
Optional Reading
Berger, J. (2016). Contagious: Why things catch on. Simon and Schuster.
Other Resources:
*Advertising Age: adage.com.
*AdWeek Web site: http://www.adweek.com/aw/index.jsp.
*New York Times “Media & Advertising” section:
http://www.nytimes.com/pages/business/media/index.html.
*PR Watch Center for Media and Democracy: www.prwatch.org.
*Public Relations Newswire: www.prnewswire.com.
*Public Relations Society of American Web site: www.prsa.org.
*Steel, Jon. Perfect Pitch. John Wiley and Sons, Inc: Hoboken, NJ, 2007.
Instructional Approach
The course will provide:
(a) supplemental readings and examples to provide a common framework to structure
understanding of the strategic IBP planning process;
(b) guidance for major account team campaign development projects to mirror the work
environment on both the client and agency sides of the advertising and communications
business; and
(c) writing assignments and other exercises to help focus on key components of the strategic
planning process and personal development.
Course Requirements
                Two Campaign Plans (Campaign #1: 20%, Campaign #2: 30%)
The major focus of this course is the two campaign plans your group will prepare and present to
clients. Although I will be assisting you and directing your work throughout the course,
individual and group work is a very important part of your grade. You are required to perform
work as members of an "agency" team. You will be graded for your participation as group
members, your individual contribution to the plans book, and also for the group's work. A
sample outline of a plansbook will be released. You will need to submit a good hard copy and a
pdf file to me. The hard copy will be given to your client on the presentation days. The
advertising business is characterized by attention to details and deadlines. Late work is not
accepted. Demonstrating creativity, enthusiasm, and hard work should be each student’s
objective during this course and beyond.
                                                  2


                               Two Client Presentations (10% each)
Main-client presentations should be 12 minutes long in total. For each presentation, the audience
will be your client, me, and your peers who intend to offer helpful feedback. This will consist
entirely of group-based work, from initial research to design, deliverables, measurement, testing,
etc. Your focus should be on carrying out campaign planning from beginning to end. In order to
be an effective pitch, every element should support your main ideas and recommendations.
An essential part of any career is the ability to present ideas in a clear and engaging manner.
While the ideas themselves of course have great value, it would be difficult to overstate the
importance of how you present those ideas. Presentation grades will reflect the fact that it is not
simply about how good your ideas are but how effectively you pitch them.
                                     Other Assignments (10%)
Individual assignments are designed to help you keep up with readings and learn more from
guest lecture. Each assignment requires you to write a short essay on the assigned book chapter
or guest lecture. Group assignments are designed to help you systematically organize andexecute
the campaign plans. More details about the assignments will be provided in class.
                                      In-Class Exercises (6%)
There will be several in-class exercises meant to lay the foundation for your two campaign
proposals. Failure to participate in any of the activities (or to participate with lackluster
enthusiasm and professionalism) will negatively affect your grade.
                             Attendance and Class Participation (4%)
Attendance will be taken as frequently as possible. For the third and fourth absences, your
final grade will be dropped a letter grade. For instance, if you missed three classes and had
earned a B grade, you will receive a C grade for the course. The 5th absence constitutes F for
the course. I expect you to arrive in class on time and to stay for the entire class. Two
unexcused, tardy arrivals will be considered as absence. A random exit may be considered an
unexcused absence. In rare circumstances, students may be unable to attend class due to serious
illness or crises. These situations will be dealt with on a case-by-case basis. In general, notice
must be given to me at least 24 hours before the absence occurs. Excused absences may be due
to a work conflict (confirmation should be presented in advance), illness (a doctor’s excuse
should be provided at the first opportunity), or legitimate emergency situation. You are
responsible for any assignments given and all work missed when absent or late.
Your active presence in class is vital to meeting the course requirements. Students are expected
to actively participate in class discussion. Phones must be in silent mode and all technology
(except for taking notes or performing in-class or group activity on your laptop) must be put
away during the class.
                            Peer Evaluation (Midterm: 2%, Final: 8%)
Your individual grade on the campaign can be significantly affected by your performance on the
team. Individuals who go above and beyond their teammates may earn a higher grade than the
rest of the team. Experiencing the rewards and learning to cope with the problems of working in
a small group is an important part of the class. Advertising is an all-weather, team sport – thus,
your group members will evaluate you as a team member at the end of the semester through a
                                                   3


confidential survey. Peer evaluation result and feedback after the first pitch will be delivered to each
student. The final peer evaluation after the second pitch is confidential.
Late Work Policy
No late work will be accepted for any group work. For individual assignments, I may accept
late work, but you will automatically lose 50% of your score. Software, network or storage
device failure is not a valid excuse for late work. No assignment will be accepted two weeks past
the due date.
Course Evaluation
               ASSESSMENT                                      PERCENT
               Two client presentations (two pitches)                 20%
               Campaign plansbook #1                                  20%
               Campaign plansbook #2                                  30%
               Individual assignments                                 10%
               Peer evaluations                                       10%
               In-class exercises                                      6%
               Attendance and participation                            4%
               TOTAL                                                100%
                                                  SCHEDULE
             The instructor reserves the right to alter the syllabus during the semester.
   Wk       Dates              Topic               Reading         Assignments and In-class
                                                                   Activities
    1       Jan 27      Class Introduction       Introduction      In-class exercise #1: STEPPS
                                                   (Berger)        framework
                                                                   Assign: Reading Part 1 (Hall)
    2       Feb 3         The Power of           Part 1 (Hall)     Form groups
                            Storytelling                           In-class exercise #2: Campaign
                                                                   case study
                                                                   Assign: Reading Part 2 (Hall)
    3      Feb 10        Essential Stories       Part 2 (Hall)     In-class exercise #3: Tales of
                                                                   successful businesses
                                                                   Assign: Background research
    4      Feb 17        Client Brief #1 &                         Assign: Campaign Plansbook #1
                           Group Work                              Assign: Reading Part 3 (Hall) &
                                                                   Ch 6 (Berger)
    5      Feb 24             Stories           Part 3 (Hall);     In-class exercise #4: Pitch
                                                Ch 6 (Berger)      Due: Situation Analysis #1 (not
                                                                   graded)
                                                   4


     6     March 2          Group Work
     7     March 9       No class meeting;                          Due: Strategy #1 (not graded)
                            Group Work
     8    March 16          Spring Break                            Due: Media Plan #1 (not graded)
     9      Mar 23          Campaign #1                             Due: Plansbook #1
                                Pitch                               Assign: Background research
    10      Mar 30            Outcome                               Assign: Campaign Plansbook #2
                            Evaluation &
                           Client Brief #2
    11      Apr 6          Guest Lecture                            Due: Situation Analysis #2 (not
                            and/or Group                            graded)
                                Work
    12      Apr 13         Guest Lecture
                            and/or Group
                                Work
    13      Apr 20          Group Work                              Due: Strategy #2 (not graded)
    14      Apr 27          Group Work                              Due: Media Plan #2 (not graded)
    15      May 4           Campaign #1                             Due: Plansbook #2
                                Pitch
Note: We do meet as a class on the days marked “Group Work” unless notified otherwise. After
checking attendance, the remaining time can be for you to work as a group and/or guest lecture
for the day.
Special Notes
Our client has volunteered time and assistance to contribute to the educational goals of our
department. All materials furnished by our client are to be treated as strictly confidential. The
plans, ideas and other materials prepared for our client become their property and may be used at
their discretion (in fact, our hope is that they will use it so you can demonstrate in every
interview and conversation forever how effective and brilliant you are).
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/index.php)
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University.
                                                    5


Plagiarism
Part of maintaining academic honesty includes avoiding plagiarism. In your work for this class
and all others, you must cite sources if you use words or ideas that are not your own. This
obviously includes quoted material, but it also covers works that may have inspired your
thinking or ideas you build upon. All your works may go through Turnitin software
(https://www.turnitin.com) that automatically detects plagiarism.
Policy on Religious Holy Days Observance
(http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance)
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence
as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence.
Students with Disabilities (http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd)
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's
Office in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. Faculty members and certain staff
members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that
they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit https://titleix.utexas.edu/ or contact the
Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Office for Inclusion and Equity (512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu)
Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual
orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion
and Equity.
                                                   6
