                                  ANT/LIN 307/312
                      CULTURE AND COMMUNICATION
                                     SPRING 2020
                                  MW 10:00-11:00 AM
                              MW class location: BEL 328
                         Plus Additional Discussion Sections
                 (for discussion section rooms, see course schedule)
“The principal criterion of a critical and ‘self-critical’ viewpoint is simple to state,
less easy to define. Any scientific theory or position that looks like a metaphor of
the dominant ideology of our society, or which can be construed as contributing
to the psychological, social, or material alienation of any class or group in world
society, must come under immediate suspicion.”—Anthony Wilden (1935-2019),
System and Structure: Essays in Communication and Exchange (1980)
Description: An introduction to the study of culture in and through
communication and the theory of signs. This class introduces and explores the
nature and structure of the “uniquely” human achievement known as “language”
(more accurately “languages”). In so doing, we attend to the structural properties
of languages and the social and cultural embeddedness of language in use.
Languages are social and cultural practices and linguistic anthropologists attend
to that interface between languages, cultures, and the individual.
Instructor information:
Professor:
       Anthony K. Webster
       Office: WCP 4.154
       Phone: 232-4529
       Office Hours: W 1:30-3:00 or by appointment
       Email: awebster@utexas.edu
TAs:
       Kelsie Gillig
       Office: PCL 5th Floor (collaborative study area)
       Office Hours: 1:30-3pm T or by appointment
       Email: gilligk@utexas.edu
       Deina Rabie
       Office: WCP 4.114 (ling anth lab)
       Office Hours: 11:00 am-12:30 pm M or by appointment
       Email: drabie@utexas.edu
       Erin Wheeler
       Office: WCP 5.114
       Office Hours: 11:00 am – 12:30 pm W or by appointment
       Email: ewheeler@utexas.edu
                                             1


Requirements: There are two exams (25% each for 50% of grade). These are
to be taken in class on Feb. 24th and April 13th. There is also an essay (2-3
pages) that is due May 6th. This essay (20% of grade) will be a response to a
question posed in class on April 27th (it will be a big picture question and hence
will tap into the content of the entire class). The question will be posted on
Canvas after class on the 27th. The essay should be typed and double-spaced.
Over the course of the semester we will watch seven films (videos). For four of
these films (you get to decide which four), you will write a film response. This
should identify the key point of the film and your informed reaction to the film
and how it relates to the course. They should be a paragraph or two in length.
Bring paper on the days of the films so that you can write the film response.
Write legibly. They should be turned in at the end of the class the film was shown
in (there are no make-ups for missing the film or the film response). These
responses are worth 20% of your grade (5% each).
Class participation (10% of grade) is vital for a successful course and will be
encouraged. I encourage students to ask questions and to speak freely in class.
Likewise, lively conversations in the discussion sections are, in fact, the point of
the discussion sections. Attendance in the discussion sections will be taken as a
part of your participation grade.
On lateness, plagiarism and missing
We will not accept late assignments. Plagiarism will not be tolerated. If you must
miss an exam, they are allowed only with a note from a doctor (after the exam) or
formal request to the professor and TA (before the exam).
Open systems (as against closed systems)
Given the tangled and emergent nature of the world (the world as open system),
this syllabus is also an open system and therefore a tentative outline and subject
to change if so needed. We live, after all, in a contingent world. We will meander.
Grading:
Two exams             50% (25% each)
Essay                 20%
Film Responses        20%
Class participation   10%
Grades:
A                     90%-100%
B                     80%-89%
C                     70%-79%
D                     60%-69%
F                     Below 60%
                                           2


Required Texts:
      Laura Ahearn. (2017). Living Language: An Introduction to Linguistic
              Anthropology. Second Edition. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
      Perry Gilmore. (2016). Kisisi (Our Language): The Story of Colin and
              Sadiki. Malden: Wiley-Blackwell.
      Anthony Webster. (2016). Intimate Grammars: An ethnography of
              Navajo poetry. Tucson: University of Arizona Press.
On Reading: I expect that students will do the bulk of their reading for the
course over the weekends.
Canvas: The syllabus will be available via Canvas. Readings outside of Ahearn,
Gilmore and Webster are available on Canvas.
Schedule:
Week One: Jan 22: Introductions
      Language? Culture? Communication?
Week Two: Jan 27-29: Socially Charged Language
      Ahearn: Chapter One and Thirteen
      Gilmore: Chapter One
      Webster: Introduction
Week Three: Feb. 3-5: Doing Linguistic Anthropology
      Ahearn: Chapter Three
      Gilmore: Chapter Five
      Feb 5: Film 1: (Whistle speech)
Week Four: Feb 10-12: Linguistic Relativity
      Ahearn: Chapter Five
      Boas: On Alternating Sounds (Canvas)
      Whorf: Relation of habitual thought and behavior to language
              (Canvas)
      Sherzer: Discourse-Centered approach (Canvas)
Week Five: Feb 17-19: More Linguistic Relativity and Endangered
Languages
      Ahearn: Chapter Twelve
      McCarty, Teresa L.; Sheilah E. Nicholas, Kari A. B. Chew,
      Natalie G. Diaz, Wesley Y. Leonard and Louellyn White: “Hear
      Our Languages, Hear Our Voices: Storywork as Theory and Praxis in
      Indigenous-Language Reclamation.” (Canvas)
                                       3


Week Six: Feb 24-26: Taking Stock One
    FEB 24: FIRST TAKING STOCK (exam)
    Feb.26: Film 2 (Gentle Words)
Week Seven: Mar. 2-4: Communities
    Ahearn: Chapter Six
    Webster: Chapter One
Week Eight: Mar 9-11: The norm (multilingualism)
    Ahearn: Chapter Seven
    Gilmore: Chapter Two
    Mar 8: Film 3: (Getting into Michif)
Week Nine: SPRING BREAK: No Class (Mar 16-18)
Week Ten: Mar 23-25: Literacies
    Ahearn: Chapter Eight
    Webster: Chapter Two
    Film 4: (Capturing Language)
Week Eleven: Mar 30-April 1: Performance
    Ahearn: Chapter Nine
    Gilmore: Chapter Three
Week Twelve: April 6-8: More performance
    Webster: Chapter Three and Four
    April 8: Film 5: (Helen Sekaquaptewa)
Week Thirteen: April 13-15: Taking Stock again
    April 13: SECOND TAKING STOCK (exam 2)
    April 15: Film 6: (The Dreamers)
Week Fourteen: April 20-22: Race and Gender
    Ahearn: Chapter Ten and Eleven
    Gilmore: Chapter Four
    April 22: Film 7: (Healing Power of Words)
Week Fifteen: April 27-29: Poetics
    Webster: Chapter Five and Conclusion
    April 27: Essay Topic Announced
Week Sixteen: May 4-6: Language, Culture and Communication redux
    Gilmore: Epilogue
    May 6: Essay due
                                   4


Addendums (or if one is inclined to produce elite indexicals,
Addenda):
This is a Flagged Course (what does that mean?)
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural
Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and
richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization.
Special Needs
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a
letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641
TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to
me at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be
discussed at that time. See following website for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and
assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made.
Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize
yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you
entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my
instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re
given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                            5
