HDO 379                                                                                       Stein
Summer 2019
HDO 379: Applying HDO
M/W/F 10:00 to 11:30 am
BEN 1.118
Unique: 78673
Instructor:
        Dr. Evan M. Stein
        Office: SEA 5.130 or GDC 7.406
        Office Hours: Monday 12 – 3 pm
        Email: estein@utexas.edu
Course Description:
In this course, you will put into practice what you have learned majoring in HDO through
experiential learning. You will be divided into groups and matched with an organization. These
organizations will present a challenge that you will work to solve through creative problem-solving,
experimental thinking, and research. You are expected to spend 5 to 8 hours each week on the
recommendation report you will complete by the end of the course.
Since the HDO program teaches you ways to use the humanities and social sciences, we will be
pairing site work with readings from a wide range of fields.
                                 SUMMER 2019 ORGANIZATION:
                                ANIME POP: https://animepopshop.com/
                                               HINT:
               A GOOD CONSULTANT FOLLOWS AND STUDIES
          THE WEBSITES AND SOCIAL MEDIA OF THEIR CLIENTS!
                                                   1


HDO 379                                                                                                  Stein
Learning Objectives
Critical Thinking/Problem Solving: Learning management and leadership practices that place
humans at the center of an organization.
Oral/Written Communications: Written and verbal clarity; professional writing (recommendation
report); understanding and interpreting data; ability to use stories/narrative to argue points;
interpersonal skills.
Teamwork/Collaboration: Group problem-solving, group writing, understanding of group
dynamics; foreseeing group challenges and developing preemptive solutions. Learning to work with
customers and colleagues of various backgrounds. Understanding and organizing roles in groups.
Leadership: Knowledge-driven decision making; measuring human behavior to inform decision-
making and organizing people according to their strengths; knowledge of methods of assessing
people in groups and leading them through change; analyze organizational problems from a holistic
standpoint; use empathetic skills to guide and motivate team members; understanding the
relationship between consumer and organization.
Professionalism/Work Ethic: Unique multidisciplinary approach to human-centered problems;
demonstrate personal accountability (punctuality) and efficient work habits. Understand elements of
human motivation. Manage a large project (recommendation report) from start to finish. Working
with external groups/clients to achieve a mutually rewarding outcome.
Required Readings & Canvas site
All required readings, videos, podcasts, etc. will be available on Canvas. Please use Modules,
which is what our homepage is linked to on Canvas. Avoid the files, which might include materials
you are NOT required to cover. All assigned texts and assignments will be posted under the
Module for the date they are due. There will be instructions posted for each class day, so
please read those carefully before digging into the material below the instructions. Many
times, you’ll choose from several reading/viewing options, so read the instructions carefully.
Grades, Assignments, and Expectations
         NOTE: All written assignments will be graded on content, grammar, clarity, and professionalism.
Leader Reports (10%):
Each week, the groups will choose a leader. That week, the leader will direct site interactions,
delegate research, interviews, surveys, etc. At the end of that week, the leader will submit a 2-page
(double-spaced, Garamond or Times New Roman, 12 point) report of how the week went: tasks
completed, challenges, successes, frustrations, etc. What might need to be done next week? Submit
this on Canvas as an assignment and email it to your group colleagues ALSO: The leader for this
week needs to send an email to your organization contact, copying your colleagues and me,
providing updates of what y’all worked on during the week.
                                     See Canvas for specific due dates
                                                      2


HDO 379                                                                                           Stein
Recommendation Report (drafts and final draft) (30%):
Your group will complete a professional-style recommendation
report that will go through several drafts and rounds of
feedback. There are guidelines on Canvas.
This should be a group-written document.
Important Dates:
     • Feb 6th: Presentations/meetings with organization reps
     • March 6th: Organization Site Report
     • March 12th: Peer Evaluation Form
     • March 13th: Recommendation Report Research Plan
     • April 17th: Draft (recommendations required!)
     • April 24th: Second Draft & Peer Evaluation Form
     • May 1st: Reports (Final Draft with Thank-You Notes)
     • May 8th: Final Presentations for Feedback Panel & Peer Evaluation Form
Peer Evaluations (10%): Three times this semester, you will complete an online survey reviewing
your peers’ and your own performance. These, and any complaints made by the organizations we’re
partnering with, will be considered in the final recommendation report grade. The grade for the
peer evaluations is based on them being fully completed and on time.
Discussion Questions (10%): You will be required to post discussion questions on the assigned
texts on our Canvas site. This is how I give you credit for doing the assigned work and engaging
critically with the material. Your questions must be posted by 5:00 pm the day before class. To
get full credit, you must complete at least 5 sets of discussion questions. If you choose to
provide additional sets of questions, I will give you credit for the 5 highest grades. Grades for
question are for the day, not for an individual question. Please limit yourself to no more than 2
questions per day.
Group Discussion Leading (20%): Once during the semester, your group will be responsible for
leading the class in discussion. For the presentation, your group will introduce the topic for the day,
provide some context and background based on research, briefly summarize key points from the
assigned texts for that day, and provide at least two discussion questions per group member to kick
off our discussion. (These count towards the group discussion leading presentation and will
NOT count towards your 5 discussion questions.) You will be responsible for facilitating the
discussion on the assigned date. Your discussion questions for that day will be listed first and will
drive our class discussion.
In-Class Attendance Class Participation (10%): Although any evidence of participation will help
this grade, there are two main components. The first is attendance: obviously you cannot participate
if you do not show up. This course meets just once a week and is centered around group work, so
being here is essential. Showing up means not just being physically present, but also being on
time, being prepared, having printed and annotated assigned daily texts with you each class, having
all assignments submitted to Canvas prior to the beginning of class, and being fully engaged in the
class. The second component of your participation grade is your contribution to class discussions
and engagement during other class activities. This class will be run in seminar format, which puts a
premium less on hierarchical authority and “knowledge” dispensed from above, but on developing
                                                    3


HDO 379                                                                                              Stein
skills—of reflection, critical thinking, and the ability to articulate your ideas both verbally and in
writing. One excellent outcome of a diverse classroom is the diversity of ideas and perspectives that
can emerge in class discussions: sharing your perspective can help others understand life in ways that
might not have occurred to them, so speak up!
HDO Reflection Paper (Due 7/8) (10%): A key skill you should gain in studying HDO is the
ability to take content and methods from any topic you study and to apply it to thinking about how
individuals, groups, and cultures interact in workplaces. In this paper, you will critically reflect on
your overall experience in this HDO course and throughout your experience as an HDO major or
minor. You will consider central issues and texts we’ve covered, along with the various assignments
you will have completed for the course and what you have learned throughout the semester, as well
as drawing on other Liberal Arts courses and how you see yourself applying what you’ve learned.
Extra Credit: TWO points added to your FINAL average if you visit Liberal Arts Career Services
Center to advance your career plans. You must obtain a signed business card of the person with
whom you spoke and upload a photo of that card to Canvas, along with 1-2 page double-spaced
paper on what your career goals are, how career services helped, how you can achieve your career
goals, and one thing you will do to achieve your goal by the end of the summer (“Extra Credit
Assignment”).
                                          COURSE POLICIES
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please
let me know as soon as possible. Please also visit the site for Services for Students with Disabilities
to see if official accommodations would help you: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Grading Policies
There will be no curve in this class. Keeping up with the assignments is essential to the successful
completion of this course. We will not argue over grades, but we will gladly discuss ways to improve
future work.
                                       Grade           Cutoff
                                       A               94%
                                       A-              90%
                                       B+              87%
                                       B               84%
                                       B-              80%
                                       C+              77%
                                       C               74%
                                       C-              70%
                                       D               65%
                                       F               <65%
                                                      4


HDO 379                                                                                                         Stein
Late work
Late work will be handled on a case-by-case basis. Generally, except in the case of an excused
absence, work submitted after an assigned deadline will not be eligible for full credit (10% off per
day late). Please communicate with me beforehand if you are having problems keeping to the
schedule. It is better to talk through problems than ignore them.
Absences
It is crucial to keep in communication with your team members and your professor; you are responsible for letting all of
us know if you cannot make it to a class.
Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable.
Check with us for details or arrangements.
If you must be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-down and
notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that
raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email
specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I
miss?” is not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
      • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
      • You have a right to respect.
      • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
      • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
      • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
      • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
           your learning environment.
      • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall
           be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
      • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
           with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
      • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
           others.
      • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring
           to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
      • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
           someone is excluded.
      • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other
           to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                                          5


HDO 379                                                                                              Stein
Personal Pronoun Preference
      Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
      topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
      gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
      legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than what
      appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference
      early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
                                        UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words
or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including
failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q-D rop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please
let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the
building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs
and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your
goals and cope with stress.
                                                      6


HDO 379                                                                                          Stein
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask
for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
(JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center:
 http://uwc.utexas.edu/
BeVocal:
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power
to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene
and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
university can:
    •   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    •   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
        have become
    •   involved in a Title IX investigation.
    •   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                      7


HDO 379                                                                                          Stein
Safety and Security
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512- 471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
    •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
        first week of class.
    •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
        re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
        University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
        be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                    8
