           TD 324P - Advanced Production Laboratory: Integrated Media
                                              Working in theatres to build advanced video playback systems!
Spring 2019
Unique # 25630
Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays 9am-Noon WIN B.220H [IM HUB]
Instructor:                                               Earnest is the IM Shop Supervisor and the
Earnest Mazique [he/him/his]                              Technical Coordinator fo the Payne Theatre.
Office: WIN B.124                                         Whe nhe isn’t building video systems, he is
email: earnest@utexas.edu                                 allocating and maintaining video and computer
Office Hours: By appointment                              equipment for productions and the PLAI Lab.
Teaching Assistants: Kaiwen Fa, Alex Gendal, Logan Smith, Mingxiang Ya
Course Description:
This course builds student confidence in working in and around a theater as a member of a
team to collaborate, problem solve, and complete tasks to meet deadlines. The class will work
together to build, test, install, trouble shoot, and strike integrated media systems for depart-
mental productions in Theatre and Dance. Students will learn how to identify different system
components including: data cables, projectors, and video servers and how they are used. Time
will also be spent learning how to use different playback software as well as looking at exam-
ples of how the software can be used to program visual effects.
Required Supplies:
You must wear closed-toe shoes that also cover the top of your foot and your heel every day to
class. This is for your safety. You should also wear comfortable clothes that you can move in,
climb ladders, and get dirty. Cell phones are great tools when used appropriately. If the instruc-
tor deems a cellphone a distraction, you will be asked to turn it off or put it in your bag.
Grading:
You are evaluated on two domains: Punctuality and Participation. Each day the class meets
you will receive 1 point for being on time and 2 points for actively participating. If you have an
unexcused absence you will not receive points for that day. If you are absent 2 days your grade
will drop 5%. Please come to class on time, every day, and ready to participate.
Plus/minus grading will be used:
A       92.5 - 100                                    C       72.5 - 76.49
A-      89.5 - 92.49                                  C-      69.5 - 72.49
B+      86.5 - 89.49                                  D+      66.5 - 69.49
B       82.5 - 86.49                                  D       62.5 - 66.49
B-      79.5 - 82.49                                  D-      59.5 - 62.49
C+      76.5 - 79.49                                  F       0 - 59.49
There is no final exam for these courses.
                                                     University of Texas Department of Theatre and Dance


                                                                   IM Production Lab Syllabus (conitnued)
Class Calendar:
The Instructor reserves the right to adjust the calendar to fit the needs of the class.
 Wed Jan 23     Introductions, Syllabus, Tours, Fall Protection Training
 Fri Jan 25     Fall Protection Hands-On Training, Working in the catwalks,
 Mon Jan 28     IM Hang: Women of _____, IM Hang: AET Spring Event 1
 Wed Jan 30     IM Focus: Women of _____, Types of cables, Cable Wrapping
 Fri Feb 1      Projectors, Networks, Fly Rail operation
 Mon Feb 4      Women of _____ system review, Introduction to Dataton Watchout Software,
 Wed Feb 6      Women of _____ notes, DRT System Review, Projector hours survey
 Fri Feb 8      Women of _____ notes, The Middle System Review, Flora Circ. System Review
 Mon Feb 11     Women of _____ notes, 30 Floods System Review
 Wed Feb 13     Women of ______ notes, IM Hang: DRT
 Fri Wed 15     Women of _____ notes, Introduction to QLab IM Hang: UTNT (WIN 1.134)
 Mon Feb 18     IM Strike: Women of _____, Introduction to After Effects, IM Hang: DRT
 Wed Feb 20     IM Hang: UTNT (OBT), IM Focus: DRT
 Fri Feb 22     IM Focus: DRT, IM Focus: UTNT
 Mon Feb 25     IM Focus: UTNT (OBT)
 Wed Feb 27     IM Focus: UTNT (OBT), DRT notes
 Fri Mar 1      DRT notes, Network Design, IM Focus: UTNT (WIN 1.134) IM Hang: UTNT (WIN
                2.180)
 Mon Mar 4      DRT Notes, UTNT notes, System Design, Strike: Opera 2 (MCT)
 Wed Mar 6      DRT Notes, UTNT notes, RJ45 connectors and crimping, Strike: Opera 2 (MCT)
 Fri Mar 8      DRT Notes, UTNT notes, Cable Management, IM Focus: UTNT (WIN 2.180)
 Mon Mar 11     DRT Notes, UTNT notes, Knots, Cable testing
 Wed Mar 13     DRT Notes, UTNT notes, AfterEffects Tutorial
 Fri Mar 15     DRT Notes, UTNT notes, Onegin System Review
 Mon Mar 18     Spring Break! NO CLASS
 Wed Mat 20     Spring Break! NO CLASS
 Fri Mar 22     Spring Break! NO CLASS
 Mon Mar 25     IM Strike: DRT, UTNT notes,
                                                                       Calendar continued on next page...
                                                  University of Texas Department of Theatre and Dance


                                                                     IM Production Lab Syllabus (conitnued)
Class Calendar continued:
 Wed Mar 27        UTNT notes, IM Hang: NWF
 Fri Mar 29        UTNT Notes, IM Focus: NWF (BIP)
 Mon Apr 1         IM Strike: UTNT (OBT), IM Hang: Onegin (MCT), IM Hang: NWF (OBT)
 Wed Apr 3         IM Hang: Onegin (MCT), IM Strike: UTNT (OBT)
 Fri Apr 5         Lighting instruments, DMX control
 Mon Apr 8         Lighting for video, Video editing
 Wed Apr 10        IM Hub Cleanup, IM Focus: Onegin (MCT)
 Fri Apr 12        IM Focus: Onegin (MCT),
 Mon Apr 15        CAT Termination review, knots review
 Wed Apr 17        Onegin notes, Speakers, Live Audio Mixing
 Fri Apr 19        Onegin notes, Video transmitters, Video distribution
 Mon Apr 22        Onegin notes, IM Hang: AET Spring Event 2
 Wed Apr 24        Onegin notes, IM Focus: AET Spring Event 2
 Fri Apr 26        Onegin notes, Analog v. Digital, Sample Rate & Data size
 Mon Apr 29        Onegin notes,
 Wed May 1         Onegin notes, Peppers Ghost Day!
 Fri May 3         Design Experience Review
Production Attendance Policy:
It is the policy of the Department of Theatre and Dance that our majors attend department season
productions and that this attendance is a part of the coursework for our majors’ classes. For the fall
semester, you are required to attend the following performances:
       • The Women of _______ (a song not song) Feb. 13-17, 2019 at the Oscar G. Brockett Theatre
       • Fortitude, Mar. 5-15, 2019 at the B. Iden Payne Theatre
       • one of the plays presented in UT New Theatre at the Oscar G. Brockett Theatre.
Information on how majors may obtain discounted admission is available on the Department of
Theatre and Dance wiki under the “Student Resources” tab.
                                                     University of Texas Department of Theatre and Dance


                                                                    IM Production Lab Syllabus (conitnued)
Additional Course Policies
Food and Drinks:
No food or drink (except sealed water bottles) shall be consumed in the theaters, backstage, or the
IM HUB. Keep in mind that the equipment used in this course will last longer and perform better when
food and drink is kept out of the electronics.
University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students:
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of
this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/
policies/emailnotify.html.
Documented Disability Statement:
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from
SSD.
     • Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
        accessible
     • (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper
     • alternative text conversion, etc.).
     • Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related
        accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the
        arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility,
        etc.).
     • Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
        (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
                                                    University of Texas Department of Theatre and Dance


                                                                  IM Production Lab Syllabus (conitnued)
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy:
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to
six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer
student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause
for dropping more than that number.”
Religious Holidays:
By UT Austin policy, you must notify instructors of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Changes:
This syllabus is subject to change upon the discretion of the instructors.
                                                  University of Texas Department of Theatre and Dance
