Visual Communication II
ARC/ARI 311L
School of Architecture
The University of Texas at Austin
Spring 2020
Tuesdays/Thursdays 8:00 AM – 11:00AM
Class locations will be announced for each module
Instructors:               Office hours by appointment
Francisca Aroso            aroso@utexas.edu
Joyce Rosner               jrosner@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants:
Jayme Gritch               jgritch817@gmail.com                     Office hours Thursday 6:45pm – 7:45pm
Stefan Brits               sbrits@utexas.edu                        Office hours Thursday 5:45pm – 6:45pm
Juan Acosta                juancasillasacosta@gmail.com             Office hours Thursday 3:00pm – 4:00pm
Introduction
Visual Communication II is a technique-based course with the focus on conventions of architectural representation and
their relationship to one’s design process. We will explore digital and analogue modes of drawing and modeling and do so
not only for their potential to represent that which we already know, but also as a generator of discoveries, ideas, and
insights that may be new to us. The intent is to begin each problem with a question rather than an answer – with
outcomes that you may not have been able to envision at the outset.
In this course we value the discipline, patience, and amount of time it takes to construct precisely crafted, carefully
measured and conceptually clear models, drawings and images. Design is an iterative process that privileges multiple
trials, repeated takes, and incremental development based on sustained practice. Investigations will inevitably build upon
one another and each student will produce an interrelated body of work that will be evaluated as a whole.
The course is organized in 3 modules:
Module 1 – Introduction to Digital Modeling
This module covers the basics of using Rhinoceros 6.0, with a focus on solid objects modeling and includes output for
in the form of digital drawings and physical models made with laser-cutting. Students will learn how to model
architectural volumes defined by developable surfaces and ways in which digital models can be a part of an expanded
workflow from idea to realization.
Module 2 – Advanced Drawing
This module introduced students to the principles of drawing and representation in the digital modeling environment as
well as in the analogue realm, with a focus on the interaction between the two ways so of working. It will also introduce
you to digital camera work and lighting. Rather than only focusing on the production of presentation images, students
are encouraged to use drawing as an iterative design tool.
Module 3 – Advanced Modeling
This module focuses on advanced uses of Rhinoceros 6.0 by exploring the complex geometries of NURBS surfaces.
Students will expand their experience in digital fabrication while working with a range of different materials.
Software
The course will require extensive use of the following software to be installed on your personal PC laptops during the first
week of class. YOU MUST HAVE A MOUSE WHEN WORKING ON YOUR COMPUTER.
Rhinoceros 6.0
You can purchase a full, single-user, Rhino 6 for Windows license available to students and faculty ($195):
http://www.rhino3d.com/sales/north-america/United_States


A limited number of discounted copies of student licenses may also be available at the UTSOA IT office.
Temporary evaluation licenses are available for free download online (Saving and plug-ins stop working after 90 days
unless you make a full license purchase):
http://www.rhino3d.com/download/rhino/6/latest
Copies of this software are available for Mac, but currently Mac laptops do not conform to UTSOA minimum laptop
requirements; as a result all instruction is based on PC/Windows versions of the software.
Adobe Creative Cloud
We will primarily use Adobe Illustrator and Photoshop in this course, though students are encouraged to have access to
the whole suite of Adobe software, such as InDesign, and Acrobat.
You can download free trial software and find out more about online subscription licensing for Adobe products here:
http://www.adobe.com/downloads.html
Additional Software
You may require additional software for the course, such as AutoCAD, and various software to manage CNC operations
(if needed). Academic licensing for student use may be available for these software packages and UTSOA computers
also have them for limited student use. Your instructor will notify you of any additional software requirements as needed.
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is derived from
broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to
deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
     Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
            The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of inquiry
            The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and models,
             etc.) in the development of the design
            Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is asked; direct
             their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
     Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in companion
     courses.
            A strong and clearly stated design objective
            Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements – and
             sectional development
            Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through creative
             engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and environmental system
             integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
            Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and assembly
     Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final design
     presentation.
            Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
             displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation


Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of
Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-            Excellent
                Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language, conceptual
                rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what
                is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-         Above Average
                Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas
                and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all
                levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C            Average
                Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication and
                rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-      Poor
                Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
                appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F               Fail
                Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade
                will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X               Excused Incomplete
                Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time
                is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the
                Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed
                before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to the School of
                Architecture policy.
                Incomplete coursework must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester. ALL GRADES
                ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter
grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written
documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed due to
excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.If a student is late (10 minutes
after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the
instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding
lateness or absences; asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.


RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may
not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their
instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a
religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and
the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
HONOR CODE
"As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity."
UNIVERSITY CODE OF CONDUCT
"The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect towards peers and community."
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing
thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
         For immediate support
               o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                   M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
               o CMHC Crisis Line:
                   24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
         Free services at CMHC:
               o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
               o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
               o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
               o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or
schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally
and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer
students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is unavailable
by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B and BMC 3.390 | 512-471-3115. Appointments available M-F 8am-5pm.(Please leave
a message if she is unavailable)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the
Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of
the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the
needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a
necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not
leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studiomates
accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce material
consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with white bags. The
Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio and
fabrication coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab. All
unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the Technology Lab at the end of the
semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be reported to
the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel
right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.


EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
         Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
          fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
      Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
      Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In
          the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
SECURITY, SAFETY AND THE STUDIO
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the
needs of everyone. Please see your instructor if problems that you are unable to resolve on your own arise. All spraying of
fixative, spray paint or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio
that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Please be mindful not to admit any uninvited
visitors and keep all exterior doors locked after hours.
Be courteous. Be smart. Be safe.


Schedule (may be subject to change)
Week 1           Tuesday         1/21
                 Thursday        1/23    Introduction
Week 2           Tuesday         1/28    Module 1 begins
                 Thursday        1/30
Week 3           Tuesday         2/4
                 Thursday        2/6     Laser-cutting training starts
Week 4           Tuesday         2/11
                 Thursday        2/13    Laser-cutting training completed – all students
Week 5           Tuesday         2/18
                 Thursday        2/20    Module 1 ends           Pinup
Week 6           Tuesday         2/25    Module 2 begins
                 Thursday        2/27
Week 7           Tuesday         3/3
                 Thursday        3/5
Week 8           Tuesday         3/10
                 Thursday        3/12
Week 9           Tuesday         3/17    Spring Break
                 Thursday        3/19    Spring Break
Week 10          Tuesday         3/24
                 Thursday        3/26    Module 2 ends           Pinup
Week 11          Tuesday         3/31    Module 3 begins
                 Thursday        4/2
Week 12          Tuesday         4/7
                 Thursday        4/9
Week 13          Tuesday         4/14
                 Thursday        4/16
Week 14          Tuesday         4/21
                 Thursday        4/23
Week 15          Tuesday         4/28
                 Thursday        4/30
Week 16          Monday          5/4     Final Review
We will be meeting on T/Th 8-11am. Depending on the project, we will either meet on the 5th floor of the West Mall
Building, in the GOL Main Jury room, or in the studio space in Sutton attic. You will be notified at least a day before
where we will be meeting.
The schedule and location is for information purposes only and is subject to change by the instructor.
