MULTICULTURAL MESSAGES & AUDIENCES
ADV 336 | Fall 2018
Tuesdays & Thursdays 3:30 – 5 pm
CMA 3.114
Instructor: Deena Kemp
Contact: dkemp@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesdays/Thursdays 2 pm (and by appointment)
Course Overview
Although people of different ethnic, socioeconomic, sexual orientation, and religious backgrounds are
typically referred to as minorities, organizations are beginning to recognize multicultural groups as the
“new majority.” In some US cities minority groups are the majority population. Increasingly, individuals
identify with more than one cultural group, and, it is estimated that in the next 20 years 50 percent of
the country will identify as a person of color.
This course examines the implications of these trends for media campaigns targeting various cultural
groups. As the economic power of marginalized social groups continues to grow, strategies for
communicating with them are also shifting. Industries from sports and fashion to hospitality and health
care need to recruit culturally competent media professionals. As consumers, it is also important to
understand how these trends shape our experience.
We will trace the evolution of strategies used to engage multicultural audiences, analyze current
advertising and public relations campaigns directed at diverse audiences, discuss the role of marketing
communications in reinforcing social dynamics or promoting cultural consciousness, and explore the
ways in which multicultural audiences have actively influenced industry trends.
Learning Objectives
    § Define key concepts related to multiculturalism and campaign development
    § Identify and describe characteristics of multicultural consumer groups
    § Demonstrate understanding of how multicultural issues are relevant to media campaigns
    § Explore the ways diverse audiences experience and engage industry marketing efforts
    § Analyze and develop strategies for connecting with multicultural audiences
Format and Expectations
Class sessions will combine lectures and media presentations with discussion and in-class activities.
Readings will draw on content from academic, industry and news publications. Students should
complete all readings in advance of the assigned class session and be prepared to participate in class
discussion and exercises. Attending each class is essential for doing well in this course.
Textbook
Mueller, B. (2008). Communicating with the multicultural consumer: Theoretical and practical perspectives. Peter
Lang.
Supplemental Materials
                                                        1


Additional resources and course materials will be posted on the course Canvas site in advance of each
class session. I recommend book marking this site and checking it frequently:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1226677
Assessments
In-class activities (10%). Short individual and group exercises to help you apply your understanding of
the material, engage your classmates and reflect on cultural perspectives outside of your own. (Learning
Objectives 1 – 5)
Reflection Paper (10%). Interview two people who identify with an underrepresented cultural group
different from your own. They could be other students, faculty members, or the barista at your favorite
coffee shop. To prepare for your interviews, conduct background research on this cultural group as an
audience or consumer segment. In your interviews, ask questions about their perceptions of advertising
targeting the group they identify with. In what contexts do they see these messages? How would they
evaluate them? Write a two-page paper comparing their responses and reflecting on your experience
conducting the interviews. (Learning Objective 4)
Mid-term Exam (30%). Covers key concepts and their application to audiences and campaign examples
discussed in the first seven weeks of the semester. (Learning Objectives 1 – 3)
Case analysis (20%). Select a contemporary campaign that appears to target one or more cultural
groups. Provide an overview of the campaign strategy and outcome and conduct an in-depth analysis of
the strengths and weaknesses of this approach based on the cultural concerns discussed in readings and
lecture notes. Identify the concepts you apply and why, and make recommendations for improvements
or additions to the campaign’s strategy. (Learning Objectives 3 & 5)
Creative Brief & Presentation (30%). You will work in groups to identify an untapped consumer group for
an assigned product or service. You may select a group discussed in class or another underrepresented
cultural group—provide a rationale for your choice. Conduct situational analyses and audience research,
including trends for marketing to this group, their media and product use, consumer buying preferences,
and relevant cultural values. Use this information to develop a message strategy applying the concepts
and cultural competencies introduced in this course. This assignment will be completed in stages with
several deadlines before the final presentation. You will be evaluated on the final brief, your
presentation format and skills, and your evaluations of each other. (Learning Objectives 1 – 5).
Grading for this Course
 Percentage                  Grade                      Percentage                 Grade
 94% or higher               A                          74 – 76%                   C
 90 – 93%                    A-                         70 – 73%                   C-
 87 – 89%                    B+                         67 – 69%                   D+
 84 – 86%                    B                          64 – 66%                   D
 80 – 83%                    B-                         60 – 63%                   D-
 77 – 79%                    C+                         59% or lower               F
                                                      2


Tentative Course Schedule
 Date             Topic
 Thurs. 8/30      Course Introduction
 Tues. 9/4        America’s Cultural Demographic
 Thurs. 9/6       Cultural Concepts
 Tues. 9/11       Implications for Advertising & Public Relations
                  Campaigns & Audiences
 Thurs. 9/13      Hispanics
 Tues. 9/18       African Americans
 Thurs. 9/20      Asian Americans
 Tues. 9/25       Native Americans
                  Reflection paper due
 Thurs. 9/27      Interracial Relationships
 Tues. 10/2       Social Class
                  Final project groups assigned
 Thurs. 10/4      Social Class
 Tues. 10/9       Gender
 Thurs. 10/11     Gender
 Tues. 10/16      MID-TERM EXAM
 Thurs. 10/18     Sexual Orientation
 Tues. 10/23      Age/Generational Groups
 Thurs. 10/25     Persons with a Disability
 Tues. 10/30      Religion
 Thurs. 11/1      Multilingualism
                  Case analysis due
                  Industry Considerations
 Tues. 11/6       Multicultural Teams: Recruiting & Managing
 Thurs. 11/8      Cultural Appropriation, Social Reinforcement
 Tues. 11/13      Brand Loyalty, Social Responsibility
 Thurs. 11/15     Emerging Markets & Businesses
 Tues. 11/20      Politics, Education, Health
 Thurs. 11/22     NO CLASS: THANKSGIVING BREAK
 Tues. 11/27      The Global Context
 Thurs. 11/29     Cultural Collisions, Activist Audiences
 Tues. 12/4       Social Media
 Thurs. 12/6      TBD
 TBD              Group Presentations
                                                     3


Student Rights & Responsibilities
    § You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    § You have a right to respect.
    § You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    § You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    § You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    § You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
         learning environment.
    § You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
         isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    § You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
         the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
    § You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
    § Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to
         it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    § You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
         excluded.
    § You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
         these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Statement of Respect and Inclusivity
You are expected to contribute to an inclusive and respectful class environment. Students of all
backgrounds are to be treated fairly and with honesty, integrity, and respect. We will cover sensitive
issues in class. Civil discourse, reasoned thought, sustained discussion, and constructive engagement
without degrading, abusing, harassing, or silencing others is required of all students.
Names and Personal Pronouns
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to instructors with the student’s legal name. I will gladly
honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this
preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not
your own (or that you have used in a previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be
guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be
found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
                                                       4


Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your email address. You should check your
e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with
university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies
and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Other Absences
You may miss up to two class sessions without penalty. If you must miss class or a group meeting time,
you are responsible for getting caught up on what you missed by contacting me via e-mail or during
office hours or working with a classmate to get notes, etc. Participation activities done during class
cannot be made up (except for absences related to religious holidays). Assessments due during any class
sessions you miss will be considered late if not submitted by the start of class that day.
Late Assessments
Generally, with the exception of absences for religious holidays, late assessments will not receive full
credit. Assessments submitted after the deadline will receive an additional half-grade deduction for
each subsequent day they are late. I understand that we all experience unexpected personal events that
limit our time and ability to get things done. In certain extenuating circumstances, a two-day grace
extension will be allowed. You must discuss this with me in advance (not the day the assignment is due),
and you will only be allowed to use this option one time. It is not available for the mid-term or final
group project.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
https://ugs.utexas.edu/vick/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from
learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we can develop a plan to
meet your need and the requirements of the course. The University also provides a range of resources
to help you achieve your academic and personal goals:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
                                                       5


needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible.
I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for
Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep, and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning
how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you
know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we
strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of
Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu
UT Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
IT@UT: https://it.utexas.edu
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
campus, go to: https://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
          become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
                                                       6


disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The Office of Campus Safety and Security provide the following recommendations regarding emergency
evacuation. For more information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety or call 512-471-5767.
     § Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
          buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
          assembling outside.
     § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     § Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
          first week of class.
     § In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     § Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
          found at: https://emergency.utexas.edu.
                                                         7
