                         UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                 DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
                                   SUMMER 19 SPN 327C
                       Advanced Grammar & Writing in Context
Instructor: Guillermina Ogando                         E-mail: mogando@austin.utexas.edu
Office: Sala del CIUC                                  Unique number: 84255
Office Hours: T, W, T 2:00-3:00
                            **This course will be taught in Spanish**
I. PREREQUISITE: SPN 611D, 612, or 312L
II. REQUIRED / RECOMMENDED (*) TEXTS:
    1. Course packet on Canvas.
    2. Iguina, Zulma and Eleanor Dozier. Manual de gramática: Grammar Reference for
        Students of Spanish. 5th ed. Boston: Heinle, 2013. (any edition) (*)
III. COURSE OBJECTIVES:
The objective of the Spanish language program addresses the basic tenet of a liberal arts
education: the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language in
society. This objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic
internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.
The Spanish language program focuses on the development of multilingual literacies through the
analysis and use of Spanish as a second language. The program focuses on the development of
three major types of competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):
    (1) linguistic competence (Spanish phonetics and phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon,
        discourse, etc.)
    (2) communication / interactional competence (sociocultural uses of the language,
        pragmatics, cultural background and perspectives)
    (3) metalinguistic competence (language as a conceptual, symbolic system)
Within the language program, SPN 327C is a bridge course between lower-division language
courses and upper-division courses in culture, literature, and linguistics. It is designed to:
    • help you inductively master grammar points of particular concern to speakers of English,
    • perfect your grammar skills through a variety of tasks designed to clarify grammatical
        points, including reading, writing, listening and speaking activities,
    • strengthen the clarity and organization of your writing, and
    • promote critical and integrative thinking skills.
                                                                                               1


IV. EXPECTATIONS:
This is an advanced language course and, as such, students are expected to:
    • have mastered basic grammatical concepts (agreement; verb conjugations: present, past,
         future; pronouns),
    • understand indicative, imperative, and subjunctive moods, and
    • read and write at high-intermediate level
If you are weak in any of these skills, it is your responsibility to (a) study them independently,
using textbooks from 1st and 2nd- year courses, (b) visit your instructor at the beginning of the
semester to discuss your concerns, and (c) work with a tutor in order to reach the expected basic
level that is necessary for you to understand and master advanced notions.
V. METHODOLOGY:
This course, unlike lecture-style courses, is highly student centered. Following a guided
inductive approach, you will analyze selected samples of both native and non-native discourse in
order to gain a deeper understanding of various linguistic features and communicative functions.
The majority of in-class and at-home activities will go beyond rote memorization and will
require you to think critically about written texts, as well as grammatical forms/constructions
found in authentic discourse in order to identify patterns and draw your own conclusions. This
approach is fundamental to our program, so please keep this in mind and be prepared to play an
active role in the learning process.
VI. COURSE FLAG
SPN 327C carries the Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
VII. ATTENDANCE POLICY:
Regular class attendance is required. Late work is not accepted nor are there make-ups for
missed work. However, a student who is absent from a class or examination for the observance
of a religious holy day or a university-sponsored activity may complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence, if proper notice of the planned absence has been given at least
two weeks in advance. Students who will be absent owing to a university-sponsored activity
must present a letter from the department or office sponsoring the event, giving the student’s
name, the dates of the expected absence(s), and the reason for the absence(s). After three
absences (three hours), your grade will be dropped 1% on a scale of 100 for each additional
absence.
VIII. ACADEMIC ACCOMMODATIONS:
I will be available to discuss appropriate academic accommodations that you may require as a
student with a disability. Before I can make course accommodations, you must provide
documentation from the Office of the Dean of Students-Services for Students with Disabilities.
(This is in compliance with the Rehabilitation Act of 1973-Section 504 and the Americans with
Disabilities Act/ADA.)


IX. SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY:
Please note that all graded work done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing
that appears to be the work of someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or
print source) or that appears to have been written in English and then translated by an online
translation program will not be accepted, and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on
the particular assignment. Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the university. For more information, visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
XI. PROBLEMS / QUESTIONS:
Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any problems, questions, or suggestions you have
relating to the class.
Course Instructor
Name: Guillermina Ogando Lavín
Office: Sala de profesores del CIUC
Office hours: T, W, T 2:00-3:00
E-mail: mogando@austin.utexas.edu
XII. GRADE BREAKDOWN & GRADING SCALE:
Exams (2)                           25%             Quizzes                                10%
Writing assignments (2)             25%             Participation                          5%
Homework                            5%              Final project                          20%
Portfolio                           10%
There is no curve or extra credit. No negotiation.
The following scale will be used to determine your final grade in the course:
93-100 = A                83-86.99 = B              73-76.99 = C                63-66.99 = D
90-92.99 = A-             80-82.99 = B-             70-72.99 = C-               60-62.99 = D-
87-89.99 = B+             77-79.99 = C+             67-69.99 = D+               0-59.99 = F
XIII. COURSE ASSESSMENTS:
Exams: There will be two exams in this course (one after chapter 3 and one after chapter 6).
The exams will test your knowledge of the grammar and vocabulary topics studied in class and at
home, your understanding of readings and cultural content, and your ability to comprehend and
analyze written and/or oral texts. You will not only be expected to use grammar correctly, but
also to comment on native and non-native discourse, explain uses of grammatical items, and use
appropriate metalinguistic terminology. Information about exams will be given in class and/or
posted on Canvas.
                                                                                                     3


Writing assignments: There will be two graded writing assignments in this course, which will
be assessed based on content, organization, and vocabulary, as well as your ability to accurately
include grammar topics from the course. For each assignment, you will turn in a first draft
(worth 70% of the grade) and a carefully edited final draft (worth 30% of the essay grade).
Detailed instructions will be given in class and/or posted on Canvas. You will have the option to
choose between two different text types for each of the two writing assignments: for writing
assignment 1 you will be able to hand in a descriptive text OR a narrative text and for writing
assignment 2 you will be able to hand in an expository OR an argumentative text. Please check
on the syllabus and with your instructor for the due dates.
Homework: You will have frequent reading assignments from the packet. You will also have
daily assignments such as written grammar exercises, text analysis, translations, section
summaries, etc. Make sure to dedicate a substantial amount of time outside of class in order to
receive a high homework grade and, more importantly, to keep up with the course material. The
general university policy expects 2 hours of work outside class for each hour of class
Portfolio: Throughout the semester you will maintain a portfolio, which will include a variety
of written assignments, such as reflections on your grammar skills and progress, short paragraphs
that will help prepare you for longer writing assignments, linguistic analysis, reactions to cultural
topics you have researched, etc. Your instructor will collect your portfolio work on a regular
basis.
Quizzes: There will be a variety of announced and “pop” quizzes throughout the semester.
They will relate to either material covered in the previous class session(s) and/or material
assigned for homework the night prior to the quiz. Quizzes will help you determine your
strengths and weaknesses in order to improve for major assignments and exams.
Participation: Although this is a grammar & composition class, you will be encouraged to
practice developing your oral Spanish skills. Your in-class participation (in Spanish) will be
graded following a rubric provided on Canvas.
Final Project: Throughout the semester, you will work on a project IN GROUPS. This culture-
based project will include independent research, as well as an interview with a native speaker.
Detailed instructions will be given in class and/or posted on Canvas.
This calendar could be modified.
                         SPN 327C: CALENDARIO DEL CURSO
Fechas                        Temas                                 Para entregar
11 julio      • Introducción al curso
12 de         • Capítulo 1: El arte a través del
julio.          tiempo y de las culturas
15de         CAPÍTULO 1:                                Quizzes en fechas variadas cada semana.
julio- 18    El arte a través del tiempo y de las       Algunos se realizarán en Canvas de tarea.


de julio   culturas II
                                                   * Borrador (la descripción) Fecha a
                                                   acordar
22 de      CAPÍTULO 2:                             * Propuesta para el proyecto final
julio 24   Los viajes, de propósito a consecuencia * Versión final (la descripción) Fecha a
de julio                                           acordar
El 25 de    • EXAMEN #1 (capítulo 1 y
julio es      sección del 2)                       * Portfolio 1
fiesta.
No hay
clase
29 de       • Trabajo en proyecto / revisión (a    * Cuestionario para el proyecto final
julio- 1      negociar)                            Fecha a acordar
de                                                 * Borrador (la narración) Fecha a acordar
agosto
5 de       CAPÍTULO 3:                             * Versión final (la narración)
agosto- 8  Sobre la identidad                      Fecha a acordar
de                                                 Revisión del proyecto final
agosto                                             * Portfolio 2
12 de      CAPÍTULO 3:                             * Borrador (la exposición) Fecha a
agosto-    Sobre la identidad                      acordar
16 de                                              * Proyecto final Fecha a acordar
agosto.     • EXAMEN #2 (capítulo 2 y              * Presentaciones del proyecto final
El 15 de      sección del 3)
agosto
es fiesta.
No hay
clase.
                                                                                            5
