 Course Name               Financial Planning for Wealth Management
 Course Number(s)          ACC 380K.24, FIN 372.3, ACC 378.3
 Professor                 Terri Holbrook, CPA, MST
 Term                      Spring 2020
                           Tues/Thurs 12:30-2:00pm – GSB 3.138 (02555,03360,02425)
 Meetings, Rooms, & Unique
                           Tues/Thurs 2:00-3:30pm – GSB 3.138 (02560,03365,02430)
 Numbers
                           Tues/Thurs 3:30-5:00pm – GSB 3.138 (02565,03370,02435)
 Office and Hours          CBA 4M.208; Tues/Thurs 5:00-6:00pm or by appointment
                           Terri.Holbrook@mccombs.utexas.edu
 Professor Contact
                           office phone 512-471-2888
                           John Hunt john.hunt@mba20.mccombs.utexas.edu
 Teaching Assistant        Office hours are Wednesdays, 9-10am and 5-6pm in CBA 4.304A
GENERAL COURSE INFORMATION
                           A survey of personal financial planning and wealth management, which
                           includes insurance and risk management, investments, income tax
                           planning, retirement planning and estate planning. Opportunities will be
 Course Description        provided to learn financial planning strategies, to develop research
                           techniques and methods of analysis in the personal financial planning
                           process. This course is focused on private wealth management, as
                           opposed to institutional wealth management.
                           This course is designed for undergraduate and graduate Accounting and
                           Finance majors. Prerequisites include ACC 311, or equivalent; FIN 357, or
                           equivalent. ACC 364, or concurrent enrollment is beneficial, but not
 Prerequisites             required. It is expected that students are proficient in (1) basic statistics, (2)
                           basic accounting and financial statement analysis, and (3) basics in time
                           value of money. Students should have working knowledge of Excel
                           spreadsheet program.
                           After completing this course, students should:
                                1. Have an understanding of the Financial Planning profession and
                                    the role of a financial planning advisor.
                                2. Possess a basic knowledge of the economic, legal and political
                                    environment that affects the financial services industry.
                                3. Be able to analyze personal financial statements and utilize
                                    budgeting techniques to meet cash flow needs and financial goals.
 Learning Objectives            4. Know how to incorporate risk management techniques to protect
                                    assets, standard of living and wealth.
                                5. Have a working knowledge of the various retirement plans, social
                                    security benefits and other vehicles available to fund retirement
                                    needs.
                                6. Understand basic investment topics (including investment types,
                                    risk and return, diversification, passive versus active management)
                                    and specific investment strategies necessary to achieve realistic
                                    goals.


                           7. Understand basic tax planning fundamentals for individuals and
                                how taxes affect investment, retirement and estate decisions.
                           8. Know the basic estate documents, probate issues and how various
                                trusts are used in estate planning.
                           9. Be able to identify strengths and weaknesses in financial situations
                                and opportunities for problem solving.
                           10. Have the ability to utilize technology tools, specifically Excel, to
                                build models, manipulate data and produce visual tools to solve
                                financial planning problems.
                       There is no textbook required for this course. The Canvas course site
                       contains modules with all PowerPoint slide decks, articles and other
 Resources and Reading
                       resource materials. The schedule at the end of this syllabus includes
                       topics that will be covered on each date.
COURSE POLICIES
                       Students will be evaluated through a combination of assignments, exams,
                       and a qualitative “professionalism” grade. Course grades will be
                       determined from the following allocation:
                       First exam (18%)
                       Second exam (18%)
 Grading               Third exam (18%)
                       Assignments (36%)
                       Professionalism; described below (10%)
                       A plus or minus grading scale will be used to assign final grades, with an
                       expected distribution curve around an average GPA of 3.3 to 3.6
                           1. The exams will be administered during class time on the days
                                outlined in the syllabus. You must take the exam on the
                                designated date/time. If an extraordinary event (death in
                                immediate family, illness requiring hospitalization, etc.), contact me
                                before the exam and I will resolve on an individual basis.
                           2. Exams will test the material covered since the last exam; however,
 Exams                          due to the integrated nature of the material, there may be a slight
                                comprehensive element to each exam.
                           3. Exam format is multiple choice and checkbox. Students will be
                                informed of the materials that are permitted in each exam.
                           4. There is no Final Exam.
                       Throughout the semester students will be assigned tasks to apply the
                       material that we are learning through an Excel worksheet analysis,
                       research activity or memorandum writing. Most of these assignments will
                       be performed and submitted in pairs. Information and due dates of these
 Assignments           assignments will be communicated in class and posted on Canvas. Each
                       assignment will be allocated points, students are permitted to drop 3
                       assignment grades and the total contribution to the course grade of all
                       assignments is 36%.


                         In calculating your final grade, 10% will come from your display of
                         professionalism in my class. This discretionary evaluation will be based
                         upon the following:
                              ▪    Class attendance – see below
                              ▪    Participating in class discussions
Professionalism               ▪    Evidence of preparedness by responding to class questions
                              ▪    Courteous consideration of classmates
                              ▪    Showing respect to classmates by following electronics policy
                                   described below
                              ▪    Contributing to the learning environment of the classroom
                         You are expected to attend all classes and absences will be noted. You
                         should contact me in advance to request an excused absence if you have
                         an emergency or important appointment. If a student has more than 2
                         unexcused absences, he/she will lose all Professionalism points. It is in
Class Attendance
                         your best interest to attend class and be prepared. If you must miss a
                         class, it is your responsibility to contact another student to get the lecture
                         notes and other materials that you missed.
                         Please turn off all cell phones and music devices. Tablets may be used
                         only to take notes and view class materials and must be in a flat position.
Electronics Policy
                         Laptops are allowed ONLY on days required for classroom activities.
                         Advance notice will be given when students should bring laptops to class.
                         This course will use the Canvas education management system found at
                         www.canvas.utexas.edu. All important information, including the syllabus,
                         class slides, additional reading materials, and assignments will be posted
Canvas and Communication
                         there. I may communicate important information via announcements or
                         messages on Canvas and students may also communicate with me
                         through Canvas or email.
                         The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic
                         dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to
                         scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
                         Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
                         http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics.aspx. By teaching
                         this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described
                         in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all
                         student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of
                         the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is
                         unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Policy on Scholastic
                         Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
Dishonesty
                         to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
                         and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the
                         individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our
                         academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
                         You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
                         http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University
                         policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further
                         elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.


                           Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency
                           evacuation, provided by the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
                           471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
                                ▪ Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin
                                    campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
                                    activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
                                    assembling outside.
                                ▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and
                                    building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door
                                    may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Campus Safety                   ▪ Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the
                                    instructor in writing during the first week of class.
                                ▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
                                    class instructors.
                                ▪ Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the
                                    following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
                                    Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
                                ▪ Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
                                ▪ Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and
                                    emergency procedures can be found at:
                                    http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                           If you have a complaint regarding your grade on an exam, please discuss
                           with me as soon as possible after the exam. I will not consider any grade
                           changes if brought to my attention more than three days after exam results
Student Grievance
                           are returned to you.
Procedures
                           If a student has a grade grievance on his/her final course grade, the
                           student must follow the specified procedures established by the University.
                           Please refer to the academic calendar for the last day to drop/add a course
                           without financial or academic penalty. It is the student's responsibility to
                           handle withdrawal requirements from any class. You must do the proper
                           paperwork to ensure that you will not receive a final grade of "F" in a
Drop/Add, Withdrawal or
                           course if you choose not to attend the class once you are enrolled.
Incomplete policy
                           If a student fails to complete this course for illness or other reason deemed
                           adequate, I will use my discretion to assign a grade of I (Incomplete). This
                           will be handled on an individual basis.
                           By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
                           fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you
Religious Holy Days        must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
                           order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
                           complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                           The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
                           academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
Students with disabilities information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259,
                           http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/


COURSE SCHEDULE (may change with adequate notice to students)
 DATE           TOPIC                                          ASSIGNMENT
                General principles of financial planning, the
 T-Jan 21
                process and profession
                External environment, including economic
 TH-Jan 23      concepts, economic indicators, legal and
                political issues that affect the FP industry
                Internal environment, including client life
                                                               Debt analysis and Mortgage
 T-Jan 28       cycle; using personal financial statements and
                                                               evaluation
                cash flow budgets to evaluate personal debt
                Amount and sources of education funding;
 TH-Jan 30      using personal financial statements and        Education funding
                budgets to determine education funding
 T-Feb 4        Fixed income security investing
 TH-Feb 6       Equity security investing                      Equity earnings reports
                Equity options and derivatives; passive vs.
 T-Feb 11
                active management; ETFs vs. mutual funds
                Alternative investments-hedge funds, PE and
 TH-Feb 13      VC funds, REITs and MLPs; Investment policy    Risk tolerance
                statement and risk assessment
                Measuring investment return and portfolio risk
                                                               Portfolio analysis for asset
 T-Feb 18       using CAPM and benchmarks; asset
                                                               allocation and risk analysis
                allocation and diversification
                No class. Holbrook office hours. Time to
 TH-Feb 20
                work on portfolio analysis assignment
                Risk assessment; hedging and monetizing a      Hedging and monetize single
 T-Feb 25
                single stock position                          stock
 TH-Feb 27      EXAM I
                Risk exposure and life insurance needs
 T-Mar 3                                                       Life insurance needs analysis
                analysis
                Life insurance products; business and
 TH-Mar 5
                investment use of life insurance
                Disability, long-term care and medical
 T-Mar 10
                insurance policies; Medicare gap
                Property, casualty and umbrella liability
 TH-Mar 12
                insurance
 T-Mar 17       Spring Break
 TH-Mar 19      Spring Break
 T-Mar 24       Taxation of investments                        Gain/Loss of capital assets
                Income tax fundamentals; basic individual
 TH-Mar 26                                                     2019 Tax formula
                formula
                Taxation of Personal activities; earned income
 T-Mar 31
                and employment taxes
 TH-Apr 2       Taxation of various business entities


T-Apr 7   Tax planning maxims; dealing with the IRS
TH-Apr 9  EXAM II
          Retirement needs analysis; sources of         Financial analysis of retirement
T-Apr 14
          retirement funding; qualified plans           needs
          Employee stock options; Traditional and Roth
TH-Apr 16 IRAs; Asset allocation in Retirement Plans;
          Target Date funds; Distributions and RMDs
          Social Security benefits; Reverse mortgages;
T-Apr 21
          annuities as tool for retirement funding
          Probate process; proper titling of assets;
TH-Apr 23
          estate documents
T-Apr 28  Federal estate and gift tax system            Estate tax calculation
TH-Apr 30 Wealth transfer, asset inheritance            Inheritance of IRA
          Estate tax planning; various types of trusts;
T-May 5
          planning techniques
TH-May 7  EXAM III
