                          Inside the Music Industry
                      University of Texas at Los Angeles
                                    RTF n348 (73495)
                                    COM n324 (72460)
                                      SUMMER 2019
Class meetings:                     M 6:30 - 10:00 p.m., Denius UTLA Center
Instructor:                        Drew Ferrante (drewferrante@utexas.edu)
Phone:                             310-612-1712
Office hours:                      Mondays 4 - 6 p.m. by appointment (UTLA Center)
Course Overview:
The Music Industry, like music itself, is constantly changing and adapting. It’s a 50+ Bil-
lion dollar international industry that creates timeless songs and worldwide superstars.
But unlike many other industries, passion plays a big role in its success. Since it’s an in-
dustry based on an art form, who’s to say what deserves to succeed or fail? It’s got su-
perstars with limited talent cashing in, while incredibly talented people struggle to make a
living. There are no rules to success, and the targets change with every new hit single that
climbs up the charts.
This course will walk you through the ins and outs of all of the aspects that make up this
exciting business. It will give each student a better understanding of how the industry
works and where opportunities exist. It will give valuable insight and knowledge to those
looking to be successful recording artists, those looking to have a career inside the music
industry, or anyone simply looking to get a better understanding of how the industry real-
ly works.
Each student enters this course with a variety of interests. You might aspire to be a suc-
cessful singer, hit songwriter, music producer, or an artist manager. Maybe you’re inter-
ested in Music Supervision or a career that walks the line between music and Film/Tele-
vision. Some of you just may want to know more about the music business in general, or
how the constantly changing trends in technology affect how revenue is generated. I will
cover all areas of interest cultivated from the students that enroll.
The Course Objective:
The overall objective is for each of you to gain a more comprehensive knowledge of how
the music industry works and how you might see yourself playing a future role in it, even
if you never thought the music industry was a place where you could have a successful
career.


Objectives: By the end of this course, you should be able to;
* Trace the history and evolution of revenue models of the Music Industry
* Compare and contrast the revenue models of Radio and Television
* Explain the composition and importance of each major division of the Music Industry
* Analyze structure, content, and production of hit songs to identify “hit potential”
* Evaluate the effectiveness of music placements in film and TV
* Identify how digital technologies are affecting traditional Music Industry practices
* Outline the multiple tiers of revenue sources for touring artists
* Explain how artists and publishers generate revenue through publishing licenses
 (And more!)
The Course Structure:
Let’s face it, music is fun, inspiring, sexy and star-studded. How hard can it be to write a
three-minute song, record it, release it, get it out to the masses and become the next big
thing? You’ll find out….
We’ll bring in incredibly talented, successful and animated guest speakers such as record
company executives, music marketing executives, tour marketing professionals, music
producers and more. They’ll share their expertise and career experience with you as to
what they do on a daily basis, how they make a difference in their respective field, and
how they got to where they are today. You will have an opportunity to hear directly from
those who have helped create music and shape the industry!
Each student needs to come prepared to discuss how music affects you, how you con-
sume it, what you like and dislike, where you think music is headed and why.
You are the future of our industry, and it’s your ideas and insight that will help shape the
music business for years to come.
Each week we will explore a particular area of the music world. Each of these areas could
be the entire 14 week course, but instead will be discussed in one class as an overview.
Come prepared and ready to engage. This is a lecture class, which includes audio and
visual presentations, but I certainly encourage your involvement, questions and thoughts.
Course requirements:
1.      * Attendance and participation in class meetings, online discussions and activities
2.      * Ten Written Assignments
3.      * Ten Online Music Research Entries
4.      * Ten current relevant Music Industry news Online Discussions
5.      * Reading of all assigned materials or reviewing of video content before class
6.      * Questions for guest speakers (contingent upon confirmation of speakers)
7.      * Midterm examination
8.      * Final Presentation with Summary paper


Course Grading:                                        Due Date
Written Assignments (20%)                              Ongoing
Research/Industry Topics (15%)                         Ongoing
Midterm Exam (25%)                                     July 1st
Final Presentation/Summary (25%)                       July 29th
Attendance/Participation (15%)                         Ongoing
Grading Scale:
A       100% - 94%                      C              <77% - 74%
A-      <94% - 90%                      C-             <74% - 70%
B+      <90% - 87%                      D+             <70% - 67%
B       <87% - 84%                      D              <67% - 64%
B-      <84% - 80%                      D-             <64% - 60%
C+      <80% - 77%                      F              <60% - 0%
Class Materials:
Reading materials and video content will be made available on Canvas.
Here are some online resources to keep current with the industry during this course:
Hits Daily Double              http://www.hitsdailydouble.com
Digital Music News             http://www.digitalmusicnews.com/
Billboard Magazine             http://www.billboard.com
All Access                     http://www.allaccess.com
Spotify Streaming              http://www.spotify.com
BuzzAngle 2018 Year End Music Report (will be distributed to class via Canvas)
Not required, but great reads: (Most are available in the UTLA Center)
All You Need to Know About the Music Business
By Donald S. Passman
What They'll Never Tell You About the Music Business: The Myths, the Secrets, the Lies (& a Few
Truths)
by Peter That
The Plain and Simple Guide to Music Publishing
By Randall D. Wine
Confessions of a Record Producer: 10th Anniversary Edition
By Moses Avalon


Course Schedule:
The schedule for this semester’s ITMI course is listed below. Due to the nature of the in-
dustry, classes may change with very short notice. I will let you know as soon as a guest
speaker is confirmed, so that you may do research on that person and submit potential
questions via Canvas. Being properly prepared for a guest speaker is essential for class
participation.
                       ITMI SUMMER 2019 SCHEDULE
                         This syllabus is the general plan for this course.
         * Changes in Class Plans, Assignments, or Readings may be necessary due to in-
                           dustry trends or Guest Speaker availability.
PLEASE NOTE:
•   All Assignments need to be completed and submitted on time or are subject to point
    deductions. Actual due dates will be posted on Canvas.
•   Additional short journalistic/trade articles related to developing industry news may be
    assigned over the course of the semester.
•   Always refer to Canvas for listed materials and links.
Week 1                         Introduction, The Power OF Music and IN Music
June 3 (M)                     Introduction, course overview, review syllabus,
                               The Power of Music Itself - Memory, Medical, Cognitive
                               The Powers in the Music Industry
                               Assignment 1: Castaway Music Choices (Canvas)
                               View: The History of Radio, History Channel Doc.
                               Online:
                                       Music research submission
                                       Music news discussion
Week 2                         Radio and Broadcasting
June 10 (M)                    Radio - History and Evolution
                               Radio Today - Programming, Ratings, Revenue
                               Music Research, Data, and the tools
                               Assignment 2: The Next BIG Hits (Canvas)
                               Read: The Science Behind Pop Hits (Article - Canvas)
                               Online:
                                       Music research submission
                                       Music news discussion


Week 3        HIT Songs - What MAKES a HIT?
June 17 (M)   The Science of HIT Songs
              Songwriting and Song Structure
              Music Production - An equal element in the equation
              Assignment 3: Song Structure and Production Analysis
              Read: BuzzAngle 2017 Year-End Music Summary/Canvas
              Online:
                     Music research submission
                     Music news discussion
Week 4        The Recording & Publishing Industries
June 24 (M)   The Power of the Major Labels
              STREAMING and the changing Revenue Model
              Radio Promotion/Leverage
              Music Publishing
              Music Licensing
              Copyrights and Public Domain
              REVIEW for Mid-Term Exam
Week 5A       BET Awards - Live 4 Hour event
June 30 (Sun) LIVE Online Discussion - 4pm - 8pm PT
Week 5B       Mid Term Exam, Music in MEDIA
July 1 (M)    Mid-Term Exam (First Half of Class)
              Music In Media & Awards
              How music is used in Film, TV, Advertising, Video Gaming
              Assignment 4: Music in Media Choices Summary
              Online:
                     Music research submission
                     Music news discussion
Week 6        The Music Touring Industry
July 8 (M)    Touring Revenue Streams
              Tour Marketing
              Music Festivals & Festival Production/Marketing
              Assignment 5: Music Festival Summary
              Online:
                     Music research submission
                     Music news discussion
                     Questions for guest speaker


Week 7                           Artist Management, DIY & Crowdfunding
July 10 (W)                      Artist Management - Potential Guest Speaker
                                 Artist Development
                                 The Do-It-Yourself World
                                 Crowdfunding
                                 Assignment 6: Submit Choices for Final Presentation
                                 Online:
                                         Music research submission
                                         Music news discussion
Week 8                           The Evolving Music Industry
July 15 (M)                      Using Data, & Analytics in Music
                                 Industry Trends
                                 Music Streaming - Revenue and Royalties
                                 Review for Final Presentations
                                 Assignment: Final Presentation Summary
Week 9                           Final Presentations, Conclusion
July 22 (M)                      Final Presentations
                                 Course Wrap Up
Incomplete Assignments: An Incomplete grade will only be given under special circum-
stances involving health issues, a family emergency, or other unique situations, and will
only be approved by the instructor with proper documentation.
Attendance and Participation: This grade is worth 15% of your overall grade, and is
determined by regular class attendance and participation in class discussions and activi-
ties, as well as other potential assigned online discussions, entries and activities. Atten-
dance is mandatory, and will be taken at the beginning of each class session. For the se-
mester, your OVERALL grade will be reduced FIVE percentage points - a half letter
grade - with each additional unexcused absence beyond the first THREE absences.
Excused absences include absences for which notification is received in advance for re-
ligious holidays or absences related to serious illness and documentation is provided.
Please provide sufficient notice if you have to miss a class due to a religious holiday.
Notes or classroom presentation materials will only be available in class, so check with
other students for materials if you miss a class. Assignments will be posted on Canvas.


Classroom expectations and electronics policy: Please be considerate during class – no
talking, reading, surfing the Internet, texting, etc. Respect the instructors, guest speakers,
and your classmates, and do not talk while other students are participating in discussion
or asking a question.
No devices should be visible or in use during guest speakers’ visits. Repeated usage of
laptops or mobile devices in class will result in a deduction of points from your atten-
dance and participation grade. Mobile devices must be turned off when class begins. Lap-
top computers can only be used in class with prior approval from the instructor.
Midterm Exam: The Midterm exam is worth 25% of your overall grade, and gives you
the opportunity to show your understanding of the material covered during the first half
of the semester. It will cover all assigned readings and/or media, lectures by guest speak-
ers, and material covered in class discussions. It may include multiple choice, matching,
identification, and short answer/essay questions. Additional information about the exam
will be provided in class the week before the exam. Students may be required to bring
their laptop/tablet to class to take the exam through Canvas (if that method is chosen).
Music Research Entries: Over the course of the semester, you will be required to com-
plete TEN music research entries after completing online music evaluations. These en-
tries should be no more than one page, single-spaced, and should include a short para-
graph about each song tested for that research session. These will be submitted in Canvas.
Music News Topics Online Discussion: Over the course of the semester, you will be re-
quired to complete TEN music news topics entries for online discussions. These entries
should consist of three current relevant music industry news topics that you are interested
in discussing in class, and will be submitted as an online discussion in Canvas.
Final Presentation/Summary: This is worth 25% of your overall grade, and will be the
combination of a 5-minute class presentation (20%), and a 2-page single-spaced summary
paper (5%). Full details will be disclosed the week of the Mid Term exam.
Late policy:
    • If an assignment is not turned in on time via Canvas, it is late. Assignments turned
        in late will be subject to a 10 percent grade deduction PER DAY.
        Therefore, assignments that are one day late START at 90/100 before grading, two
        days late START at 80/100 before grading, etc.
    • All Final Summary papers will be penalized one letter grade for each day late. If
        the paper is not turned in on time via Canvas, it is late.
    • Failure to take the exam on the scheduled dates will result in an automatic zero.
        Absences from the exam are excused only in the case of serious illness and other
        emergencies with documentation, as well as pre-excused religious holidays.
Email correspondence: In this course, email may be used as a means of communication
with students. You will be responsible for checking your email regularly for class work
and announcements. The majority of messaging will be sent through Canvas.


Religious Holidays: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination
schedules. If you miss an assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious
holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reason-
able time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that you
must notify your instructor at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates
you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsi-
bility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through in-
tegrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagia-
rism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to
avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes,
but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement
or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the
same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to
them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student’s learning experience and readi-
ness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on
scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services website at http://deanofs-
tudents.utexas.edu/sjs
A Statement About Plagiarism
Plagiarism is “the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any means
material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas,
illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that
material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit,” or in plain English, “us-
ing someone else’s work in your own academic work without giving proper credit.” Ex-
amples of plagiarism include copying a friend’s or classmates work; buying or borrowing
papers; cutting and pasting blocks of text without providing documentation of the original
source; borrowing images and other media without documentation of the original source;
publishing work on the web without permission of the creator; careless paraphrasing;
poor documentation of sources; quoting excessively; failure to use your own ideas or
words. Should plagiarism be detected in your work, you will immediately earn a failing
grade for the course. You may appeal the decision through appropriate university chan-
nels.


Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accom-
modations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Please inform me within the first two weeks of class if you have a physical, learning,
sensory, or psychological disability and need accommodation to take part in or to com-
plete the required work for this course.
Instructor Bio:
Drew Ferrante
For the past three decades, Drew Ferrante has been instrumental in achieving success for
various companies in almost every division of the Music Industry. A "lifer" in the world
of music, Drew became a musician at an early age, played in bands throughout his teens,
and ran his own successful professional recording studio by the time he was 20. While
engineering and producing countless regional acts, his own band was signed to a major
recording contract, and he was hired to co-produce their major label debut album which,
unfortunately, was never released.
Desperate to understand how the major labels operated, he switched gears, spending the
next 12 years “inside” the music industry, with various A&R, Marketing and Promotion
positions at MCA Records, Columbia Records, Chaos Recordings, The Work Group, and
Epic Records. He was then recruited to help rebuild and revive the Walt Disney Compa-
ny's Hollywood Records label. After several years, and a successful relaunch of the Dis-
ney Music Group, he was offered a unique opportunity to help build and run the indepen-
dent Connoisseur Records label.
With piracy causing record labels to downsize, he opted to switch to the tech-driven side
of the industry, joining Yangaroo, Inc., the Entertainment Industry’s leading Digital Me-
dia Distribution company, where he continues to assist Major Entertainment companies to
make the most out of digital distribution. As their Senior Vice President of Business De-
velopment, he has been instrumental in the creation of their Yangaroo Awards Solutions,
and has helped secure deals for The Grammy Awards (NARAS), The Golden Globes
(HFPA), The Academy of Country Music Awards, The Emmy Awards (NATAS), the
MTV Music and Video Awards, the BET Awards, and many more, moving them from
traditional paper balloting to a secure online streaming and voting solution.
In his “spare” time, he feeds his creative side as an Engineer, Producer, and Mixer, hav-
ing mixed or re-mixed several #1 songs by Miley Cyrus, Jesse McCartney, and Breaking
Benjamin.
