                                           Organizational Behavior
                                         MAN F336 | Summer 2020
                                               Professor Ed Shardlow
        Class:                              M-Th, 12:00 PM – 2:00 PM
        E-mail:                             edward.shardlow@mccombs.utexas.edu
        “Office” Hours:                     W, 2:00 PM – 3:00 PM, or by appointment
        Teaching Assistant:                 Ilana Friedman
        TA E-mail:                          ifriedman@utexas.edu
Course Description
When are employees satisfied with their jobs? What motivates them to succeed? Do those questions
have the same answer? How do employees make decisions, including taking morally questionable (or
worse) actions? What are the benefits and weaknesses of workplace phenomena such as power,
negotiations, and culture? How do organizational changes affect these dynamics? Every organization,
and every manager, faces these questions.
This course is an advanced survey course in organizational behavior designed to give you exposure to
essential theories and concepts for analyzing, understanding, and managing human behavior in
organizations. In this course we will tie concrete organizational situations (as reflected in cases) to
essential theories and effective management practices. In this course, we will investigate:
            •   Individual behavior in organizations, including personality, motivation, decision-
                making, and ethics
            •   Organizational and interpersonal issues, including teamwork, conflict, leadership, and
                power
Required Course Materials
    1. Text: Bauer and Erdogan (2015). Organizational Behavior (Adapted). Flat World Knowledge.
        Irvington, NY. https://students.flatworldknowledge.com/course/2592754
    2. Course packet: Available at the University Co-op.
    3. Additional (but REQUIRED) text: Sandel, Michael J. 2009. Justice: What’s the Right Thing
        to Do? ISBN 978-0375432505. Here’s an Amazon link to make it easier to find.


    4. Simulation materials: More information will be provided later in the course, but the cost is
         $15.
Attendance, Participation, and Professionalism – Building Your Brand
You may ask, why do I start here? Because I hope it will form the basis for everything else we do
together, and will maximize both the amount of material you learn in the class and your grade.
This is a course designed for business students. As I anticipate that you intend to enter the
professional world following your glorious (and, thanks to COVID, historically unusual) UT
experience, I’d suggest it’s time (if you haven’t already) for you to think about the professionalism
that will define you in the working world. When people hear your name, what do they think? Are you
a consistent, reliable contributor? Or are you unreliable, problematic, or contentious? Marketers call
the process of developing reputations “building a brand.”
What does that mean? Think WWIDITWARJ (“What would I do if this were a real job?”). How do
employers feel about missing work? Sometimes it’s inevitable: we get sick, have family emergencies,
etc. But, how would your employer react if you missed an assignment because of recreational
activities, or because you misunderstood a due date? Would you walk into a business meeting late, or
unprepared? Would you interrupt or speak down to those around you? Many do. At first, it may just
raise questions, but over time it defines who you are and the value you bring to the organizations.
Of course, other things are more important than work, and sometimes WWIDITWARJ allows for
deviation from the plan. COVID, for instance, has made our lives harder in a number of ways. (I, for
one, am trying to write a dissertation proposal from home—with three kids.) Like most managers, I’m
not heartless; I want you to succeed and at the same time I realize that there are other important things
in our lives. But, remember: WWIDITWARJ?
Along those lines, we will discuss topics in this class that can be quite challenging, intellectually and
emotionally. I expect that you may have differing views on these topics, and I hope that you will share
them. I bring this up for two reasons. First, please try to understand that my job as an instructor is to
push you out of your comfort zone a little, to help you see things in a different way. After all, in your
workplace not everybody will look, think, and act like you. If anything I (or someone else) say
offends you, please come talk to me about it. My intent is never to offend you, and my personal views
may be (and if I’ve offended you, likely are) drastically different from what you may think I
expressed in class. Second, our abilities as both business people and as citizens improve when we are
able to consider arguments with which we may not agree. This allows us greater perspective and a
more deliberate decision making process. However, personal attacks based on race, religion,
intelligence, etc., will absolutely not be tolerated. I am aware of no way to destroy your brand faster
than engaging in ad hominem assaults on your coworkers.
Build your brand, starting now.


Assignments
            1. Exams: Midterm (15%) and Final (20%)
The exams will cover material from lectures, assigned cases, and assigned readings. They will consist
of multiple choice, short answer, and/or essay questions.
Exams are during class time and will not be rescheduled, with three (and only three) exceptions: (a)
conflict with a religious holiday, per UT policy (see below), (b) a documented medical emergency,
and (c) a documented need for special accommodations. For a religious holiday, you are required to
inform me of this at least two weeks before the exam so that an alternate date can be arranged. For a
medical emergency or special accommodation, you must work with either the BBA Office (in the case
of a medical emergency) or the Services for Students with Disabilities Office. Do not approach me
about either of these issues without having spoken to the appropriate office!
To make sure you are doing the very best you can in this course, I offer the following. If you score
better on the final than on the midterm exam, I will drop the midterm and add the weight to the final.
For instance, if you scored 77 on the midterm, but achieved an 86 on the final, I will score your 86 as
35% of your course grade and ignore the midterm. However, you must have completed the midterm in
order to qualify for this benefit.
            2. Quizzes - 10%
Because this is a summer class, we will be moving quickly. To help ensure that you are keeping up,
there will be 11 in-class quizzes throughout the semester. Some will test your understanding of the
reading, while others may be based on our in-class discussion or other material. I will drop your lowest
quiz score.
            3. Case Assignment – 10%
Case-based learning is an important pedagogical tool to help students apply course concepts to the real
world. To give you experience in analyzing a case based on the facts presented, you will submit a
written response to the Lincoln Electric case (approximately 3-5 double-spaced pages). We will
discuss more about how to do this during the first week of class.
            4.   Ethics Paper - 15%
This course carries the Ethics and Leadership flag (see below). As part of the ethics portion of the
class, you will write an Ethics paper (approximately 3-5 pages in the length) that will be centered
on the Ethics text. More details about the assignment will be provided in the first week of the
semester. However, given the speed of the course in a summer session, you should begin reading
the book NOW to make sure you have time to adequately complete it and write the paper.
            5. Team Simulation - 20%
Toward the end of the semester, you will participate in a team-based computer simulation. The
simulation will allow you to implement the lessons from the course in a socially-distanced
environment.


The grade for this assignment will be broken down into two categories. Performance on the simulation
will account for 10% and a group report will account for 10%. More details about the simulation will
be provided later in the semester.
             6. Attendance, Participation, and Professional Conduct- 10%
Students are expected to attend class regularly and participate actively in discussion. Although I
would prefer to be in an actual classroom, COVID has made this impossible for the near term.
Accordingly, your attendance, participation, and attention will be monitored via your webcam during
class. In addition, I will use polls regularly in class, and the answers will be recorded. Attending class,
completing the participation polls, and participating in discussions (in both small groups and the larger
class) are some of the components of this part of the grade. The expectations of our workplace are that
everyone will be on time, well prepared, and willing to contribute.
A short word about speaking up in class. I understand that some of us are natural introverts and are
nervous about sharing in class. But, when you get into the professional world, you will be a more
valued employee if you learn to speak up with contributions and, as a corollary, to learn to omit the
comments that are not. Your time at McCombs gives you an opportunity to hone this skill in an
environment that is not immediately tied to your employer’s evaluation; please, take advantage!
             7. Extra Credit
I doubt there will be any opportunities for extra credit. If this occurs, however, the opportunity will be
announced in class and provided to all students equally. Extra credit is not offered upon request.
               TWO EXTREMELY IMPORTANT NOTES ABOUT ASSIGNMENTS
There are two requirements that will apply to all assignments. First, unless otherwise specifically
noted, all assignments are due BEFORE CLASS on the due date (noon Central time). Late
assignments will be docked 10% for every day late. The time recorded on Canvas is the official time,
and this penalty applies even if the assignment is 1 minute late. Plan to submit early to avoid
problems with connectivity.
And second, do not put your name on the assignments. Rather, please use only the numbers from your
EID. Why this policy? When I am grading, I will download all of the papers into a file, and then grade
them. Only after every paper has been graded will the grades be associated with the student. The lack
of names helps to ensure anonymity and minimizes the chance of bias.
Grading
This is a required course for all McCombs students; thus, it is subject to the BBA Grading
Guidelines, which was adopted by the Undergraduate Program Committee in 2013. I will seek to
assign grades as closely as possible to standard grading conventions (93%+ = A, 90-92.99% = A-
, etc.), but reserve the right to make adjustments—up or down—to meet the Guidelines, which
require that the average GPA for your class session should fall within 3.0-3.2 GPA.
Source of grades: Your grade is assessed based on your output on the assignments, not a personal


evaluation of you or the amount of effort you or I believe you put in. I am happy to meet with you
during office hours to discuss your performance and how you might improve. I am not as receptive
when I receive an email or visit at the end of the semester complaining that a seemingly minor
infraction cost you the grade you wanted.
Finally, a note about grade appeals: The grades you earn on each assignment and, consequently, in the
class, are carefully considered and informed by both my training and expertise and the quality of your
work. Thus, any lobbying efforts to improve your grade are unlikely to be successful. However, in the
case that you feel a particular assignment or exam answer has been overlooked, you may submit your
appeal in writing within one week of the grade being posted on Canvas. This writing should contain
your reason for believing the grade was inappropriate. If I believe there is merit to the claim, I will re-
grade the assignment with a blank slate; accordingly, the grade could go up or down. Please note that
the following reasons will never be considered grounds for re-examining: scholarship requirements
(academic, athletic, or otherwise); parental pressure; admission to the business school; job/internship
concerns; time or effort put into the assignment; etc.
Electronics Policy
COVID-19 has changed our world, at least for the foreseeable future. As you know, this class will be
entirely via Zoom. I will ask that you keep your cameras on, but microphones muted during class
time. My TA will be monitoring cameras to ensure you are paying attention during class time. There
are exceptions that should be obvious, limited, and temporary. It should go without saying that you
should refrain from doing other things during class time.
On a personal note, I mentioned earlier I have three children, the youngest of which is 4. I’ll be
honest: she likes to Zoom bomb. I will do what I can to prevent it, but it may happen at some point.
Please let me apologize in advance.
Ethics and Leadership Flag Note
This course carries the Ethics and Leadership flag. Ethics and Leadership courses are designed to
equip you with skills that are necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional
lives. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments
involving ethical issues and the process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations. In this
course, leadership and ethics are covered throughout chapters in the textbook, additional readings,
class discussions, and the ethics paper.
Plagiarism and Dishonesty
Speaking of ethics, plagiarism and dishonesty are extremely serious violations. In the real world,
either of these may get you fired and/or publicly disgraced. (Two high-profile examples:
https://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/11/us/correcting-the-record-times-reporter-who-resigned-leaves-
long-trail-of-deception.html. https://www.poynter.org/news/jonah-lehrer-remembers-moment-his-
career-was-shattered.) It might take a while for someone to discover the plagiarism, but they will.


     These include using quotes or information without citation, having someone else complete work for
     you, working together on individual assignments, and cheating on tests or other assignments.
     Please note that Canvas allows me to check your assignments for plagiarism. Instances of plagiarism
     or cheating will result in, AT THE VERY MINIMUM, a score of 0 on that assignment and a referral
     to the University. Depending on the nature of the infraction, I reserve the right to institute any other
     punishment, up to and including an F in the course.
     I understand that what constitutes plagiarism may vary depending on local norms, and that this may be
     particularly troublesome for some who are not as experienced in this area. Part of what you get at
     McCombs, whether an international student or not, is exposure to business in the United States. You
     will be graded accordingly. If you have any questions, please ask!
     Class Schedule
     Note that I reserve the right to modify these readings as we go along, but any such changes will be
     announced clearly in class. Anything below referring to “Chapter” is from the textbook; (CP)
     designates it can be found in the course packet.
   DATE           TOPIC                                 READING                                  ASSIGNMENTS
                                                                                                         DUE
6/4             Introduction     Class Syllabus
                                 Chapter 1: Organizational Behavior
                                 Guidelines for case analysis (CP)
6/8             Individuals      Complete Personality test (Do this first!)                         Personality test
                at Work          Chapter 2: Individual Differences and Perceptions                  (graded only on
                                 Chapter 3: Individual Attitudes and Behaviors                        completion)
6/9             Individual       Chapter 4: Theories of Motivation
                Motivation       Wolfgang Keller (CP)
6/10            Motivating       Chapter 5: Designing a Motivating Work Environment
                at Work          On the Folly of Rewarding A, While Hoping for B. (CP)
6/11            Decision         Chapter 6: Making Decisions Biases and Blunders
                Making           Biases and Blunders (CP)
6/15                             Lincoln Electric (CP)                                               Case write-up
6/16            Diversity        Chapter 7: Diversity in the Workplace
                                 The Consequences of Diversity in Multidisciplinary Work
                                 Teams (CP)


   DATE   TOPIC                             READING                         ASSIGNMENTS
                                                                                 DUE
6/17    Employment Business Law: The First Course, Chapters 27 (section 1 –
        Law          6 only) & 28 (CP)
                     EEOC v. Abercrombie & Fitch
                     https://www.supremecourt.gov/opinions/14pdf/14-
                     86_p86b.pdf
6/18    MIDTERM
         REVIEW
6/22    MIDTERM
          EXAM
6/23    Groups and   Chapter 8: Managing Groups & Teams
        Teams        The great conundrum – You vs. the team. (CP)
6/24    Conflict and Chapter 9: Conflict & Negotiation
        Negotiation  How management teams can have a good fight (CP)
                     Making Rational Decisions in Negotiations (CP)
6/25    Culture      Chapter 10: Organizational Culture
                     Influence without authority (CP)
6/29    Ethics       Values in Tension: Ethics Away From Home (CP)            Ethics paper
                     How Will You Measure Your Life? (Chapter 10 only –
                     CP)
                     The Case of the MBA Hackers (CP)
6/30    Leadership   Chapter 11: Leading People within Organizations
                     How leaders begin culture creation (CP)
                     Leadership that gets results (CP)
7/1     Power and    Chapter 12: Power and Politics
        Politics     The necessary art of persuasion (CP)
                     Managing Xerox’s Multinational Development Center
                     Case (CP)
7/2     Team         None
        Simulation
7/6     Simulation   None                                                     Group Paper
        debrief
7/7     Career       How Will You Measure Your Life? (Chapters 2-4 – CP)
        Management


   DATE           TOPIC                                         READING                                         ASSIGNMENTS
                                                                                                                          DUE
7/8             FINAL
                REVIEW
7/9             FINAL
                EXAM
                                       APPENDIX A – IMPORTANT POLICIES
                                                       Important Notifications
                                                      Students with Disabilities
     Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
     Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
     http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                                         Religious Holy Days
     By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
     observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order
     to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
     time after the absence.
                                                  Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
     The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both
     students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on
     Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have
     agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe
     all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class
     or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate
     University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
     the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of
     the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You
     should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the
     official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
     constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
                                                           Campus Safety
     Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of Campus
     Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
           • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when
                  a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
                                                               outside.
           • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that


  the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first week of
  class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
• Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
  University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 (or
  https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php).
• Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
  at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
