GRG 404E: Environmental Science: A Changing World)
Summer 2019
Lecture: MTWThF: 10:00 a.m.-11:30 a.m. PAR 308
Labs W: 1-4:30pm: RLP 3.102.
Instructor: Sam M. Krause, PhD
samkrause@utexas.edu
Department of Geography and the Environment
Office Hours: MTWThF 12:00-1:00pm or by appointment
Course Overview: Environmental science is directly linked with the most traditional parts of
Geography as a discipline, and in doing so, encompasses natural science, social science, and
environmental history. This course will provide a historical, geographical, and humanistic
framework by which we understand our environment, and as a group we will confront a plethora
of environmental issues that we face as a society in the Anthropocene. This course introduces
you to the complex relationship that humans have with the natural environment and the
biosphere over temporal and spatial scales. We will consider and grapple with the major global
environmental concerns that affect our planet and its residents from the perspectives of the
environmental sciences and quantitative thought. This summer, you will learn how scientists
monitor, evaluate, and predict changes in ecosystems, biodiversity, and ecosystem services. We
will critically assess the availability and sustainability of water and energy sources, review and
determine environmental contamination, and engage in discussion of the equity of current
environmental issues that divide and unite the planet.
By the end of this course, you will:
        Understand how the biosphere is linked to the earth as a system on a variety of temporal
         and spatial scales and comprehend the major mechanisms of environmental change.
        Be able to quantitatively assess and measure natural resource consumption and ecosystem
         response to pressures such as anthropogenic pollution.
        Recognize the parameters of human-induced and natural changes in the environment
        Develop essential tools for analyzing environmental problems in both the lab and field.
        Understand the methodology required to solve problems both from an environmental
         science and environmental management and conservation standpoint.
This course fulfills the requirements for 3 flags:
         1. Quantitative reasoning flag
                 a. Data analysis, statistics, probability
                 b. Focus on real-world problems
1|Page


         2. Writing flag
                 a. Emphasis on critical thinking
                 b. Immersion in academic literature
                 c. Scientific/technical writing
         3. Ethics and leadership flag
                 a. Investigating what is involved in making real-world ethical decisions
                 b. Practice arguing from alternative perspectives before asserting your own
Class Book (recommended not required)
Visualizing Environmental Science by Berg, Hager and Hassenzahl - 4th Edition
Additional readings on canvas!
Attendance
Students are expected to attend every lecture and lab. Note that lecture attendance is not
mandatory and does not count towards your grade, but regular attendance will increase
your probability of earning a higher grade overall. In other words, if you come to lecture,
your grades will get better! Lecture slides will be available on Canvas, but reading the
slides is not an adequate substitution for missing class. Lab attendance is mandatory. No
makeup lab assignments, except with a valid written excuse presented at least 2 weeks
in advance of the lab. Medical excuses must be presented to Dr. Krause within 24 hours
of the missed lab. There will be no makeup exams except for extreme and unforeseen
circumstances. Note that your lowest exam grade will automatically drop at the end of the
semester.
Grading
Exams: (3 tests and a final, 20% each of grade)
5 Labs (20% of grade, lowest drops)
Final Paper: 100 points, 15% of grade
5 Class Assignments, 5 points each, 5% of grade
Lab Reports, Essay Style, Deliverables:
There are 5 lab sessions in total (Labs W: 1-4:30om: RLP 3.102). Lab reports and final essay are
to be submitted electronically on Canvas. It is the student’s responsibility to ensure assigned
work is delivered in a timely fashion – this means ON TIME. Due to the size of the class, late
assignments will not be accepted.
Formal laboratory write-ups follow a strict structure. The following components must be
included:
1) Title
2) Abstract
3) Introduction
4) Methods
5) Results
2|Page


6) Discussion
7) References
Final Paper:
The final paper is a short research essay covering any subject of your choice related to the field
of environmental science. It is a good idea to run your topic by me before getting started to make
sure that your paper is of a reasonable scope.
The final paper is due on the last class day by midnight.
The required page count for the essay is 5-7 pages PLUS a minimum of 5 peer reviewed
references.
Final Paper Formatting
Lab reports and the final essay must be edited in the following format:
Font Size: 11-12
Font Style: Times New Roman
Line Spacing 1.5
Margins: Top 1’’; Bottom 1’’, Left 1’’, Right 1’’
***Page counts for any written assignments do NOT include bibliography / list of references,
tables, figures, photographs or any other supplementary materials.
The citation style should be consistent and follow a scientific format (examples given in class)
Academic Integrity: Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated. Students are expected to uphold
the University of Texas’ Academic Honor Code: As a student of The University of Texas at
Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.
        Intellectual integrity is expected in all work. Collaboration and the use of a wide range of
         references is encouraged, but any plagiarism, use of un-cited materials, or un-credited
         assistance will result in a recommendation of course failure. If you have any questions
         about what is acceptable and what is not, please ask. Also see:
         http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
        You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Integrity Policy which can be
         found at the following address:
         http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
        Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
         penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
         University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
         the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
         information, please visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at:
         http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct
         Violations of the UT honor code, including cheating or plagiarism, will result in: 1) a
         zero for the assignment/exam; 2) an assigned ‘F’ for the final grade; and/or 3) notification
3|Page


         to the UT Academic Judiciary Committee for further disciplinary measures.
         Exam rules:
              All bags and backpacks will be stored below your seat and out of reach.
              Smartphones and smart watches must be silenced (no vibrate or ring) and placed
                 inside your bag. They should not be in your pocket, on your body, or anywhere
                 accessible during the exam.
              No sunglasses. You can wear them at night, but not here.
              No books, notes, or any material that could give you an unfair advantage. This
                 includes digital and written materials.
              Baseball caps must be removed or worn backwards (bill in the back)
              Restroom breaks are not permitted unless for a medical emergency. In these
                 instances, your phone and laptop must be placed in the front of the room. You
                 must also sign out and in with Dr. Krause.
Make Up Exam Policy: There will be no make-up exams for the three regular examinations,
which is why I will automatically drop your lowest exam grade.
Communication: We all get hundreds of emails a day! I try my best to answer all emails within
a 48 hour period! Please help me keep organized by putting the course number in the subject line
of your email. For example, I would write “GRG 401C: Can I go over my exam with you?” in
the subject line. This allows me to see your email quickly. 
Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more than half of UT undergraduate students use
the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are
welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist
appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different
subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc, JES A332, or
call 512-471-3614.
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you will need to execute a Q
drop before the Q drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under
Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations: Students with a documented disability may request appropriate
academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     Please request a meeting with Dr. Krause as soon as possible to discuss any
         accommodations.
     Please notify Dr. Krause as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
         accessible.
     Please notify Dr. Krause if any part of the physical space is difficult for you.
4|Page


Religious Holy Days: Per UT Austin policy and Texas Education Code, you must notify Dr.
Krause of a pending absence due to observance of a religious holy day as far in advance as
possible (minimum 14 days prior to the date of the religious holy day is a good rule of thumb). If
you must miss a class, an examination, or a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, Dr. Krause will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counselling and Mental Health Centre (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Evacuation Information: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation
from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
        re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
        The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
5|Page


TL;DR: Come to class, come to lab, keep up with your reading, check canvas, check the
syllabus.
6|Page


   GRG 404E Course Calendar
Week              Topic                             Readings     Assignments and       Notes______
                                                                 Labs
Theme 1: Environmental Challenges
Week 1            Intro to Environmental            VES:
June 6-7          Challenges in the 21st            Chapters
                  Century,                          1-3
                  Sustainability and Human
                  Value Systems,
                  Environmental History,
                  Politics, and Economics
Week 2:           Environmental Risk                VES:         Lab 1
June 10-14        Ecosystems – Energy Flows,        Chapters     Biomagnification. Due
                  Intro to Toxicology               4-6          Friday
Theme 2: Systems, Cycles, and Energy Flows
Week 3:           Earth’s Energy Balance            VES:         Lab 2 Weds, Due       Test 1: Tuesday
June 17-21        The Carbon & Hydrologic           Chapters     Friday                June 18
                  Cycle,                            7-9
                  The Nitrogen & Phosphorus
                  Cycle
Week 4:           Populations, Demographics,        VES:         Lab 3: Weds, Due
June 24-28        and Urbanization,                 Chapters     Friday
                  Pollution                         10-14
                  Urban Environments and
                  Urban Ecology
Theme 3: The Anthroposphere and Conservation
Week 5:           Agriculture and Food              VES          Lab 4: Autos, Due     Test 2:Tuesday,
July 1-5          Resources                         Chapters     Friday                July 2
                  Energy Production,                10-14
                  Food Security
Week 6:           Biological Resources -            VES          Lab 5: Climate Due    Test 3:
July 8-12         Conservation Biology,             Chapters     Friday                Thursday, July
                  Biodiversity                      15-18                              11
                  Climate Change
July 11: Thursday Last class day for first-term classes (Final Test)
July 12-13: Friday-Saturday Final examinations for first-term classes Final Paper Due at 10pm
Saturday
   7|Page
