                                                       1
               AFR 357T: Greek Tragedies, Postcolonial Dramas
                                              Unique # 30750
                                                Spring 2020
___________________________________________________________________
Professor: Dr. A. A. Adelakun.
Email: adelakun@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Wed 10am -12noon (By appointment)
                            COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
Greek tragedies are considered one of the greatest heritages of the white western world. But what does it
mean when they are adapted by Black/African writers in postcolonial and post-Apartheid societies to
narrate their contemporary African histories? What contradictions occur in these adaptations and what
creative potentials do they make possible? This course is a study in adaptation of great dramatic literature
of the Greek civilizations to their phenomenal evolution into popular African performances. Our task as
scholars in this class is the mediation of the meeting of great minds like Euripides, Aeschylus, Sophocles,
Wole Soyinka, Ola Rotimi, Athol Fugard, Femi Osofisan, Efua Sutherland, and Yael Farber through
critical analysis. What insights do we derive about history and culture when Hellenism becomes a
narrative paradigm for African/Black nationalism?
We will parse Greek tragedies, the African adaptations, and critical studies of these works to understand
the making of multicultural literature, the de-colonization agenda that goes into the project of adaptation,


                                                         2
and what world history and culture both gain (or lose) through these re-creative works. As we put the
classical writings from Ancient Greek in dialogue with texts that formed the background of African anti-
colonial revolutions, we will analyze how Africans have used these works to re-shape literary canon and
given their world and their histories universal purchase.
While this course involves creative writing and some staged performances, you do not need prior
experience to be a member of this class.
At the end of this class, students would have:
    •    Built critical knowledge based to make informed analysis on dramatic art, aesthetics, history, and
         the political and ethical issues that arise from adaptations and appropriation across disparate
         cultures.
    •    Increased their knowledge of classical and modern African dramatic literature, with a broad
         understanding of how these texts have shaped human culture through time.
    •    Participated in dramatic exercises written and staged collectively as a pedagogical task of
         developing an embodied understanding of texts and build skills that enhance personal confidence.
    •    Developed set skills to critically analyze drama, social situations, and different genres of public
         performance across diverse human cultures.
    •    Widened their knowledge of world cultures, multicultural art, and the lines that can be drawn
         through time and space
    •    Acquired the knowledge of the politics of drama in postcolonial and post-Apartheid contexts,
         understand concepts such as “decolonization” and be able to reflexively formulate their own
         arguments in extant social debates.
GRADES:
Grades in this course are assigned on a percentage basis. Your total score will dictate your final grade. All
grades will be posted on canvas as they are earned through the semester.
                         Requirement
                                                                      Percentage of Grade
              Quizzes/Discussion Forum (2)                                      10
              Class participation/Attendance                                    15
                    Reflection Papers (2)                                       30
                 Group Presentation/Play                                        20
                         Final Paper                                            25
                          TOTAL                                                100


                                                         3
COURSE FLAGS
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present. This course also carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag
courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you
can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes
meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
DESCRIPTION OF ASSIGNMENTS
All assignments will be discussed on the first day of class. Please do not hesitate to approach your
instructor during office hours if you seek further clarifications regarding the assignments
Quizzes/Discussion Forum (10 percent)
Twice this semester, students will be paired into groups and they will jointly take a quiz that will be
posted on the canvas discussion boards. The professor will supply a discussion prompt, and student
groups will respond in a format similar to social media exchanges. After each group has settled on their
choice of prompt they want to answer, they will use the canvas discussion board to debate their positions
as individuals. Each student will highlight their stances thoughtfully and with textual references that
demonstrates their engagement with the materials we have read in the class. Individuals in each group are
free to disagree with each other’s positions but by the end of the session, they should find a point of
resolution so they can present a coherent answer for their group. The goal of this assignment is to
encourage students to think through what it means to engage in discourse intervention, public advocacy,
criticism, and reflection in responsible and provocative ways. Please consider this assignment and its
format as also a training ground for other future critical engagements on important social and political
issues of the day. The professor will monitor and participate in these discussion threads from time to time.
At the end of the semester, students will be graded on the quality of their contribution to issues.
Class Participation/Attendance (15 percent)
African drama and classic studies are broad subjects and you may not always be familiar with its every
aspect. This means attendance at every class is among the minimum requirements for success in this
course. Students who miss at class at will are likely to be lost in the middle of the semester. You are
therefore encouraged to come to class prepared, prepare ahead by reading and engaging the materials, and
actively participate by posing relevant questions, provide comments, and feedback on the reading for each
class period. In other words, you must have an active voice in the class. Failure to prepare for class or to
be an active participant will result in a poor participation grade. The professor will take the attendance at
the start of every class. Students that arrive late will be marked either “late” or “absent.”


                                                          4
Note: You are allowed only two unexcused absences throughout the semester. Any further unexcused
absences will be penalized with a point reduction in grade. Students competing for the university on an
NCAA or club level team should notify the professor as soon as possible about any future absences.
Written documentation from the Athletic department will be required for accommodations to be provided.
Reflection papers (15 percent each)
Twice this semester, students are expected to submit a reflection paper that captures their thoughts on the
topics that have been discussed in class within the period. This is a creative art studies class, and students
are encouraged to give a free rein to their imagination as they work on this paper. You can submit a paper
that makes a rigorous analysis of an existing adaptation, or you can do a comparative analysis of different
adaptations, or write a play of your own that demonstrates your critiques of existing adaptations. The goal
of this assignment is to deepen your analytical skills. By subjecting aesthetic works from Ancient Greece
and the modern cultures of “othered” Africa to reflective scrutiny, you are being called upon to be a
mediator between great cultures, their competing claims of aesthetic excellence, and philosophical
enquiries through narratives. Please take this task seriously in your reflection papers.
Note: This material is expected to be between 2-3 pages, typed in Times New Roman 12 font and in
double line spacing. These papers must be well-researched, show thoughtfulness, resourcefulness, and an
ability to re-conceptualize the theories and analyses discussed in class. The professor will provide regular
feedbacks on each paper to individual students. Please take the feedbacks seriously as they will aid you in
writing more polished papers in subsequent assignments. Students are expected to have a citation page
attached to their paper. Students who desire extra credit can choose to turn in one or two more reflections
papers.
Group Presentation (20 percent)
By mid-semester, students will be placed into groups where they will all work on adaptation of any of the
texts we will read in class. The goal of this assignment for students to jointly reflect on a selected work,
“re-do” it after reflecting on its relevance to the times, and also reflect on how their positions as thinkers
have been influenced by their subjective experiences. At the end of the semester, students will present
their work to the class. The presentation can take any form and students are encouraged to be as creative
and original as possible. Students are encouraged to run their ideas with the professor before the
presentation dates. There will be ample time provided for students to meet and work on their
presentations.
Final Paper (25 percent)
This will be based on individual students’ reflection and analysis of the plays we have worked on
throughout the semester. While the previous reflection papers expects you to reflect on the works studied
within a class period, this assignment requires you to make a broad and critical assessment of all the
works we have studied through the 16 weeks of class. The professor will supply more classic texts and
their adaptations from African and non-African cultures. Students are expected to select their pick from
this list to buttress their analysis in their paper. This assignment is expected to be between 5-7 pages with


                                                         5
at least five academic sources cited. The final paper is not supposed to merely regurgitate what we have
discussed but to show critical thinking and analysis, and an ability to independently formulate ideas and
research on them. Students are encouraged to share their ideas with the professor to get a feedback on
whatever they have chosen to research.
 GRADING SCALE
 A          = 94-100
 A-         = 90-93
 B+         = 86-89
 B          = 80-85
 B-         = 74-79
 C+         = 70-73
 C          = 65-69
 C-         = 60-64
 D          = 55-59
 F          = 0-54
Course Activities
Class periods will include lectures (by the instructor and sometimes guest lecturers), screenings, active
class discussions, small group discussion, reflective writing, and digital media discussions.
          COURSE POLICIES AND POLICIES OF THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Class Decorum:
The decorum policies of this class exist as an agreement between all of us in order to create a respectful
and productive environment for learning and dialogue. As such the following rules will be enforced:
     •    The use of electronic devices is permitted in class ONLY for note taking and with prior
          permission of the professor. Beyond that, you are not allowed to use electronic devices in class.
          Students who become disruptive with their devices will be asked to leave the class for the day and
          marked “unexcused absence.”
     •    Only productive discussion is allowed in class. This means talking must occur only in response to
          the subject of study that day. In order to facilitate this in an orderly manner I will act as a
          moderator. Students should raise their hands and wait to be called upon. Also, give others a
          chance to speak. And above all, BE RESPECTFUL.
     •    Students who repeatedly disrupt the class will be asked to leave and may fail the class.
Late Assignments
     •    All assignments are due by the date listed on the syllabus and in the class. Students with excused
          absence can email an assignment to the professor. Late assignments will not be accepted.


                                                         6
Attendance
    •    Students are expected to attend every class meeting and be prepared to participate. If you are
         absent for any reason – excused or unexcused – you are still responsible for all material covered
         in class.
    •    I may post PowerPoint presentations on Canvas under “Files” if the slides contain information
         students need but were unable to take as notes in class. Students who are absent should make
         arrangements to get notes from a classmate. I am happy to meet with you during office hours to
         discuss any questions you have about course material, but I will NOT simply “tell you what you
         missed.”
    •    Classes and assignments may only be made up in the event of an emergency (documented illness,
         death in the family, etc.), or a pre-arranged absence (religious holidays, athletic events,
         conferences, weddings, etc.). Absences due to religious holidays must be arranged in accordance
         with the University of Texas at Austin Student Handbook. All make-ups (including those due to
         illness) must be accompanied with appropriate documentation.
    •    Please note that traffic, car troubles, oversleeping, and missed busses are not excused absences
         and students who miss submitting as assignment for these reasons will not be allowed to make
         them up. Out of fairness to all students, no exceptions will be made to this policy.
    •    In case of a medical emergency, please contact your professor and be ready to provide
         supporting documentation.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to and from Students
    •    All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
         policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her
         e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to
         stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications
         may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice
         per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mailaddress are
         available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
    •    When using e-mail to contact us about the course, use your UT email address. Include “AFR 304”
         in the subject line. Your name and UT EID should be in the body of each and every e-mail you
         send regarding this course. Anyone who does not comply with these requests might not receive a
         response.


                                                       7
     •   Your course Instructor gets a lot of correspondence and therefore you should allow 48 hours for
         us to respond to your emails. If it has been 48 hours and you have not yet heard from me, feel free
         to send a cheerful reminder about your inquiry.
     •   A note about e-mail correspondence: The Internet has greatly changed the methods in which we
         communicate. The accessibility of modes such as e-mail has created additional labor for
         Professors, Instructors, and Teaching Assistants. BEFORE you contact me with a question, take
         the time to look for the information on the syllabus and the Canvas website. I promise to be
         diligent about posting important information and announcements for you, and ask that you respect
         that labor and time by not submitting redundant requests to us. If the information you seek is not
         available on the syllabus or the Canvas site, please see me before or after class, during my office
         hours, or, of course, send us an e- mail.
     •   If you have a question or concern about a grade, I ask that you observe the 24/7 Rule: wait 24
         hours to send the email or speak with one of use in person about the matter, and allow us 7 days
         to get back to you. Note that questions and/or concerns about grades will only be addressed
         within two weeks (or 14 days) of its posting. Once the grade has been available through the
         Canvas gradebook for two weeks, it is considered uncontested and final.
Use of Canvas in class
In this class we use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected access at
http://canvas.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post
grades, to receive assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys. You can find support in using
Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Feedback Loop
Throughout the semester I will give you individual feedback on your work. I also encourage you to visit
office hours to discuss your progress through the course material. I will also ask you to give me feedback
on your learning in informal as well as formal ways, including through a mid-semester survey about how
my teaching strategies are helping or hindering your learning. It is very important for me to know your
reaction to what we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these surveys. I also hope that you
will reach out to me during my office hours, with any questions or concerns you have regarding the
course material, the assignments, or your progress in this department and the university in general.
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity


                                                        8
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work
submitted by a student in this course for academic credit should be the student's own work. We have zero
tolerance for plagiarism.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter
from SSD. Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
(e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
conversion, etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips
are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
transportation, site accessibility, etc.). Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice)
or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD).Call512-232-5050orvisit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                        COURSE SCHEDULE*


                                      9
WEEK   TOPICS           REQUIRED READINGS
Week 1 Introduction
Jan 21                  Scodel, Ruth. An Introduction to Greek Tragedy. Cambridge University
                        Press, 2010.
Jan 23                  Shipley, Jesse Weaver. Trickster Theatre: the poetics of freedom in urban
                        Africa. Indiana University Press, 2015. (E-copy in library)
Week 2
Jan 28                  Wetmore Jr, Kevin J. The Athenian Sun In An African Sky: Modern African
                        Adaptations Of Classical Greek Tragedy. McFarland, 2001.
Jan 30                  Sophocles’ Antigone (E-version in library)
Week 3 Translating
       history & ethics
Feb 4                   Osofisan, Femi. Tegonni.
Feb 6                   Chanter, Tina. Whose Antigone?: The Tragic Marginalization of Slavery.
                        SUNY Press, 2011.
Week 4
Feb 11                  Fugard, Athol. The Island
Feb 13                  Quiz/Discussion 1
Week 5 Bearing witness
       to history
Feb 18                  Sophocles’s Oedipus Rex (E-version in library)
Feb 20                  GUO, Yue-hua. "Oedipus Rex: Fate, Truth and Self-will."
Week 6
Feb 25                  Rotimi, Ola. The Gods are not to Blame
Feb 27                  Simpson, Michael. "The Curse of the Canon: Ola Rotimi’s The Gods are
                        not to Blame." Classics in Post-Colonial Worlds (2007). Page 86
                        DUE: Paper 1.
Week 7 Social
       transitions
Mar 3                   Euripides’ Alcestis (E-version in library)
Mar 5                   Talbert, Linda Lee. "Alcestis and Edufa: The transitional individual."
Week 8
Mar 10                  Sutherland, Efua. Edufa (E-version in library)


                                      10
Mar 12                   Quiz/Discussion 2
          SPRING BREAK!!
Week 10   Decolonization
 Mar 24                  Euripides’ The Bacchae (E-version in library)
 Mar 26                  Segal, Charles. Dionysiac Poetics and Euripides' Bacchae. Princeton
                         University Press, 1997.
Week 11
 Mar 31                  Soyinka, Wole. The Bacchae of Euripides: A Communion Rite. WW
                         Norton & Company, 1974.
                         DUE: Paper 2.
  Apr 2                  Nouryeh, Andrea J. "Soyinka's Euripides: Postcolonial Resistance or
                         Avant-Garde Adaptation?." Research in African Literatures 32, no. 4
                         (2001): 160-171.
Week 12   Art &
          Universalism
  Apr 7                  Aeschylus. The Oresteia (E-version in library)
  Apr 9                  Van Weyenberg, Astrid. "Staging transition: the Oresteia in post-apartheid
                         South Africa." In Art and Visibility in Migratory Culture, pp. 69-90. Brill
                         Rodopi, 2011.
Week 13
 Apr 14                  Faber, Yael. Molora
 Apr 16                  Odom, Glenn A. "South African Truth and Tragedy: Yael Farber's
                         Molora and Reconciliation Aesthetics." Comparative Literature 63,
                         no. 1 (2011): 47-63.
Week 14
 April 21                Scheduled meetings with professor
 April 23                Scheduled meetings with professor
          Class
          Presentations
 April 28                Group Presentation 1
 April 30                Group Presentation 11
Week 16   Final Paper
                         Final Due Date: May 8, 2020.
