           ACC 311: Fundamentals of Financial Accounting
                                           Skylar DeTure
                                            Summer 2019
    E-mail: sdeture@utexas.edu                                         Web: www.sdeture.com
    Office Hours: MTWTh 12 noon-1 pm                      Class Hours: MTWTh 10 am-12 noon
    Office: CBA1.310A                                                   Class Room: CBA 4.332
Course Description
Life is full of situations where other people make decisions you care about without you watching.
Maybe it is your mayor deciding whether to close or open new public schools in your neighbor-
hood. Maybe it is your roommate deciding whether to leave a mess in your shared kitchen.
Maybe it is the mechanic deciding whether your car “needs" a new eight hundred dollar gizmo
for your AC to work properly. In all these situations, someone else is making a decision that affects
you, and you, for some reason, expect them to make that decision with your preferences in mind.
    How do you plan to make sure that all the “someone elses" of the world make their decisions
with you in mind? How can you hold other people accountable for their decisions that affect
you?
    This is the question we will focus on this course. For low stakes decisions, like car repairs
or keeping a tidy kitchen, holding others accountable may not be such a big deal. But as you
progress further in life, the stakes will get higher and higher and involve more and more money.
Eventually, you will have what I hear non-graduate students call “life savings." You will entrust
this money to other people (maybe the fine people that run your local too-big-to-fail bank or
Fortune 500 company) who will try to turn that money into more money, so you can live off of it
during your golden years. You (or someone acting on your behalf) will need to hold these people
accountable, or your golden years might not include very much gold. Financial accounting is
a multi-billion dollar feat of social engineering designed to hold people accountable when they
make high stakes business decisions. Welcome to fundamentals of financial accounting.
 Prerequisite
If you do not have twenty-four hours of prior college credit, the Dean will drop you from the
course. No exceptions.
                                                   1


                                                     Fundamentals of Financial Accounting– Summer 2018
Course Objectives
   1. Learn how to participate in one particular tool used to hold decision makers accountable:
      Financial Accounting. In particular:
         • Learn how to account for the basic business transactions you are already familiar with,
            like buying and selling goods or services with cash.
         • Learn about more transactions (like taking out loans, issuing stock, and tracking in-
            ventory) that are common in large businesses.
         • Learn to account for said transactions using Generally Accepted Accounting Princi-
            ples.
         • Learn to prepare financial reports to communicate said accounting information about
            said transactions.
         • Learn to infer a company’s business transactions by using the accounting information
            in their financial reports.
   2. Discuss what “accountability" means in business settings and why it is important
   3. Analyze the relationship between accountability, monitoring, and communication
   4. Discuss the other tools society uses to hold decision makers accountable for their choices
In Class Activities
    • class begins with an individual exercise which will be on the board when you arrive
    • after everyone has had a few minutes to work, we will review the exercise and move on to
      a mixture of short lectures, guided problems, and group activities.
    • class will end with a 10 minute quiz
Readings and Homework
I recommend doing the readings before class and the optional homework problems after class.
Participation
There is no attendance or participation score in the final grade.
Required Items
    • Required Text: The Accounting Game, by Mullis and Orloff, ISBN: 978-1-4022-1186-7. It’s
      less than $20 dollars on amazon and you can get a full refund for two weeks, so there is no
      reason not to buy it FOR THE FIRST MONDAY OF CLASS AT THE LATEST.
                                                2/5


                                                                 Fundamentals of Financial Accounting– Summer 2018
      • Required Technology: either a smartphone, laptop computer, or an HP 10bII+ financial
         calculator. 1 .
      • Optional Reference Text: Financial Accounting, 8th Edition, by Libby, Libby, and Short,
         ISBN: 9781259398698
Grading Policy
McCombs policy states that the average grade for this course should be between 3.0 and 3.2 (so
about a B/B+ average). This implies that your grade will depend on how your performance
compares to your peers. I will post a daily leader board showing the class’s running scores
(anonymized, of course) on canvas so you can see where you stand. The maximum number of
possible points over the entire semester is 270. If you earn less than 150, I will assign you an F in
the class. If you earn at least 151 points, I will give you at least a C.
Daily Quizzes
We will have a short (10 minute) quiz at the end of every class. I will return the graded quizzes
the next day. If you plan to be absent, you can take the quiz for full credit during office hours
BEFORE I give it in class. You can also retake a quiz during office hours within 7 days to earn
back half the missed points. You cannot take a missed quiz after I give it in class, no exceptions.
2 . The quizzes are closed notes with no calculators (there won’t be any difficult calculations).
Exams
On Thursdays, we will end class with a 30 minute exam instead of a 10 minute quiz. Each exam
counts three times as much as a quiz. Exams are open notes, open book, and open internet.
Collaboration (e.g. talking, texting, or emailing) is prohibited. There won’t be an exam for the
week of July 4th.
Academic Dishonesty Policy
If you cheat on a quiz or the final exam, I will give you a zero on the assignment and report you
to the Dean.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the
building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
    1 Exams  are open-book/open-internet, so you can use your phone or computer. If you want to learn to use an
old-fashioned financial calculator for future coursework, the department recommends the HP10bII+ and I can teach
you how to use it.
    2 If you miss a quiz due to an emergency, I will drop the quiz score contingent on appropriate documentation, e.g.
a note/email with a corresponding phone number from a medical provider, law enforcement officer, veterinarian, etc.
                                                          3/5


                                                       Fundamentals of Financial Accounting– Summer 2018
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video
phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
                                                4/5


                                                   Fundamentals of Financial Accounting– Summer 2018
Week 1, 06/03 - 06/07: Introduction
  Thursday: First Day of Class; Accountability and Big Business Decisions
Week 1, 06/10 - 06/14: Describing Business Activities
  Monday: The Balance Sheet (Assets, Liabilities, and Equity)
  Tuesday: Business Activities and Journal Entries
  Wednesday: The Income Statement
  Thursday: Adjusting Entries and Statement of Cash Flows
Week 2, 06/17 - 06/21: Financing a Business
  Monday: Issuing Debt
  Tuesday: Accounting for Debt
  Wednesday: Issuing Equity
  Thursday: Accounting for Equity
Week 3, 06/24 - 06/28: Some New Transactions
  Monday: Inventory
  Tuesday: Accounting for Inventory
  Wednesday: Sales and Discounts
  Thursday: Accounting for Sales and Discounts
Week 4, 07/01 - 07/05: Even More Transactions
  Monday: Property Plant and Equipment (PPE)
  Tuesday: Accounting for PPE
  Wednesday: Review
  Thursday: July 4th Holiday
Week 5, 07/08 - 07/12: Accountability Beyond Financial Accounting
  Monday: Miscellaneous assets and how to account for them
  Tuesday: Review + guided reading of form 10-K
  Wednesday: Review + guided reading of form 10-K
  Thursday: Final Exam (you can also take it during the official time set by the Registrar)
                                             5/5
