The University of Texas at Austin                          Division of Textiles and Apparel
                  TXA 365 The Apparel Design Mentors Course
Course Instructor: Eve Nicols                                     Email: karuna@mail.utexas.edu
Office hours: via zoom or by phone, email to arrange an appointment.
Apparel Design Mentor: UT Textiles and Apparel Alumni with Apparel Industry Experience.
Course Description
Students will receive as a core component of this course individual, mentorship from Apparel
Designers with industry experience. Individual meetings between each Apparel Design Mentor
and their student mentee will be held at the start of the semester in June. At that meeting the
first assignment will be discussed, with opportunities for questions from students. There will be a
mid assignment check in, when students will present first draft designs. Websites and resumes
will be reviewed and discussed at this meeting. A third meeting at the conclusion of the first
assignment, which will be reviewed, then briefing for second assignment. The mentors will meet
mid assignment two when students will present first draft designs, again at final collection
presentation, these will be reviewed. The next meeting will be to review updated website, resume
and discuss interview technique for Apparel Design careers. There will be a mock interview, after
the mock interview the Apparel Design Mentors will share any remaining advice.
There will be a minimum of six meetings, organized for each student individually with their Design
Mentor. The faculty instructor will meet at a prescheduled regular time every week with the
students, and remain in close contact with the students and design mentors throughout the whole
summer semester.
Websites and resumes will be reviewed at the onset and conclusion of the course. Assignments
will be set inline with what is expected of a graduating student applying for an Assistant Designer
industry career position.
The course is a cooperative effort involving three major participants: students,
Textiles and Apparel UT graduates with professional industry experience, and the faculty
instructor.
Pre-requisite TXA 355C Computer Aided Design
Upon the Completion of the course
     • Students will develop an understanding of the techniques, principles and procedures used
          in the apparel design industry.
     • Students will improve digital proficiencies, and professional online communication skills.
     • Students will gain knowledge of the standards expected by professionals in apparel design
          industry careers.


Course requirements
    • Students will share their websites and resumes for initial review at the onset of the
        course.
    • Two assignments will be undertaken, one in June, one in July.
    • Interview techniques and skills will be discussed, recommended and reviewed in a mock
        interview format with the Apparel Design Mentor.
    • A second review of the student’s websites and resumes with the summer assignments
        uploaded will be completed and reviewed.
Required Assignments
    • Prompt, Prepared and Professional attendance is required at all Apparel Design Mentor
        meetings.
    •   Professional practice, requires that students will dress in appropriate daytime attire, and
        communicate through zoom or alternate system with the video activated.
    •
    •   Design Assignment One PRESENTED JUNE 26 FRIDAY
    •   Design Assignment Two PRESENTED JULY 24 FRIDAY
    •   Website LINK SENT FRIDAY MAY 21st, UPDATED WEBSITE LINK TUESDAY SENT JULY 28
    •   Resume DOCUMENT SENT FRIDAY MAY 21st, UPDATED DOCUMENTS SENT JULY 28
    •   Interview skills exhibited in MOCK INTERVIEW FRIDAY JULY 31st
Course Grade determination
Apparel Design Mentor
Assignment One                    100
Assignment Two                    100
Final Website review              100
Final Resume review               100
Interview skills                  100
                          Total   500
Course Instructor
Assignment One                    100
Assignment Two                    100
Final Website review              100
Final Resume review               100
Professional practice             100
                          Total   500


Grade Distribution
A = 850-900 points                C+= 600-649 points
A- = 800-849 points               C = 550-5992points
B+ = 750-799 points               C- = 500-549 points
B = 700-749 points                D+ = 450-499points
B- = 650-699points                D = 400-449 points
Attendance Policy
This is a senior level course, students are expected to treat this as a professional situation. Be
sure to check you email regularly and the canvas site. Maintain good time management as if you
were in an actual job. The course instructor will be in touch with you on a regular basis, if you
become unwell, or have any circumstances that disrupt your progress please contact Eve Nicols
immediately, she will be checking email every day throughout the course and will reply to you
promptly.
Academic honesty is expected at all times. All these aspects of the UT policy apply:
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the General Information Catalog to access the
official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further
elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
This course follows UT’s guidelines for accommodating students with disabilities: The University
of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-
6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Accommodations for religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending
absence at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Please be advised that the syllabus may change at any time based on the instructor's discretion.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement (DDCE), Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability.
Schedule below The course instructor will set up all zoom meetings and be present at all
meetings, except when overlap occurs.
Meeting are scheduled on Tuesdays and Fridays at 11:30 -7:30pm.


The University of Texas at Austin                      Division of Textiles and Apparel
                TXA 365 The Apparel Design Mentors Course Schedule
Tentative Schedule
Schedule changes may occur due to unexpected professional commitments. The time of
Friday and Tuesday meetings with Apparel Design Mentors, students and course
instructor will be finalized and agreed upon prior to the semester start on 4 June.
Students are required to send their work by 12:00 noon on Thursdays prior to Design
Mentors Meetings
June 5          Friday         MENTOR MEETING ONE
                               Faculty introduces course and Mentor to Mentee
                               Assignment One, discussion.
June 9          Tuesday        Course Instructor progress review.
                               Visual research/mood/inspiration
June 12         Friday         MENTOR MEETING TWO
                               Assignment One progress review
                               Visual research/mood/inspiration/ideation/fabrics/
                               first draft designs.
                               First group of students’ web site, and resume review.
June 16         Tuesday        Course Instructor progress review.
                               ideation/fabrics/first draft designs.
June 19         Friday         MENTOR MEETING THREE
                               Assignment One mid-review, web site, and resume review.
                               Visual research/mood/inspiration/ideation/fabrics/ first
                               draft designs.
                               Following feedback students rework designs, add flats, tech
                               pack for one outfit to present the following week.
                               Second group of students’ web site, and resume review.
June 23         Tuesday        Course Instructor progress review.
                               Reworked designs, add flats, tech pack for one outfit ready
                               to present on Friday.


June 26      Friday   MENTOR MEETING FOUR
                      Assignment One Completion, discussion,
                      recommendations. Assignment Two, discussion.
                      Following Mentor Feedback students update assignment
                      one to include recommendations to Assignment One.
                      Students start work on Assignment Two.
June 30      Tuesday  Course Instructor progress review.
                      Visual research/mood/inspiration/ideation/fabrics.
                      Check on resume and website progress.
Independence Day Week
July 10      Friday   MENTOR MEETING FIVE
                      Assignment Two mid-review
                      Visual research/mood/inspiration/ideation/fabrics/ first
                      draft designs. Following feedback rework designs, add flats,
                      tech pack for one outfit to present the following week.
                      First group of students’ 2nd web site, resume review.
July 14      Tuesday  Course Instructor review progress
                      Mid Semester RESUME and WEBSITE progress review.
July 24      Friday   MENTOR MEETING SIX
                      Assignment Two Present
                      Discussion of interview techniques for the apparel
                      industry.
                      Second group of students’ 2nd web site, resume review.
July 28      Tuesday  Course Instructor progress review.
                      Students complete, send updated website and resume
July 31      Friday   MENTOR MEETING SEVEN
                      Mock interview, any further advice to share.
August 4     Tuesday  Course Instructor Assignments Review
August 11    Tuesday  Course Instructor Website and Resume Review


Required Assignments
    • Prompt, Prepared and Professional attendance is required at all Apparel Design Mentor
       and course instructor meetings.
    •  Professional practice, requires that students will dress in appropriate daytime attire, and
       communicate through zoom or alternate system with the video activated.
    •  Design Assignment ONE PRESENTED JUNE 26 FRIDAY
    •  Design Assignment TWO PRESENTED JULY 24 FRIDAY
    •  Website LINK SENT FRIDAY MAY 21st, UPDATED WEBSITE LINK TUESDAY SENT JULY 28
    •  Resume DOCUMENT SENT FRIDAY MAY 21st, UPDATED DOCUMENTS SENT JULY 28
    •  Interview skills exhibited in MOCK INTERVIEW FRIDAY JULY 31st
Please be advised that this is a tentative sequence may change at any time based on the
Apparel Design Mentors schedule change.
