                                      G E N D E R A ND M E D IA C U L T U R E
                                        Radio-Television-Film 328c
                                        Cross-Listed with WGS 324
                                                 Summer 2019
                     Class Meetings: Mondays – Thursdays 12-2pm (BMC 4.206)
                              Screenings: Mondays 3-5:30pm (CMA 3.120)
Professor: Dr. Jennifer McClearen, Dept. of Radio-Television-Film
Office hours: 30 minutes before and after class by appointment
Office: CMA 6.128c
Email jennifer.mcclearen@utexas.edu
Twitter: @jmcclearen
Web: jennifermcclearen.com
Teaching Assistant: Brett Siegel
Office hours: By appointment
Email: brettsiegel89@gmail.com
   Note: This syllabus is subject to revision! Please check Canvas and your email frequently for any
                                updates to readings, screenings, or class.
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course provides an introduction to the critical and theoretical analysis of gender (femininities
and masculinities) in media (film, television, new and emerging media). Students will engage
dominant and oppositional practices of media production, representation, and reception to
investigate the sociocultural mechanisms that shape individual and collective notions of gender in
our media-saturated environment. Paying particular attention to wider questions of power, politics,
and identity, students will read key texts in cultural, media, and communication studies, as well as
influential theories within gender, feminist, and transgender studies. Although primarily focused on
the mediated construction of gender, this course insists on an intersectional approach that
examines gender in conjunction with race, class, sexuality, nation, and generation.


R E Q UI R E D T E X T S
All readings for this course are available for download on the Canvas modules pages. There is no
required textbook for the course.
S C R E E NI N G S
The screenings in this class are required course material, like assigned reading in a literature course.
Attendance is expected unless it has been excused. If you do have to miss a screening, be sure to
watch what you’ve missed before the next class.
A S S I G N ME N T S
I: Reading and Screening Pop Quizzes. (20% of final grade).
            Throughout the semester I will administer pop quizzes on the readings and screenings to
            test your basic knowledge of course readings. I will not necessarily warn you that a pop
            quiz is coming the next class day and you should be ready to take the quiz on any day. The
            quiz questions will only consist of readings and screenings for that class week. Your two
            lowest quiz grades will be dropped.
II. Engagement Activities. (10% of final grade).
            Engagement activities are opportunities for you to engage course content more deeply and
            share your insights in writing or with your classmates. These may be short reflective writing
            exercises, pair work, or group activities. Your two lowest engagement activities scores will
            be dropped.
III. Weekly Discussion Posts. (25% of final grade).
            Each Tuesday and Friday you will submit a 300-500 word discussion post reflecting on some
            aspect of gender and media covered that week and respond to two other students’ posts.
            Each post will cite at least one reading (or a screening that is academic or
            documentary/educational in nature) and one concept discussed in class. Your two lowest
            discussion post scores will be dropped. Please see additional assignment instructions on
            Canvas.
IV: Group Project Part 1: Photo Essay (20% of final grade)
            You will analyze found images of a gender in the media topic that interests you using
            concepts, theories, and discussions from this course. This activity will be done in groups of
            two. The photo essay that is essentially a first draft of your final video essay (see description
            below). You will select 8-10 images that help you argue a major thesis about some aspect of
            gender in the media. You’ll also provide written descriptions of the images that includes an
            introduction, body, and conclusion. More information on this assignment is on the Canvas
            assignment page.
V: Final Group Project Part 2: Video Essay (25% of final grade)
            Your final project for this class will be a 5-minute video essay and will be completed with the
            same partner and on the same topic as your photo essay. A video essay is similar to a final
            paper in that you have to use analysis skills to make a claim about a particular media
            artifact. The assignment requires you to incorporate photos, video, and your own voices


          into the video essay. This assignment will be completed in pairs and I have reserved some
          class time for you to work with your partners. You do not need to have experience in video
          essays to do this assignment well and there will be dedicated class time for learning video
          editing/how to do video essays. The assignment is divided into three parts.
                      a)     5-minute video essay
                      b)     Feedback on Student Videos (completed in class)
                      c)     Self and Peer Evaluation of Group Assignment
                      More information on this assignment is on the Canvas assignment page.
C L A S S P O L IC IE S
Syllabus Revisions: Changes to the course schedule and assignments may occur due to
unforeseen circumstances; please make sure you check Canvas frequently for updates.
Grading system: This class will be graded using the following letter grade system: A (94%+), A-
(90-93%), B+ (87-89%), B (84-86%), B- (80-83%), C+ (77-79%), C (74-76%), D (60-69%), and F
(less than 60%). Final grades that are .5 and above will be rounded up.
Access and Accommodation: Your experience in this class is important to me, and it is the
policy and practice of the University of Texas to create inclusive and accessible learning
environments consistent with federal and state law. Please inform me early in the first weeks of
the semester if you have a learning difference or other issue that could affect your performance
in this class. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Inclusion: Consideration for each other is very important in this classroom. This includes being
respectful of diversity of all kinds: race, ethnicity, sex and gender, sexual orientation,
ability/disability, among others. The diversities that each of us bring to the classroom allow us
to be exposed to other points of view. Please show consideration for each other, and be open
to listening to new perspectives and ideas. If you have any concerns about any of these issues
within this class, please let me know as soon as possible. Conversations will remain confidential
unless you request otherwise. Alternatively, students seeking support around these issues can
find more information and resources
Attendance: Each week we will have pair and group activities that will help you engage more
deeply with course content. Although attendance is not specifically required, active
engagement is a portion of your grade and a major factor in your learning. If you must be
absent, please check with a classmate to find out what you have missed.
Late assignments. For purposes of fairness for all students, you will be given a reasonable
amount of time to complete all assignments. Late assignments will be subject to a grade
penalty.


Digital Devices. Computers and tablets are allowed (and encouraged) in in our media
classroom, but please only use them for class related work! People with laptops should sit in
the middle or back of the room to avoid distracting other students. Cell phones should be on
silent and put away during class.
Mutual Respect: In lecture and discussion sections we will be talking about such loaded topics
as gender and sexism in the media industries and American society. We will also discuss how
other identities such as race, sexuality, class, ability, and other differences are portrayed in the
media. In this endeavor, one of my main responsibilities is to ensure that the classroom is a
space in which everyone can feel safe, speak up, and feel respected. I don’t expect that we’ll
always agree or that conversations will always be comfortable for everyone. In fact, I
encourage discussion and debate in class. What I do ask, is that you engage with me and with
each other with attentive listening and mutual respect. If discomfort ever gives way to fearing
for one’s emotional or physical safety, then please address these concerns with me
immediately.
Academic Honesty: Work turned in by a student should be solely her/his own work. Any time
an outside source is utilized in the writing of a student paper and not properly acknowledged,
this is a form of plagiarism. Plagiarism, cheating on an assignment or exam, or other academic
misconduct will not be tolerated and results in severe sanctions, which can include failing the
course or expulsion from the university. Please don’t put yourself in this position. For more
information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Writing Support: I encourage you to seek writing assistance from the Moody College Writing
Support Program or the University Writing Center. The Moody College Writing Support
Program, located at BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students
seeking to improve their writing in all fields of communication, including film and television
studies. Students may book half-hour appointments at
moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting or drop in during all stages of the writing process.
The University Writing Center, located in Learning Commons, PCL 2.330, also offers
individualized assistance to students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no
charge, and students may come in on a drop in or appointment basis. They are at 512-471-
6222 and uwc.utexas.edu.
Counseling Support: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything
else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
         ▪ Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th
             floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
         ▪ CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html


        CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
        ▪ M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is
           unavailable)
        FREE Services at CMHC:
        ▪ Brief assessments and referral services
        ▪ Mental health & wellness articles -cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
        ▪ MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
        ▪ Classes, workshops, & groups -cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CLASS SCHEDULE
This schedule highly tentative. Please refer to Canvas frequently for revisions to the schedule.
Readings and screenings listed for a given day should be completed before coming to class,
except for the screenings scheduled from 3-5:30, which will be done in class.
Thursday, June 6: Introductions
               Read the Syllabus
Monday June 10: Gender, Sex, and Sexuality 101
               Read Rosalind Gill: Gender
               No screening today
Tuesday June 11: Intersectionality
               Read Brenda Webber: Intersectionality
               Watch Kimberly Crenshaw The Urgency of Intersectionality
Wednesday June 12: Gazes
               Read bell hooks. The Oppositional Gaze: Black Female Spectators
Thursday June 13: Representation Part 1
               Read Stuart Hall: The Work of Representation
Monday June 17: Representation Part 2
               Read Natalie Hill: Miss Representation: A Critical Review
Monday June 17 Screening (3-5:30pm)
               Miss Representation
Tuesday June 18 Feminisms
               Read Jennifer McClearen Don’t Be a Do-Nothing-Bitch: Popular Feminism and
               Women’s Physical Empowerment in the UFC
               Watch: Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie: We Should All Be Feminists


Wednesday June 19: Idealized Masculinities and Femininities
               Watch Pop Culture Detective: "Abduction as Romance"
               Watch Pop Culture Detective: The Predatory Romance of Harrison Ford Movies
Thursday June 20: (Mis/Under) Representing Wo/men of Color
               Read Isabel Molina Guzmán and Angharad N. Valdivia: Brain, Brow, and Booty:
               Latina Iconicity in U.S. Popular Culture.
               Read Frederick Dhaenes and Sander De Ridder: Resistant Masculinities in
               Alternative R&B: Understanding Frank Ocean and the Weekend’s
               Representations of Gender
Monday June 24: LGBTQ Identities
               Read Bonnie Dow, "Ellen, Television, and the Politics of Gay and Lesbian
               Visibility"
               Read: Julia Serano: Skirt Chasers: Why the Media Depicts the Trans Revolution in
               Lipstick and Heels
Monday June 24 Screening (3:00-5:30)
               Pose Season 1 Episode 1-2
Tuesday June 25: Power Players (Guest Lecture: Daelena Tinnin)
               Read Janell Hobson Beyonce’s Fierce Feminism
Wednesday June 26: Pleasure Watching and Slash Fiction
               Read Janice Radway: Women Read the Romance
               Read Noy Thrupkaew: Fan/Tastic Voyage: A Journey into the Wild, Wild World of
               Slash Fan Fiction
Thursday June 27: Group Work on the Photo Essay
Friday June 28: Photo Essay Due / No Discussion Post Due
Monday July 1: Gender in Gaming (Guest Lecture: Rusty Hatchell)
               Read Esther MacCallum-Stewart, "Real Boys Carry Girly Epics: Normalizing
               Gender Bending in Online Games"
               Watch Feminist Frequency: Damsels in Distress Part I and Part II
Monday July 1 Screening (3-5:30)
               TBD
Tuesday July 2: Gender and Sport (Guest Lecture: Brett Siegel)
Wednesday July 3: Feminist Media Production


               Read Annenberg Inclusion Initiative: Inclusion in the Director’s Chair (You do not
               need to know specific statistics; rather, read through to get a sense of the
               phenomenon).
               Read Rozalia Jovanovic: A Brief Visual History of Riot Grrrl Zines
Thursday July 4: Happy 4th of July!
Monday July 8: Group Work
               No readings or screening
Tuesday July 9: Group Work - Final project due at 11:59pm
               No readings
Wednesday July 10: Final Projects Screening (required)
               No readings
Thursday July 11: Final Projects Screening (required)
               No readings
