                                                                     The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325J} Spring 2019
	  
                       Visual Anthropology in Practice:
         THE PHOTOGRAPHIC IMAGE
                                   This is a preliminary syllabus.
                Critical information will be posted and updated on Canvas
                           ANT 325J (31698) - Location: SAC 4.120
Seminar: Tuesdays: 2:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m.
Lab: Fridays: 1:00 p.m.-3:00 p.m.
Instructor: Craig Campbell
Office hours: Fridays 3-4pm in my office (SAC  4.122)  
Teaching Assistant: Jimmy Beveridge
Office hours: Tuesdays from 10am to noon at Caffé Medici on Guadalupe (Guad and 22nd).
                  Firearms are not welcome in this class. If you own a gun, leave it at home.
                                                                                                    Photo: Mary Ellen Mark
                        Reality is always extraordinary.
                                           Mary Ellen Mark
                                                                                                                           1	  


                                                          The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325J} Spring 2019
	  
THE PHOTOGRAPHIC IMAGE
Course Description
"The Photographic Image" applies concepts and practices from visual ethnography to
the study of memory, place, and everyday life. The course aims at developing
approaches to practices of looking and techniques of representation within an ethical
and historical framework. Whereas photographs are often taken to be archival and
documentary technologies, we will invert this idea and explore how images can be
transient and ephemeral by focusing on sites of encounter and codes of engagement.
In our critical approach we consider both the production and reception of photographs.
The class is planned around a number of photo-based projects and one final project.
You will be required to read for these projects and undertake original photography
assignments. At all points in the course students are drawn into the use of image-
making as an interpretive and critical engagement with course readings. Writing is an
essential element of in visual ethnography; sometimes it is foregrounded, sometimes it
is subordinated to the photographs. Regardless, students will have an opportunity to
fine-tune their writing in relation to their photographic practice. We will begin with
techniques of visual inquiry established by visual anthropologists and documentarians
as well as artists working within or on the margins of documentary traditions. Students
are expected to engage fully in both individual and group activities.
     Students will be expected to have at their disposal a camera (digital or analogue).
Required Readings
All assigned readings will be posted on Canvas. There are no books to purchase in
this class.
Learning Goals
In general, there are a number of critical things that I think you should learn in this
course. As the title suggests the idea and practice of photography are central. This is
not a photography course that you would take in a Fine Arts or Journalism program;
understanding the differences in these disciplines is a key learning goal. You will be
using your camera in a form of practice-based and experiential learning. As we study
photography you will be using your own photographs and camera to extend your
inquiry and hone your critical eye.
                                                                                                                2	  


                                                         The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325J} Spring 2019
	  
Ethics in research practice with a focus on the ethics of qualitative research and visual
representation is fundamental to and pervasive through this course. You will learn how
ethics matters not only in and to the discipline of Anthropology, but as a general
humanist approach to research. More specifically, you will learn the nuances of
'informed consent' though practice-based exercises.
You will develop a flexible and extensible skill set that will allow you to read
photographic theory and history, look at and think about photographs as a form of
visual culture, and think about the ways that photographs are apprehended by people
in the everyday. Reading and writing are critical components to this practice of visual
anthropology
Note:
All information in this syllabus is subject to change. Students will be given reasonable
and explicit notice for all changes to the syllabus.
Grades & Assignments:
Reading notes = 10%
Participation = 20%
Presentations = 10%
Photo Assignments = 30%
Final Project = 30%
Reading Notes
For all seminars with assigned readings you are required to hand in reading notes.
These should be around a page in length (max 2). Reading notes must include:
     •   Your name, ID#, Date
     •   Formatted reference to that week's readings (MLA style)
     •   Quotes from the text that you find interesting, challenging, or problemmatic.
     •   A few questions or ideas you'd like to discuss in class
     •   Other notes
Participation
                                                                                                               3	  


                                                          The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325J} Spring 2019
	  
Attendance and participation in labs and seminars is mandatory. If you need to miss a
day contact us in advance. Unapproved abscences, late arrivals, early departures can
count against you in your participation grade.
Presentations
In-class presentations are a critical component of this course. You will be evaluated on
your preparation and your presentation. The presentations should be polished,
intelligent, and coherent.
Photo Assignment requirements.
All photo assignments require you to take photographs. They also require you to read
assigned materials and undertake abbreviated research projects. There will be multiple
assignments throughout the course of the semester that will help to develop and set
the foundations for your final project.
     •   Purchase two portfolios for holding your work (must be large enough to hold
         tabloid (A3, 11x17) prints. Write your name on them and use them when you
         hand in assignments. Please don't get large portfolios. We're basically just
         looking for a paper or plastic sleeve or enveloppe.
     •   Most of your assignments will require you to print on tabloid sized paper. You
         will need to find a printer who can do this for you (copy centers at UT can do
         this). As we proceed through the semester we will be placeing more and more
         importance on the quality of your presentation (not just the content).
     •   In most of our labs we will be doing critiques (crits) of your work. Even if the
         assignment is not due on that day, you are required to come prepared with
         work to share. Typically, half of your grade for any given assignment will be
         based on what you have brought and prepared for the crit. Assignments will be
         graded by percentage and then averaged at the end.
Final Project
The final project for this class is an independent ethnographic photo-essay. It is a major
multi-part project.
                                                                                                                4	  


                                                                The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325J} Spring 2019
	  
                          University Notices and Policies
Documented Disability Statement
     •   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
         Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities
         at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
         http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd .
Notice regarding academic dishonesty
     •   Honor Code or statement of ethics.
              o   University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
                  Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
                  responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
                  through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
                  community.
     •   Explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism
     •   Web site for more information:
     http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
Religious Holy Days
     •   By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
         prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
         examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I
         will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
         the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     •   If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
         Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
         behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
         of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
         Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
         512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
     •   The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and
         support for your learning.
              o   Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
              o   Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
              o   Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
              o   Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
              o   Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                                                                                      5	  
