ANT  324L  –  BRONZE  AND  IRON  AGES  IN  ATLANTIC  EUROPE  
UNIQUE  #  31684  
INSTRUCTOR:  DR.  MARIAH  WADE  
MEETS:  TTH  3:30-­‐5:00  AM  IN  WCP  4.174  
SPRING  2020  
OFFICE  HOURS:  W  11:00-­‐12:00  PM  IN  WCP  4.146  
TELEPHONE:  512-­‐232-­‐4876  
EMAIL:   m.wade@austin.utexas.edu  
  
Course  Description:  This  course  surveys  European  prehistory  and  early  history  emphasizing  the  archeological  connections  
between  all  geographic  and  cultural  regions  of  Europe.  The  course  focuses  on  the  archaeological  cultures  of  the  1)  
Eastern,  Central  and  Western  Mediterranean  and  2)  on  those  of  Atlantic  Europe.    
Course  objectives/expectations:    
Students  will  have  a  comprehensive  regional  understanding  of  European  prehistoric  and  early  historic  cultural  and  
archeological  similarities  and  differences.    
Students  will  demonstrate  their  understanding  through:  1)  geographic  knowledge,  2)  human/landscape  adaptations  for  
specific  cultural  and  archaeological  periods,  and  3)  trade  relationships  between  the  different  regions.  
Textbook  (required):  Europe  Between  the  Oceans  9000  BC-­‐AD  1000,  Barry  Cunliffe,  Yale  University  Press  2008  or  most  
recent  ed.  
Other  Readings:  on  Canvas  under  Course  Documents.    
Evaluation/Grading:    
     •    6  homework  assignments  =  35  points  
     •    5  in-­‐class  quizzes  @  6  points  each  =  30  points  
     •    1  investigation  paper  –  5/7  pages  long  =  25  points  
     •    class  attendance  and  participation  =  10  points  
Important  Class  information:  
Assigned  readings  complement  your  lectures  and  are  needed  for  assignments.  Thus,  reading  assignments  have  to  be  
completed  before  class.    
Several  videos  will  be  shown  in  class  and  the  dates  will  be  announced  prior  to  presentation.    
Homework  assignments  are  to  be  delivered  on  the  due  date.  When  appropriate,  assignments  are  to  be  typed  and  
delivered  in  class.  No  exceptions.    
There  is  no  make-­‐up  for  in-­‐class  quizzes.  No  exceptions.  
Final  grades  will  be  provided  only  in  person;  no  grades  will  be  provided  by  email.    
Cell  phones  and  other  electronic  devices  must  be  turned  off  while  in  the  classroom.  
According  to  University  Rules  tape-­‐recording  of  lectures  is  not  permitted,  unless  the  instructor  has  granted  permission.  


Required  University  Notices  and  Policies    
Use  of  E-­‐Mail  for  Official  Correspondence  to  Students  
E-­‐mail  is  recognized  as  an  official  mode  of  university  correspondence;  therefore,  you  are  responsible  for  reading  your  e-­‐
mail  for  university  and  course-­‐related  information  and  announcements.  You  are  responsible  to  keep  the  university  
informed  about  changes  to  your  e-­‐mail  address.  You  should  check  your  e-­‐mail  regularly  and  frequently—I  recommend  
daily,  but  at  minimum  twice  a  week—to  stay  current  with  university-­‐related  communications,  some  of  which  may  be  
time-­‐critical.  You  can  find  UT  Austin’s  policies  and  instructions  for  updating  your  e-­‐mail  address  at  
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564  
You  can  contact  the  Teaching  Assistant  or  me  by  email,  by  coming  to  the  office  hours,  or  by  appointment.  Email  messages  
received  after  10:00  pm  will  not  be  answered  until  the  following  day.  When  contacting  your  instructor  or  the  Teaching  
Assistant  by  email  you  are  expected  to  address  them  by  title  or  name  and  include  your  name  at  the  end  of  the  message.    
Use  of  Canvas  in  Class:  Power  Point  presentations  will  be  uploaded  to  Canvas  after  the  class.      
Emergency  Evacuation  Policy:  Occupants  of  buildings  on  the  UT  Austin  campus  are  required  to  evacuate  and  assemble  
outside  when  a  fire  alarm  is  activated  or  an  announcement  is  made.  Please  be  aware  of  the  following  policies  regarding  
evacuation:  Familiarize  yourself  with  all  exit  doors  of  the  classroom  and  the  building.  Remember  that  the  nearest  exit  
door  may  not  be  the  one  you  used  when  you  entered  the  building.    
If  you  require  assistance  to  evacuate,  inform  me  in  writing  during  the  first  week  of  class.  In  the  event  of  an  evacuation,  
follow  my  instructions  or  those  of  class  instructors.  Do  not  re-­‐enter  a  building  unless  the  Austin  Fire  Department,  the  UT  
Austin  Police  Department,  or  the  Fire  Prevention  Services  office  give  you  instructions  to  do  so.  
Notice  regarding  academic  dishonesty:  University  of  Texas  Honor  Code:  The  core  values  of  The  University  of  Texas  at  
Austin  are  learning,  discovery,  freedom,  leadership,  individual  opportunity,  and  responsibility.  Each  member  of  the  
university  is  expected  to  uphold  these  values  through  integrity,  honesty,  trust,  fairness,  and  respect  toward  peers  and  
community.  Web  site  for  more  information:    
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism  
Religious  Holy  Days:  By  UT  Austin  policy,  you  must  notify  me  of  your  pending  absence  at  least  fourteen  days  prior  to  the  
date  of  observance  of  a  religious  holy  day.  If  you  must  miss  a  class,  an  examination,  a  work  assignment,  or  a  project  in  
order  to  observe  a  religious  holy  day,  you  will  be  given  an  opportunity  to  complete  the  missed  work  within  a  reasonable  
time  after  the  absence.  
Behavior  Concerns  Advice  Line  (BCAL):  If  you  are  worried  about  someone  who  is  acting  differently,  you  may  use  the  
Behavior  Concerns  Advice  Line  to  discuss  by  phone  your  concerns  about  another  individual’s  behavior.  This  service  is  
provided  through  a  partnership  among  the  Office  of  the  Dean  of  Students,  the  Counseling  and  Mental  Health  Center  
(CMHC),  the  Employee  Assistance  Program  (EAP),  and  The  University  of  Texas  Police  Department  (UTPD).  Call  512-­‐232-­‐
5050  or  visit  http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal  
Students  with  Disabilities:  The  University  of  Texas  at  Austin  provides  students  with  qualified  disabilities  with  academic  
adjustments  to  their  needs.  For  more  information  please  visit  this  site:  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/  or  call  471-­‐
6259.  If  you  have  a  disability  please  let  me  know  by  the  beginning  of  the  second  week  of  class.      
PLEASE  READ  CAREFULLY:  Title  IX  legislation.  Starting  January  1,  all  employees  who  witness  or  receive  information  about  
sexual  harassment,  sexual  assault,  dating  violence  and  stalking  that  involve  a  current  student  or  employee  must  promptly  
report  the  incident  to  the  University’s  Title  IX  Coordinator  or  a  Deputy  Title  IX  Coordinator.  Reports  can  be  made  by  
phone:  (512)  471-­‐0419;  email,  or  online.  This  means  that  disclosure  to  the  instructor  or  the  TAs  of  any  incident  related  to  
the  subject  matter  listed  above,  will  result  in  reporting.    
  
                                                     


                                                      WEEKLY  COURSE  SCHEDULE  
   Week/dates                           Topics                            Readings  page  numbers  may           Quizzes  and  Assignments  
                                                                          differ  with  editions  
   Week  1  –  January  21-­‐23         Introduction                      Cunliffe,  Preface,  Chapter  1,  1-­‐   
                                                                          14  
   Week  2  –January  28-­‐30           Time  and  Space;  Chronology     Cunliffe,  Chapter  1,  14-­‐29,       January  30  -­‐  Map  Test  (quiz  1)  
                                        and  Geography  
   Week  3  –  February  4-­‐6          Prehistoric  Europe               The  Peopling  of  Europe…  Clive      Assignment  1  
                                                                          Gamble,  5-­‐41  
   Week  4  –February  11-­‐13          Upper  Paleolithic                The  Upper  Palaeolithic…  Paul          
                                                                          Mellars,  42-­‐78  
   Week  5  –February  18-­‐20          The  land  between  the  oceans   Cunliffe,  Chapter  2                  Quiz  2  
   Week  6  –February  25-­‐27          Mesolithic                        Cunliffe  Chapter  3,                    
   Week  7  –  March  3-­‐5             Neolithic                         Cunliffe  Chapters  4  and  5            Quiz  3  
   Week  8  –  March  10-­‐12           Later  Neolithic,  Copper  Age    Cunliffe,  Chapter  6                  Assignment  2  
   Week  9  –  March  16-­‐20           Spring  Break                                                              
   Week  10  –  March  24-­‐26          Bronze  Age                       Cunliffe,  Chapter  7;  Andrew         Assignment  3  
                                                                          Sherratt  The  Emergence  of  
                                                                          Elites…244-­‐276  
                                                                          Anthony,  Horse,  Wheel…  
   Week  11  –  March  31-­‐April  2    Late  Bronze  Age/Atlantic        Cunliffe,  Chapter  8                  Assignment  4  
                                        Bronze  Age  
   Week  12  –April  7-­‐9              Iron  Age                         Cunliffe  Chapter  9                   Assignment  5  
   Week  13  –  April  14-­‐16          Late  Iron  Age/Roman             Cunliffe,  Chapter  10                 Quiz  4  
                                        expansion  and  conquest  
   Week  14  –  April  21-­‐23          The  Roman  Empire                Cunliffe  Chapter  11                  Assignment  6  
   Week  15  –  April  28  -­‐30        The  Barbarians  return           Cunliffe,  chapter  12                 Quiz  5  
   Week  16  –  May  5-­‐7              Modern  connections                                                      Papers  due  
  
This  course  provides  students  with  the  following  readiness  competencies  and  skills:  
     •    Critical  Thinking/Problem  Solving  
     •    Analytical  thinking  
     •    Oral/Written  Communications  
     •    Global/Multicultural  Fluency  
     •    Analytical  thinking  
     •    Collaboration    
     •    Time  Management                                                                 
