                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                         STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:             SW n383T                 Instructor:       Starla Simmons, LCSW
                                                                       (she/her)
 Unique Number:             87590                    Email:            Starla.simmons@utexas.edu
 Semester:                  Summer 2020              Office:           3.124D
 Meeting Time:              T/R 1:30-4pm             Phone:            512-232-2703
 & Place:                   Web-based                Office Hours:     Tues, 11-1pm, or by appt.
                                       Social Work Practice II
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course builds upon Social Work Practice I by deepening students’ knowledge of the
generalist social work perspective in the application of theory and practice methods for
effective and ethical service delivery to diverse individuals, families, groups, organizations
and communities in conjunction with field education. Prerequisites: This course must be taken
concurrently with Field Instruction II, except for those students having advanced standing
status. It is a prerequisite for all second-year concentration courses.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
         Upon completion of this course, students should be able to:
         1. Critically analyze professional values, ethical dilemmas and ethical decision
              making and their impact on service delivery, policy and practice;
         2. Identify, critique, apply and evaluate social work theories and methods from a
              strengths-based generalist perspective for effective service delivery to diverse
              individuals, families, groups, organizations and communities;
         3. Apply beginning practice skills in the development, leadership and evaluation of
              small groups in agency, organization and community settings;
         4. Identify aspects of human diversity within and between groups and the
              implications for this diversity in assessment, planning, intervention and evaluation;
         5. Demonstrate knowledge of leadership and advocacy skills, conflict management
              and Inter- professional collaboration at all levels of social work practice to
              promote social and economic justice;
         6. Apply a beginning level of skill in utilizing empirical knowledge to evaluate
              theoretical frameworks, intervention plans and practice effectiveness;
         7. Communicate effectively and professionally, both orally and in writing,
              assessment, intervention and evaluation plans for diverse client systems that
              enhance client strengths, capacities, assets and resources.
III. EPAS COMPETENCIES
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on
Social Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the
UT SHSSW engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with
CSWE’s Education Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
                                                   1


Using a common evaluation instrument - the Final Case Analysis assignment - this course
measures the implementation of knowledge, skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective
processes to assess the following competencies:
Competency 1: Demonstrate Ethical and Professional Behavior
    a) Outcome 1.1: Make ethical decisions by applying the standards of the NASW Code of Ethics,
        relevant laws and regulations, models for ethical decision-making, ethical conduct of
        research, and additional codes of ethics as appropriate to context.
    b) Outcome 1.2: Use reflection and self-regulation to manage personal values and maintain
        professionalism in practice situations.
    c) Outcome 1.3: Demonstrate professional demeanor in behavior; appearance; and oral,
        written, and electronic communication.
    d) Outcome 1.4: Use technology ethically and appropriately to facilitate practice outcomes
        Outcome 1.5: Use supervision and consultation to guide professional judgment and behavior.
    e) Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families & Groups
    f) Outcome 6.2: Use empathy, reflection, and interpersonal skills to effectively engage diverse
        clients and constituencies.
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families & Groups
    a) Outcome 7.1: Collect and organize data, and apply critical thinking to interpret information
        from clients and constituencies.
    b) Outcome 7.3: Develop mutually agreed-on intervention goals and objectives based on the
        critical assessment of strengths, needs, and challenges within clients and constituencies.
    c) Outcome 7.4: Select appropriate intervention strategies based on the assessment, research
        knowledge, and values and preferences of clients and constituencies.
    d) Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families & Groups
    e) Outcome 8.1: Critically choose and implement interventions to achieve practice goals and
        enhance capacities of clients and constituencies.
    f) Outcome 8.3: Use inter-professional collaboration as appropriate to achieve beneficial
        practice outcomes.
    g) Outcome 8.4: Negotiate, mediate, and advocate with and on behalf of diverse clients and
        constituencies.
    h) Outcome 8.5: Facilitate effective transitions and endings that advance mutually agreed-on
        goals.
Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families & Groups
    a) Outcome 9.1: Select and use appropriate methods for evaluation of outcomes.
    b) Outcome 9.3: Critically analyze, monitor, and evaluate intervention and program processes
        and outcomes.
    c) Outcome 9.4: Apply evaluation findings to improve practice effectiveness at the micro,
        mezzo, and macro levels.
IV. TEACHING METHODS
This class will be taught online, using zoom. I teach using a variety of methods with an
emphasis on experiential learning for the purpose of building skill and confidence. The
generalist nature of the course content requires a didactic approach as well. Therefore,
PowerPoint lectures, role-plays, videos, class discussions, small group and dyad exercises,
and guest speakers will all be utilized. For success in this class, you must be willing to
participate, take risks and “stretch” out of you comfort zone. You are expected to ask
questions to clarify expectations, provide me with constructive feedback in a timely manner
and meet with me individually as needed and/or when requested.
                                                   2


Use of Canvas for this course: This class uses Canvas – a Web-based course management
system with password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu - for confidential
communication such as posting and submitting assignments. Readings that are not in the
required text, assignment guidelines and assignment grading rubrics are all posted to Canvas.
Students can access Canvas Help 24/7 by calling 855- 308-2494. Students are expected to set
notifications in Canvas so they receive announcements and updates as soon as they are posted.
If anything is getting in the way of your learning, let me know as soon as possible so we can
discuss it and problem solve together!
REQUIRED TEXT
Walsh, J. (2013). Theories for Direct Social Work Practice. (3rd edition). California:
Wordsworth Cengage Learning.
Articles and Podcasts are assigned weekly to supplement the text. They can be found on
Canvas with this link:
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
1. Attendance and Participation                                              (10 points)
        Being a self-motivated, lifelong learner is essential to becoming a strong social work
professional. It is also important to practice new skills and learn to work effectively with other
social work professionals. Therefore, consistent attendance (you come every time, on time,
and stay until dismissed), demonstrated preparation (you complete the required readings
before class) and regular participation (you share insights, ask relevant questions, and
contribute to exercises) are expectations of this course. I do not excuse absences. It is up to
you to decide whether missing class is worth the point deduction. I do ask that you
communicate in a timely manner your absence, tardy or early departure. Email
communication is preferred.
                Attendance & Participation points will be deducted in the following manner:
                Absence 1 will result in a loss of 0 points as long as you communicate with me in a timely
                and professional manner (-1 point if no timely, professional communication provided)
                Absence 2 will result in a loss of 2 points
                Absence 3 will result in a loss of 3 points
A pattern of absences, late arrivals or early departures (more than 3), or a pattern of poor
preparation or participation may result in disciplinary action
2. Learning Profile and Reflection:                                                 (15 points)
        Students will answer in self-assessment questions that reflect their social work goals,
learning styles, understanding of social justice. Assignment guidelines can be found in
Canvas.
3. Theory Group Project                                                             (25 points)
        To study theory in-depth and practice task group skills, you and your group will
develop and facilitate a creative class presentation about a particular theory and its application
to practice. Students may present from the following theories: crisis theory; relational cultural
                                                     3


theory, cognitive theory, attachment theory, and narrative theory. Groups will be decided in
class. Guidelines with grading rubric and due date can be found in Canvas.
4. Video Role Play Project                                                    (20 points)
        This assignment is designed to help students improve their interviewing and
intervention skills, as well as improve their self-awareness and ability to give and receive
feedback. Guidelines with grading rubric and due dates can be found in Canvas. This project
has two parts. Video & Feedback Participation: Pair up with another student to do a role-
play or real play. This role play/real play will demonstrate the work phase and allow you to
practice an intervention. Students will then show a 5-minute clip of the video to a small group
from the class, and exchange feedback with members of the group.
5. Final Case Analysis                                                        (30 points)
To help you consolidate your professional knowledge and skills acquired over Practice Class,
and to support the school’s CSWE accreditation process, you will study a fictional case and
answer a set of questions about the case. The case and questions will test your competency in
the areas of ethics & professionalism, and engagement, assessment, intervention and
evaluation of individuals, groups & families.
VI. COURSE GRADING
This table summarizes how you will demonstrate your learning and how each assignment is
weighted:
    Assignments                                        Points possible  % of Total Grade
    Participation                                      10               10
    Learning Profile and Reflection                    15               15
    Video Role Play                                    20               20
    Group Theory Presentation                          25               25
    Final Case Analysis                                30               30
    Total:                                             100              100
The following grading scale will be used to determine your final letter grade for the course.
The student who earns a high “A” for this course is one who consistently submits excellent
quality work over the entire semester.
                94. 0 and Above A
                90.0 to 93.999 A-
                87.0 to 89.999 B+
                84.0 to 86.999 B
                80.0 to 83.999 B-
                77.0 to 79.999 C+
                74.0 to 76.999 C
                70.0 to 73.999 C-       (Class failed/no credit)
                67.0 to 69.999 D+
                64.0 to 66.999 D
                60.0 to 63.999 D-
                Below 60.0 F
                                                 4


Students who were admitted to the MSSW program on a conditional basis are not able to take
an incomplete for this course if the conditions for admission are still in place.
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Social work students must adhere to the Student Standards for Professional Conduct of the UT
School of Social Work and the NASW Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for their own
conduct.
Find the MSSW Handbook at http://www.utexas.edu/ssw/current/forms/
Find the MSSW Graduate Guide to Field at http://www.utexas.edu/ssw/field/forms/
1. Professional Conduct in Class: The professor expects students to act as professionals in
class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the
class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. We will not, nor should we,
always agree with one another. In this environment we should be exposed to diverse ideas and
opinions, and sometime we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. However, the
professor does require that students engage one another with respect and professionalism.
2. Student Privacy & Confidentiality: Class discussions or role plays can on occasion bring
up strong emotions or raise issues of a personal nature. For student privacy, it is
recommended that students not discuss matters of a highly sensitive nature in class. If you
need to talk, come see me after class. Your privacy and confidentiality will be protected
unless the matter must be reviewed by the School of Social Work or must be reported by law
(please refer to the MSSW Handbook and Title IX requirements). I will connect you with
resources in the community if your personal needs exceed what can be provided by me or by
UT services.
3. Client Privacy & Confidentiality: If class work prompts you to reflect on past or current
client contact, and sharing information about that contact is necessary for the learning process,
it is your professional obligation to protect the client’s privacy and confidentiality as much as
possible by sharing judiciously and anonymously (this applies to information shared about
staff at your field agency as well).
4. Classroom Civility: A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various
backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex,
physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations,
among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement
and mutual respect. Social Work deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues
may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive
classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to
challenging issues.
5. Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially
important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture,
religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters
are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to
address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun.
                                                  5


Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate
changes to my records.
6. Unanticipated Distress: Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions
to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to
inform the instructor. The instructor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’
participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students can
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
7. Grading Policies
If you are confused by a grade or the feedback you receive on an assignment, please make an
appointment to meet with me. I enjoy talking face to face with students about how they can
improve and may give some credit back on the assignment.
Assignments are all due to Canvas according to the posted due date. (except presentations
and videos due by class time). Assignments turned in after due date are considered late.
Students will lose 5% of the assignment point value per calendar day that an assignment
remains un-submitted. On subsequent days, papers must be submitted to Canvas by noon to
avoid the additional 5% penalty. If you anticipate a problem turning in an assignment on time,
please contact me in advance. You have one free late day per semester to be used at your
discretion, but you must indicate in Canvas that you are using your “pass” when you submit
the assignment or it the pass will not be applied.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
1. THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of
Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
2. DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
(471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student
should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of
any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
3. PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The
professor expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive
on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one
another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various
backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender,
sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations,
among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement
and mutual respect. This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and
                                                  6


dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also
deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that
did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this
environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not
agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students
engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
4. UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
5. POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public
social networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users
cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work
students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen,
read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to,
etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and
prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other
forms of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication
may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are
expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate
for a professional social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised
to manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos
or using any language that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and
are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information
that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality
in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted
regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate
the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social
Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
6. POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
                                                 7


individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the
Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
7. USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not
limited to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any
unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in
disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course
materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the
University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in
further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading class
materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or future
students.
8. CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies,
clients, and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on
educational supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of
the educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions
taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in
sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
9. USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are
responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change
of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at
minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for
updating their e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
10. RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe
a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
11. TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment
that is free from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty,
field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated
reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking,
dating violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents
will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title
IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also
be found at https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
                                                  8


12. CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be
found here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing
the Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
13. SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments
that involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments
may present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the
profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices
related to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any
safety concerns.
14. BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about
their behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else,
students may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This
service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
15. EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin
campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. Course Schedule
All readings, assignment guidelines, grading rubrics and other essential information will be on
the Canvas website. Check Canvas regularly and use it to ask questions about the course
schedule. Changes to the schedule may be made at Professor Simmons’ discretion and as
circumstances require. It is your responsibility to note these changes when announced.
Professor Simmons will make every effort to announce changes with as much advanced
notice as possible
                                                  9


   DATE:     TOPIC:                            READINGS:                                           ASSIGNMENT
                                                                                                         DUE:
1  Thursday, Class Overview:                   No Readings
   6/4       Syllabus & Schedule
             Learning Expectations
2  6/9       Integrating Theory in Practice:   Walsh Chapters 1
             Professional Use of Self,         CRT & SW Practice article in Canvas
             Intersectionality & Critical Race
             Theory
3  6/11      Trauma Informed Care & Healing    Healing Centered Engagement by Dr. Shawn
             Centered Engagement               Ginwright                                       Learning Assessment
                                                                                               Due
4  6/16      Ego Psychology &                  Walsh, Chapter 4
             Defense Mechanisms
5   6/18     Group Dynamics & Facilitation     Handouts in Canvas
6  6/23      Solution-Focused & Motivational   Walsh, Chapter 10 & 11
             Interviewing
7  6/25      Mindfulness                       Summers and Vivien (2018). Ecotherapy: A
             Ecotherapy &                      Forgotten Ecosystem Service Review
             Environmental Justice
8  6/30      Group Presentation:                                                                  Group #1 Handout
             Attachment Theory
9  7/2                     NO CLASS                                NO CLASS
10 7/7       Group Presentation:               Walsh, Chapter 5                                   Group #2 Handout
             Cultural Relational Theory
11 7/9       Group Presentation:               Walsh, Chapter 12                                  Group #3 Handout
             Narrative Theory
12 7/14      Group Presentation:               Walsh, Chapter 13                                  Group #4 Handout
             Crisis Theory
13 7/16      Group Presentation:               Walsh, Chapter 8                                   Group #5 Handouts
             Cognitive Theory
14 7/21      Video Role-Play w/ Partner:       No reading                                         5min role play clip
             Reviews                                                                              uploaded to canvas
                                                                                                  & Feedback Report
15 7/23      Leadership, Advocacy & Organizing In Canvas:
                                               1. Hardina, D. (2014) “Dialogue in Community
                                               Organizing Practice”
                                               2. Community Organizing Handout
                                                http://grandchallengesforsocialwork.org/grand-
                                               challenges-initiative/
16 7/28      Endings, Transitions, Evaluations No readings                                     Final Case Analysis Due
                                                  10


X. Bibliography
Comstock, L. D., Hammer, R. T., Strentzsch, J., Cannon, K., Parsons, J. & Salazar, G. (2008).
Relational- cultural Theory: A framework for bridging relational, multicultural, and social
justice competencies. Journal of counseling and development, 86.
Congress, E. (1997, 2005). Using the culturagram to assess and empower culturally diverse
families. In Congress, E. (Eds.), Multicultural perspectives in working with families. New
York: Springer Press, 3-16.
Corey, G., Corey, C. & Corey, M.S. (2010). Groups: Process and practice. Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole, CENGAGE Learning.
Davis, R. D. & Jansen, G. G. (March 1998). Making meaning of Alcoholics Anonymous for
social workers: Myths, Metaphors and Realities. Social Work, 43(2), 169-182.
Nemeth, D. G. (2015). Ecopsychology: Advances from the intersection of psychology and
environmental protection [2 volumes]. Westport: ABC-CLIO.
Hardina, D. (2014). The use of dialogue in community organization practice: Using theory,
values, and skills to guide group decision-making. Journal of Community Practice, 22(3),
365-384.
Ishizuka, K. & Husain, A. (2015). Anti-oppressive practices. In Social Worker’s Desk
Reference (3rd ed. pp.413-426). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2005). Excerpt from Coming to Our Senses: Healing Ourselves and the World
Through Mindfulness. Published by Hyperion; January 2005; ISBN 0-7868-6756-6).
Kelley, P. & Smith, M. (2015). Narrative therapy. In Social Worker’s Desk Reference (3rd ed.
pp. 287-292).New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Lankton, S.R. (2015). The use of therapeutic metaphor in social work. In Social Worker’s
Desk Reference(3rd ed. pp. 629-639). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Iacono, G. (2018). An affirmative mindfulness approach for lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, and queer youth mental health. Clinical Social Work Journal, 1-11.
Lee, E., & Bhuyan, R. (2013). Negotiating within whiteness in cross-cultural clinical
encounters. Social Service Review, 87(1), 98-130. doi:10.1086/669919
Maurer, K. (2016). The invisibility of whiteness in clinical practice: Case commentary on
"becoming visible: The case of colette". Clinical Social Work Journal, 44(4), 351.
doi:10.1007/s10615-016-0598-x
McCormick, A., Scheyd, K., & Terrazas, S. (2018). Trauma-informed care and LGBTQ
youth: Considerations for advancing practice with youth with trauma experiences. Families in
Society: The Journal of Contemporary Social Services, 99(2), 160-169.
doi:10.1177/1044389418768550
                                               11


Mizrahi, T. (2015). Community organizing principles and practice guidelines. In Social
Worker’s Desk Reference (3rd ed. pp. 894-906). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
National Association of Social Workers. (1997). National association of social workers code
of ethics. Washington, D.C.: NASW Press
Rosenzweig, J.M. & Sundborg, S.A. (2015). The neurobiology of toxic stress. In Social
Worker’s Desk Reference (3rd ed. pp. 292-301). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Schneider, D. & Grady, M. (2015) Conscious and Unconscious Use of Self: The Evolution of
a Process, Psychoanalytic Social Work, 22:1, 52-70
Steelman, S. M. (2016). Externalizing identities: An integration of narrative therapy and queer
theory. Journal of Family Psychotherapy, 27(1), 79-84.
Thomas Joseph Blakely, Gregory M. Dziadosz; Application of Attachment Theory in Clinical
Social Work, Health & Social Work, Volume 40, Issue 4, 1 November 2015, Pages 283–
289, https://doi-org.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/10.1093/hsw/hlv059
Vonk, M.E. & Early, T.J. (2015). Cognitive-behavioral therapy. In Social Worker’s Desk
Reference (3rd ed. pp. 257-263). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Walsh, J. (2013). Theories for Direct Social Work Practice. (3rd edition). California:
Wodsworth Cengage Learning.
https://medium.com/@ginwright/the-future-of-healing-shifting-from-trauma-informed-care-
to-healing-centered-engagement-634f557ce69c
                                               12
