Spring 2019
ARC 370V / ARC 380V
Creative Robotics
Benjamin Rice
ben@austin.utexas.edu
Tues/Thurs 9:30-11am WMB Computer Lab / Sutton Hall
Robotics Lab
Office hours by appointment Sutton Hall Robotics Lab
Course Description:
This course will explore contemporary methods of using industrial robots to produce creative expression
and representation. The course will revolve completely around researching, testing, and creating
creative output in the robotics lab on the robots with a focus on pushing the limits of what we
understand to be considered representation. This course has no rigid boundaries or correct answers –
only unlimited questions that lead to creative, and hopefully unexpected, output.
Expected Learning Outcomes:
A knowledge of emerging robotic technologies as they relate to creative output, particularly modes of
representation. Basic understandings of skills relative to this including:
    •   programming for robotics;
    •   robotic simulation;
    •   material research;
    •   3d modelling and visualization;
Course Requirements:
Students are expected to arrive on time to class prepared to work. The lab based nature of this course
requires active engagement in every class meeting. Our final projects in this course will be actively
worked on and built up over time through each and every meeting. Thoughtful discussion relative to
your own as well as your colleague’s projects is required.
Assignments:
There is a single assignment to meet the requirements of this course. This project will be constructed
thoroughly over each and every class meeting The final project will be due the final day of the course.


Grade Breakdown:
     •   Attendance and discussion: 20%
     •   Final Project 80%
Grading Policy:
A Work exceptional
A- As above, but with scope for further development
B+ Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and completes all work.
B Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.
B- Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued. One or more assignments or projects
requiring further development.
C Assignments and/or projects are not pursued with dedication or vigor. Assignments or projects are
incomplete in one or more areas.
F Unacceptable work
Attendance:
You are expected to attend each class session. A student with two non-excused absences may be asked
to leave the class.
Course Materials:
Throughout the course we will be producing output on the robots constantly. The materials you will
need to purchase for the course will be based on your research direction, but students can expect to
spend between $100-400 on materials during the course of the semester.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy Statement:
The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259,
471-6441 TTY.
Academic Integrity Statement:
Strict standards of academic honesty will be enforced according to the University policy on academic
integrity. All written work handed in by you is considered to be your own original work, prepared
without unauthorized assistance. I expect that a student’s name on any assignment means that you
have neither given nor received unauthorized aid.
