                                            Culture and Health
                                    ANT 324 L (unique number 31643)
                                               Spring 2020
                                     Professor Pauline Turner Strong
                                       Department of Anthropology
                                       University of Texas at Austin
                        Office Hours: Tuesday, 9:30-11:00am, and by appointment
                                        RLP 4.404 (512.471.8524)
                                           Email through Canvas
Course Description:
This course considers the social and cultural foundations of western medicine, and introduces
students to indigenous and alternative health systems. The course also considers the linkage
between modern medicine and the construction of modern subjectivity and personhood, and
analyzes local and global health disparities based on social, political, and economic inequalities.
In this course students will develop an understanding of the cultural and historical construction of
health, illness, race, gender, the body, subjectivity, and personhood. You will be introduced to the
history of the biomedical model of health and illness, and will develop an awareness of alternatives
to the biomedical model. You will develop an understanding of the social, cultural, political, and
economic context of contemporary health systems and health disparities, both locally and
internationally. You will develop an understanding of the ethical principles embedded in the
biomedical and alternative models of health and illness, as well as some of the ethical dilemmas
faced by patients, caregivers, and practitioners.
This course carries a Global Cultures flag and an Ethics flag, both of which are part of the
University’s core requirements. It may also count towards the certificate in Native American and
Indigenous Studies (with the completion of an individual project on an indigenous issue; please
consult the instructor for requirements). Finally, it counts towards the new Bridging Disciplines
certificate in Patients, Practitioners, and Cultures of Care.
Learning Objectives:
    • Students will develop an understanding of the cultural and historical construction of health,
         illness, race, gender, the body, subjectivity, and personhood.
    • Students will become aware of the history of the biomedical model of health and illness.
    • Students will develop an awareness of global alternatives to the biomedical model as well as
         essentials of cross-cultural communication (i.e., cultural competence).
    • Students will develop an understanding of the social, political, and economic context of
         health systems and health disparities, both locally and globally (i.e., structural competence).
    • Students will develop an understanding of the ethical concepts embedded in the biomedical
         and alternative models of health and illness, and their implications for ethical reasoning and
         decision-making by patients, family caregivers, and healthcare providers.
    • Students will learn the perspectives of the fields of medical anthropology and global health
         on questions of culture and health.
    • Students will learn the contributions of ethnographic fieldwork, analysis, and comparison to
         our understanding of human health, illness, and healing.
    • Students will develop critical reasoning, writing, and presentation skills, as well as skills in


         working on a research team.
Course Requirements:
This is a fast-paced course and students must keep up with the readings and assignments in order
to succeed. You are required to attend class regularly and to participate in class discussions; please
contact the professor if you need to miss class due to an illness or emergency. You are expected to
read the assigned material carefully prior to class (see guidelines posted on Canvas). Research
teams will be formed around topics, and each will be given discussion facilitation assignments.
There will be quizzes every week or two; no make-ups are available, but the lowest grade will be
dropped. You will complete two short papers and contribute to a group project. You are expected to
complete work on time; if this is not possible due to an illness or emergency, please contact the
instructor.
Assignments:
    • Paper 1 (due Feb 23): A paper of 1000-1500 words summarizing, applying and evaluating
         the four approaches to health care ethics discussed in Reimagining Global Health, chapter 9
         (utilitarianism, liberal cosmopolitanism, capabilities approach, human rights framework) as
         well as principalism as discussed by Gillon (1994). The paper should clearly and
         thoughtfully delineate and assess the five approaches, showing how they help you think
         through a specific bioethical dilemma found in our readings, your personal experience, or in
         other sources. What are the advantages and disadvantages of each approach? Do you find
         one of them clearly superior to the others in addressing your dilemma? Why? All sources
         and quotations must be thoroughly documented, following MLA, APA, or Chicago Style. Your
         paper must be double-spaced and have a heading, an informative title, and a bibliography.
         The most straightforward organization for this paper is to begin with a dilemma and
         systematically use the frameworks to consider it, but you may organize your paper
         differently if you prefer.
    •    Paper 2 (due May 8): There are several possible formats for Paper 2. In either case, the
         format and length are the same as described for Paper 1.
             o Expanding on our discussion of the narrative construction of health and illness,
                  write a narrative concerning an experience of illness that you or a family member
                  have had. If you write the narrative of another person, you must obtain written
                  permission from the person to conduct an interview and submit the narrative to
                  your instructor, for educational purposes only. If you write a narrative about your
                  own experience, please avoid topics that may prove to be traumatic; it may be
                  difficult to achieve critical distance on experiences that are emotionally intense or
                  have occurred recently. The narrative should conclude with an analysis, using
                  appropriately some of the concepts discussed in class (for example, the experience
                  of illness vs. the biomedical concept of disease, health care disparities, ethical
                  principles in health care, etc.). A well-structured paper will mention these concepts
                  in an opening paragraph in order to prepare the reader for your analysis. Your
                  opening paragraph must also refer to specific course readings on health and illness
                  narratives.
             o Compare, contrast, and evaluate the three ethnographies we have read: All in Your
                  Head; Fresh Fruits, Broken Bodies; and Lissa. What are the aims of each ethnography,
                  and what are the strengths of each? How does each ethnography address the
                  relationship between culture and health? Which ethnography do you think is most
                  successful and enlightening, and why?
             o Graduate students, professional students, and students wishing to count the course


                 towards the certificate in Native American and Indigenous Studies should confer
                 with the instructor about requirements for Paper 2.
     •   Group Project (due April 27): The final assignment is to create and make a presentation to
         the class on an aspect of Culture and Health that is interesting to your group and goes
         beyond the course syllabus. We will decide on groups and topics in class, but most of the
         work on the project will occur outside of class. Presentations will be during the last two
         weeks of class, and you will be expected to submit a progress report/work plan (on March
         27) and an individual contribution and assessment memo (on May 6). Further directions
         will be posted on Canvas and discussed in class.
Evaluation:
The final grade will be calculated as indicated below. This class uses a standard plus/minus scale.
The highest grade for any assignment is 97.
     Attendance & Participation                                  15%
     Quizzes                                                     10%
     Paper 1                                                     25%
     Paper 2                                                     25%
     Group Project                                               25% (progress report 5%, individual
                                                                       memo 5%)
     TOTAL                                                      100%
Required Texts:
The required texts include an introduction to global health (Farmer, et. al.), an anthology of articles
on medical anthropology (Brown and Closser), two ethnographies (Holmes; Buchbinder), and a
graphic novel (Hamdy and Nye). The texts are available at the University Cooperative Bookstore. I
recommend purchasing or renting the texts through the Coop or other vendors if at all possible, but
all but Buchbinder may also be obtained through PCL.
     Brown, Peter and Svea Closser, eds., Understanding and Applying Medical Anthropology, 3rd
        edition. Routledge, 2016. (PCL electronic resource)
     Buchbinder, Mara. All In Your Head: Making Sense of Pediatric Pain. University of California
        Press, 2015. (on order at PCL)
     Farmer, Paul, Jim Yong Kim, Arthur Kleinman, and Matthew Basilico, Reimagining Global Health:
        An Introduction. University of California Press, 2013. (PCL electronic resource)
     Hamdy, Sherine and Coleman Nye. Lissa: A Story about Medical Promise, Friendship, and
        Revolution. University of Toronto Press, 2017. (PCL reserves)
     Holmes, Seth M. Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies: Migrant Farmers in the United States. University of
        California Press, 2013. (PCL electronic resource)


Course Schedule:
Students are responsible for any changes in the schedule posted on Canvas. See Modules for
additional details on these assignments.
Module I. Introduction to Culture and Health
       Jan 22       Discuss course theme, format, expectations, assignments, and student areas of
                    interest.
       Jan 24       Lissa, Part I. Lissa is a graphic novel based on research by two anthropologists
                    on “how social contexts shape medical decisions” (264). We are beginning with a
                    graphic novel to introduce some of the cultural, structural, and ethical issues
                    that we will be discussing in the course of the semester.
       Jan 27       Lissa, Parts II & III
       Jan 29       “Medical Anthropology,” Chapter 1 in Understanding & Applying Medical
                    Anthropology.
       Jan 31       “Introduction: A Biosocial Approach to Global Health”: Chapter 1 in Reimagining
                    Global Health: An Introduction.
                    Þ Quiz 1 on Key Concepts and Methodologies (be able to define and explain
                        the significance of the key concepts and methodologies posted on Canvas
                        under Modules).
Module II. Theoretical, Evolutionary, and Historical Perspectives
       Feb 3        “Unpacking Global Health: Theory and Critique”: Chapter 2 in Reimagining
                    Global Health: An Introduction.
       Feb 5        “Evolution and Human Biological Variation”: Conceptual Tools and Chapters 2-3
                    in Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology.
       Feb 7        “Evolution and Human Biological Variation”: Conceptual Tools and Chapters 4-8
                    in Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology.
                    Þ Quiz 2 on Key Concepts and Methodologies
       Feb 10       “History of Health”: Chapters 9, 10 (and Conceptual Tools) in Understanding &
                    Applying Medical Anthropology.
       Feb 12       “Colonial Medicine and Its Legacies”: Chapter 3 in Reimagining Global Health, pp.
                    33-73.
Module III. Ethics and Values in Health
       Feb 14       “Health for All?” and “Declaration of Alma-Ata”: Chapter 4 and Appendix in
                    Reimagining Global Health.
       Feb 17       “Values and Global Health”: Chapter 9 in Reimagining Global Health.


       Feb 19      “Medical ethics: four principles plus attention to scope,” by R, Gillon. BMJ 309
                   (1994):184–188. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.309.6948.184. On Canvas.
                   Þ Quiz 3 on Key Concepts and Methodologies
       Feb 21      Writing day (no class): Work on Paper 1
                   Þ Paper 1 Due on Canvas, February 23
Module IV. Structural Violence, Social Suffering, the Clinical Gaze, and Ethnographic Methodology
       Feb 24      Introduction to ethnographic research and structural competence (no assigned
                   readings)
       Feb 26      “Structural Violence”: Chapters 11, 12 (and Conceptual Tools) in Understanding
                   & Applying Medical Anthropology.
       Feb 28      “Structural Violence”: Chapters 14, 15 (and Conceptual Tools) in Understanding
                   & Applying Medical Anthropology.
                   Þ Quiz 4 on Key Concepts and Methodologies
       Mar 2       Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies: Migrant Farmers in the United States, Introduction
                   and Chapter 1.
       Mar 4       Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies, Chapters 2-3.
       Mar 6       Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies, Chapters 4-5.
       Mar 9       Fresh Fruit, Broken Bodies, Chapters 6-7
                   Þ Quiz 5 on Key Concepts and Methodologies
Module V. Ethnomedicine, Meaning and Experience of Illness, Technology and the Body, Culture &
Mental Health
       Mar 11      Ethnomedicine and Healers: Chapters 16-18 (and Conceptual Tools) in
                   Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology.
       Mar 13      Ethnomedicine and Healers: Chapters 19-21 (and Conceptual Tools) in
                   Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology.
       Mar 23      The Meaning and Experience of Illness: Chapters 22-24 (and Conceptual Tools),
                   pp. 228-260 in Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology.
                   Þ Quiz 6 on Key Concepts and Methodologies


                                            SPRING BREAK
      Mar 25     Biomedicine, Technology, and the Body: Chapters 25-28 (and Conceptual Tools),
                 in Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology.
      Mar 27     Research day (no class): Work on Group Projects
                 Þ Progress Report/Work Plan due on Canvas, March 27
      Mar 30     Culture, Illness & Mental Health: Chapters 29-31 (and Conceptual Tools), in
                 Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology.
                 Þ Quiz 7 on Key Concepts and Methodologies
      Apr 1      All In Your Head: Making Sense of Pediatric Pain, Introduction.
      Apr 3      All In Your Head: Making Sense of Pediatric Pain, chapters 1-2.
      Apr 6      All In Your Head: Making Sense of Pediatric Pain, chapters 3-4.
      Apr 8      All In Your Head: Making Sense of Pediatric Pain, chapter 5 and Conclusion.
                 Þ Quiz 8 on Key Concepts and Methodologies
Module VI. Biomedicine, Stigma, Health Disparities, and Global Health
      Apr 10     “Working with the Culture of Biomedicine,” Chapters 32-35 (and Conceptual
                 Tools) in Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology, pp. 333-362.
      Apr 13     “Stigma and Coping with Chronic Illness” in Understanding & Applying Medical
                 Anthropology, pp. 363-407.
      Apr 15     “Culture and Nutrition” in Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology, pp.
                 363-407.
                 Þ Quiz 9 on Key Concepts and Methodologies
      Apr 17     “Global Health Issues and Programs,” Chapters 42-45 (and Conceptual Tools) in
                 Understanding & Applying Medical Anthropology, pp. 408-446.
      Apr 20     “Global Health Priorities for the Early Twenty-First Century”: Chapter 11 in
                 Reimagining Global Health, pp. 302-354.
      Apr 22      “A Movement for Global Health Equity?”: Chapter 12 in Reimagining Global
                 Health, pp. 302-354.
                 Þ Quiz 10 on Key Concepts and Methodologies


Module VII: Review and Applications
        Apr 24         Review Lissa. How does this novel portray ethical decisions regarding cancer
                       prevention and kidney transplantation? How are health disparities portrayed?
                       How are cultural beliefs (both Egyptian and Western) expressed in Lissa? How
                       are culture, politics, and health related? How are suffering and sacrifice in the
                       realm of health related to suffering and sacrifice in the political realm? How does
                       the graphic and fictional form of this account affect your experience as a reader?
         Apr 27        Presentations of group projects
                       Þ Slides for all groups due on Canvas, April 27
         Apr 29        Presentations of group projects
         May 1         Presentations of group projects
         May 4         Presentations of group projects
         May 6         Presentations of group projects
                       Þ Contribution and assessment memo due on Canvas, May 6
         May 8         Writing day (no class)
                       Þ Paper 2 due on Canvas, May 8
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES AND POLICIES
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-
6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations. For more information, visithttp://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help.
Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any
academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek
support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Centereach
year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for
more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit


http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slcor call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
UndergraduateWritingCenter: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce
harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to:
wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information
BCAL:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right–
it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Emergency Evacuation:
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/•Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas
at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.•Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each
classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used
when entering the building.•Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in
writing during the first week of class.•In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: AustinFireDepartment, The
University of Texas at AustinPolice Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.•Link to information
regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures canbe found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Title IX and Senate Bill 212 Reporting. Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:1)
Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating. 2) Provide support and remedies to students
and employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation. 3) Investigate and
discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further investigation
any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking committed
by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also requires reporting incidents of sex-
and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title IX incidents). This means we
cannot keep confidential information about any such incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with
someone who can maintain confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-
6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly urge you
make use of these services for any needed support and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office at
at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own


(or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy and the University Honor Code, which can be found at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops
while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
