                 Spring 2019 ALD 118C: Intro to Mentoring/Leadership
                               Mondays 7-8 PM (UTC 1.104)
Instructor of Record:
Devin Walker, Ph.D.
devinwalker@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant
Tiffany Lewis, Ph.D.
tiffany.tillis@austin.utexas.edu
Enrique Aguayo
enriqueaguayo@utexas.edu
Course Objectives:
The objective of this class is to build and strengthen mentoring and leadership skills and
provide Gateway Mentors a solid foundation of experience and knowledge that can be
applied to classroom facilitation and mentorship in Fall 2019. Student mentors will
develop skills to be effective mentors with intent to provide ongoing academic, personal,
and professional support to other students.
Class Expectations:
     1. Be in class on time. We will start promptly at 7:00 PM.
     2. Attendance is mandatory and will be recorded.
     3. Put away all technology during class unless otherwise instructed.
     4. Be engaged, ask questions, and use this class as an opportunity to learn and
         network with your fellow peers and in-class presenters.
Suggested Readings*:
Newton, F. B., & Ender, S. C. (2010). Students helping students : a guide for peer
educators on college campuses.
Rowley, B. (2006). Becoming a high-performance mentor : a guide to reflection and
action
*The majority of the material of covered in the course comes from these two texts. YOU
WILL NOT BE RESPONSIBLE FOR READING them throughout the semester.
However, if you are interested in the course material and wish to further develop your
skills as a student mentor these books will serve as a reference.
Assignments and Grading:
Your grade for this course will be based upon the criteria listed below:
1. Participation/Attendance (70%): Mentors are expected to fully participate by
     engaging in discussions during each class. Each class attendance is worth 5% of your
     total grade (14 classes x 5% = 70% of total grade).


2. Mentor the Mentor Training (25%): Students will develop a training for their
    fellow student mentors. The training could expand on topics discussed throughout the
    semester or can be original topics that could potentially be useful when mentoring
    students involved in the Gateway Scholars Program. This training will be formatted
    as a video or in class presentation and will from 8-10 minutes.
3. End of Semester Feedback (5%): Mentors are expected to complete and submit an
    end of semester feedback for the course. This will be administered during class time.
Grade Cutoffs:
Grades will be calculated using the scale below:
A - 90% - 100%
B - 80% - 89%
C - 70% - 79%
D - 60% - 69%
F – 0% - 59%
              DATE                                TOPIC
                1/28                     Importance of Mentorship
                                     Guest Speaker: Dr. Tiffany Lewis
                 2/4              Becoming a High Performance Mentor
                2/11                       Student Mentorability
                                      Guest Speaker: Victoria Black
                2/18              Real Talk: Helping Friends in Distress
                                           Guest Speaker: CMHC
                2/25            Facilitating Conversations about Diversity
                 3/4        Bouncing Back: Coping with Failure and Rejection
                                           Guest Speaker: CMHC
                3/11               Interpersonal Communication Skills
                3/18                         SPRING BREAK
                3/25        Understanding Group Process and Leading Groups
                                                Effectively
                 4/1                    Personal Safety on Campus
                                          Guest Speaker:(UTPD)
                 4/8             Understanding Undocumented Students
                4/15                   Supporting LGBTQ Students
                                           Guest Speaker: (GSC)
                4/22                 Strategies for Academic Success
                4/29               Mentor Training Video/Presentations
                 5/6               Mentor Training Video/Presentations


*This schedule is tentative and instructors reserve the right to change weekly topics,
assignments, and discussions.
Accommodations for students with disabilities:
UT provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities upon request. If you have a physical or learning disability and you wish to
have accommodations, please notify your teaching assistant immediately. You must also
notify Services for Students with Disabilities office in SSB 4.206 before accommodations
can be made.
Academic Integrity: University standards regulating academic integrity are strictly
enforced. Plagiarism is a serious offense in this and all courses. It is always necessary to
identify the original source of supporting information; you must cite the source of any
material, quoted or paraphrased, that is used in your presentation.
Religious Holy Days: A student who misses classes or other required activities,
including examinations for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the
instructors in advance.
