ANT	  304T	  –	  Introduction	  to	  Texas	  Archaeology	  	  
Unique	  #	  31600	  
Class	  meets	  MW	  1:00-­‐‑2:30	  pm	  
The	  class	  meets	  online:	  live	  online	  streaming	  	  
Instructor:
Dr. Mariah Wade
Office:	  SAC.	  4.146	  
Office hours: M 10:00 am -12:00 pm
Email: m.wade@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants:
Mr. Jordan Bowers
Office: SAC. 4.166
Office hours: MW 11:00 am – 12:00 pm
Mr. Duncan Hurt
Office: SAC 4.166
Office hours: TTH 12:00-1:00 pm
TA Email: onlineant304tta@austin.utexas.edu
Course description: People have been in Texas since about 12,000 years ago and the evidence of their
presence throughout time is fascinating. Ever wondered how we know and can prove that? This course
introduces students to Texas archaeology through lectures and a variety of media resources. Texas
geographic and environmental diversity provided prehistoric and historic peoples with unique resources
and possibilities, and people used that diversity to make choices and develop specific cultural
characteristics while interacting with other peoples from the surrounding regions.
Doing archaeology requires teamwork, critical thinking and multidisciplinary approaches. In
archaeology, it is often more important to ask relevant questions than provide ready answers. The
lectures, readings, videos and homework assignments in this course aim to emphasize these
requirements as well as how archaeology relates to other sciences.
This course may be used to fulfill the natural science and technology (Part II) component of the common
core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and empirical
and quantitative skills.
Pre-requisites: none
Course readings: This course uses textual and media material from The Texas Beyond History website.
http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/
All required readings, whether they are from The Texas Beyond History or from other sources, are
available through links provided in the modules or posted on Canvas. Although not required, it is highly


recommended that students purchase Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians, by Ellen Sue Turner and Thomas
R. Hester.
Evaluation:
Participation and attendance: 10 points
Tests: 3 @ 25 points each = 75 points
Projects: 3 projects = 15 points
Grading policy:
A - 100-90
B - 89-80
C - 79-70
D - 69-60
F - less than 60 points.
Description	  of	  Online	  Course	  Format	  
This course is streamed live to your computer. Unlike the majority of courses offered at the University
of Texas, you will be viewing this class online from any place you choose. Though delivered as a live
stream through Canvas, this course takes place at the official times described in the course schedule:
Monday and Wednesday 1:00 to 2:30 pm. You are required to attend class by logging into the course
site before 1:00 pm on Monday and Wednesday to watch the live, real-time video stream of the lectures
and participate in class activities when required.
It is very important that you treat logging into the course website the way you would treat attending a
traditional course held in a classroom; attendance is required. You must also treat the class period as a
normal class: you must not answer the phone, a knock on the door of your apartment, etc. Otherwise you
may miss an instapoll and important lecture material. Students are expected to pose questions online in
real-time just as if you were raising your hand in class.
Technical Requirements:	  All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled laptop or
desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should have enough
battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:  
                          a.	  	  	  	  	  	  2 GB RAM/memory (most computers purchased in the last five years will have
                                                      this)  
                          b.	  	  	  	  	  	  Modern and updated operating system (Windows or macOS)  
                          c.	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Updated web browser: Chrome (recommended), Safari, Firefox  
                          d.	  	  	  	  	  	  5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)  
    
	  
Specific	  information	  about	  the	  online	  course	  format	  follows.	  
Canvas	  class	  website:	  To	  get	  to	  everything	  associated	  with	  the	  class,	  go	  to:	  
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1227089	  
	  
You	  can	  enter	  directly	  at	  this	  URL	  or	  through	  Canvas	  (https://utexas.instructure.com/).	  To	  log	  
into	  Canvas	  and	  the	  class	  website,	  you	  will	  need	  your	  UTEID	  and	  password.	  Once	  you	  reach	  the	  
class	  website,	  you	  can	  navigate	  your	  way	  to	  other	  areas.	  	  


	  
Some	  of	  the	  most	  important	  features	  include:	  
Homepage	  –	  The	  homepage	  will	  have	  links	  to	  the	  Course	  Syllabus,	  the	  technical	  requirements	  and	  
test	  stream	  webpage,	  information	  regarding	  technical	  questions	  and	  other	  important	  information.	  
On	  the	  left-­‐‑hand	  side	  of	  each	  page	  of	  the	  Canvas	  course	  site	  are	  navigation	  tabs	  to	  all	  parts	  of	  the	  
website,	  including	  the	  Syllabus.	  	  
	  
Video	  Stream	  -­‐‑	  The	  Video	  Stream	  page	  is	  where	  you	  will	  find	  the	  video	  stream	  for	  the	  course.	  The	  
Video	  Stream	  page	  will	  also	  display	  the	  outline	  for	  the	  current	  lecture,	  links,	  and	  other	  
participation	  activities	  including	  instapolls.	  	  
	  
Modules	  –	  The	  Modules	  page	  includes	  links	  to	  the	  Assignments,	  Readings,	  Lecture	  video	  archives	  
and	  other	  course	  documents.	  	  
	  
Pre-­‐‑Class	  Activities	  –	  These	  activities	  are	  required	  before	  the	  first	  day	  of	  class	  to	  ensure	  that	  you	  
are	  prepared	  to	  take	  the	  online	  course.	  Activities	  include	  making	  sure	  your	  computer	  is	  up-­‐‑to-­‐‑
date,	  testing	  your	  network	  connection,	  and	  watching	  screencasts	  that	  help	  you	  understand	  how	  to	  
navigate	  and	  communicate	  in	  the	  course	  (see	  Technical	  Requirements	  above).	  	  
	  
Frequent	  Asked	  Questions	  (FAQ):	  Please	  refer	  to	  this	  feature	  because	  it	  is	  set	  to	  answer	  most	  of	  
your	  questions.	  If	  you	  do	  not	  find	  the	  answer	  to	  your	  question	  in	  FAQ,	  then	  please	  contact	  your	  
Teaching	  Assistants	  or	  Dr.	  Wade.	  	  	  
	  
Most	  of	  your	  activity	  on	  Canvas	  will	  take	  place	  in	  the	  Live	  Video	  Stream	  and	  Modules	  tabs.	  	  
	  
Tests:	  There	  are	  three	  tests	  that	  will	  be	  taken	  in	  person	  on	  the	  following	  dates,	  times	  and	  
classroom:	  	  
	  
Test	  One	  -­‐‑	  October	  8	  –	  1:00	  –	  2:30	  pm	  -­‐‑	  ECJ	  1.214	  
Test	  Two	  –	  November	  19	  –	  1:00	  –	  2:30	  pm	  ECJ	  1.214	  
Test	  3	  –	  December	  10	  –	  1:00	  –	  2:30	  pm	  ECJ	  1.214	  
	  
This	  is	  the	  link	  to	  the	  building	  and	  its	  location:	  
https://maps.utexas.edu/buildings/UTM/ECJ/	  
	  
Out	  of	  the	  Classroom	  Projects:	  	  
a)	  Material	  cultural	  workshop.	  All	  students	  must	  attend	  to	  obtain	  a	  grade.	  Students	  will	  have	  to	  
register	  online	  for	  the	  different	  workshop	  dates.	  Registration	  is	  on	  a	  first	  come,	  first	  serve	  basis.	  
The	  days,	  times	  and	  places	  are	  shown	  below:	  
	  
Monday, September 17 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
Tuesday, September 18 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
Wednesday, September 19 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
Thursday, September 20 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
	  
b)	  Ethics	  in	  online	  classes	  and	  in	  archaeology	  workshop	  	  


Monday, October 22 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
Tuesday, October 23 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
Wednesday, October 24 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
Thursday, October 25 - @ 6:00-7:00 pm SAC 4.174
	  
c)	  Visit	  to	  the	  Bullock	  Museum.	  	  
Friday,	  November	  30	  –	  time	  to	  be	  announced	  
Saturday,	  December	  1	  -­‐‑	  time	  to	  be	  announced	  
	  
	  
	  
ONLINE COURSE FORMAT
To prepare for these classes, we ask that you do two things before each class begins at 1:00 PM. First,
you are required to view the pre-class modules assigned for that week. Each module emphasizes which
videos or readings students will need for the following class, but you can do all weekly readings and
view videos ahead. This allows students to better manage their own schedules and you can watch the
videos at your own pace, rewinding when you feel it necessary. Second, students are expected to
complete any readings associated with that day’s class before the live class begins. The lecture videos
will continue to be open for viewing throughout the semester but pre-class activities will no longer be
accessible after the closing deadline.
Questions and participation DURING the live class—We have built in a way of interacting with students
during the live course to ensure that material is clarified when necessary and your questions about the
substance of the course are discussed. You will have the opportunity to pose questions online in real-
time during lecture through the “Ask the Profs” button. We will incorporate some question- and
answer- into the live classes. On the other hand, as anthropologists we wish to preserve personal contact
with the students, so we encourage all students to visit Dr. Wade and the Teaching Assistants during
their scheduled office hours. Attendance and participation will be assessed through Instapolls.
There are 28 classes but three of these classes are dedicated to the three tests. That means there are 25
lecture classes. Five randomized questions will be sent to you during each class. Your answers do not
need to be correct; they need to show that you were attending class and participating. There will be NO
Instapolls during the first four classes. Instapolls will begin on September 17. That means there will be a
total of 105 instapoll questions. The Instapoll grading will be as follows:
90 or more - 10 pts.
80 or more - 9 pts.
70 or more - 8 pts.
60 or more - 7 pts.
50 or more - 6 pts.
40 or more - 5 pts
30 or more - 4 pts
29 or less - 0 pts.
The three tests that are part of the grading for this class will take place during the normal class period, as
it would happen with a ‘normal’ class, and your answers will be submitted on Scantron. Tests will NOT


be comprehensive. Test One will cover the class material from the beginning of class, Test Two will
cover the class material since Test One and Test Three will cover the material since Test Two. Please
note that some of the material does overlap, but you will be given clues as to this material before the
tests.
Questions and participation OUTSIDE of the live class – There are three approved avenues of
communication outside of class. Note that the Canvas inbox is NOT a supported way to contact the
teaching staff:
In-person office hours with Dr. Wade or the TA Team (see office hour times at the top of the syllabus)
Dr. Wade’s email and the TA email – Please use these email addresses for private inquiries related to the
course.
All technical support questions should be directed to gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu. Do Not
email the teaching staff with technical issues. YOU MUST COMMUNICATE with the technical staff as
soon as you experience a problem.
We expect that you will treat all discussions - online and in office visits - in a civil and respectful
manner. Please refrain from using profanity or any euphemisms for profanity. Please do not use sarcasm
in a way that can be misinterpreted negatively. Please just respect the right of your colleagues to ask
questions and discuss their opinions about the subject matter of our course. Violators of these
discussion rules will simply be shut out from all class communications—email, and office hours.
OFFICIAL RULES AND ANNOUNCEMENTS:
Class instructions (please read carefully):
1. Class participation is required. All assigned readings are required.
Assignments will be due on the appointed dates. This is a fairness issue.
2. Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will be dealt with according to University Rules.
Please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php. This site also contains several
useful links to students. On scholastic conduct see also:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi05-06/app/appc11.html	  
3. The University of Texas provides appropriate academic accommodations for students with
disabilities. For more information please contact the Office of the Dean of Students at (512) 471-6259 or
(512) 471-4641.
If you have a disability you must let me know no later than the second week of class. SSD
accommodation letters must be delivered in person to Dr. Wade. Failure to do so will result in delaying
appropriate provisions and will affect testing accommodations.
4. Please do not ask for grades or grade information by email. Information about grades will only be
given in person, or through official means.


Weekly schedule
Class schedule and corresponding material are shown by themes and respective Power Points (PP). If we
need to make any changes you will be informed in class or by email.
Week 1
Wednesday August 29
PP 1 - Introduction - Important issues about this class
What is archaeology and what archaeologists do.
Week 2
September 3 - LABOR DAY HOLIDAY
September 5
PP 2 - Archaeological Methods and Techniques
        Module 1 covers Weeks 1 and 2.
Week 3
September 10 -12
PP 3 - Texas Physiography, Archaeological Regions and Archaeologists
PP 4 - The First Americans - Routes, hypotheses, and evidence.
Week 4
September 17-19
PP 5 - The Antiquity of humans in America - Blackwater Draw.
PP 6 - Dating Methods and Paleoindian sites. Notes on Social Organization
        Module 2 covers Weeks 3 and 4.
                          Material Culture Workshop (see schedule above).
Week 5
September	  24-­‐‑26	  
PP 7 - Ways of making a living. Video
PP 8 - Paleoindian Burial Behavior. The Late Paleoindian Period/Transitional Archaic.
Week 6
October 1 -3
PP 9 - Late Paleoindian Period/ Early Archaic. East and Central Texas.
PP 10 - The Late Paleoindian Period/ Transitional Archaic -Climate and life changes.
        Module 3 covers Weeks 5 and 6.
Week 7
                October 8 – TEST ONE
October 10
PP 11 - The Late Paleoindian Period/ Transitional Archaic. The Lower Pecos. Microbotanical evidence
to reconstruct the environment.


Week 8
October 15 -17
PP 12 - The Middle and Late Archaic Periods. Landscape and Resources.
PP 13 - The Middle and Late Archaic Periods. Dwellings and structures.
Coastal, Trans-Pecos, Lower-Pecos.
               Module 4 covers Weeks 7 and 8. 	  
Week 9
October 22 -24
PP 14 - Late Archaic and Early Prehistoric, general characteristics: Central, South,
PP 15 - Woodlands - The Middle and Late Archaic Periods - Mound Building, Burial Customs.
                      Ethics Workshop (see schedule above)
Week 10
October 29-31
PP 16 - The Late Archaic and Prehistoric Periods: Texas Panhandle.
PP 17 - Material Culture and Rock Art. Preservation and Conservation.
         Module 5 covers Weeks 9 and 10.
Week	  11
November 5 - 7
PP 18 - Trade and material culture - The Lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos.
PP 19 - Late Prehistoric in Central Texas – Austin and Toyah Phases.
Week 12
November 12 -14
PP 20 - The Jornada Mogollon and Hueco Tanks
PP 21 - Hueco Tanks and La Junta de los Rios.
               Module	  6	  covers	  Weeks	  11	  and	  12.	  
Week 13
November 19
                      November 19 - TEST TWO
         November 21 – 24 Thanksgiving Holiday
Week 14
November 26 -28
PP 22 - Historic Period: European Encounters.
PP 23 - The Spanish Colonial Mission Period.
                      Field Trip to The Bullock Museum
	  
Week 15
December 3 -5


PP 24 - The Mission Period. Presidios and soldiers. The Red River Wars.
PP	  25	  -­‐‑	  The	  1800s	  in	  Texas	  
              Module	  7	  covers	  Weeks	  14	  and	  15.	  
	  
Week 16
December 10
                            December 10 -TEST THREE
December 10: last day of class.
Course Expectations and Outcomes:
You will not become a Texas Archeologist, but we hope you become one in the future.
You will learn about Texas environmental and archaeological diversity and the ways native inhabitants
made use of the state’s natural resources;
You will learn about Texas connections to other archaeological areas and why present state boundaries
are pointless in terms of archaeology;
You will handle and learn about how prehistoric and historic Texas Inhabitants made a living and the
materials they used in their daily lives;
You will have a comprehensive understanding of the methodologies and techniques archaeologists use
to date sites, discover clues about the ancient environment, classify and study lithic tools and ceramics
and contribute to the preservation and conservation of archaeological artifacts;
     By the end of this course, we hope you have develop admiration and respect for the past Texas
inhabitants and are knowledgeable to contribute to the preservation of the archeological objects that are
Texas legacy.
You will become aware of TARL as a curatorial facility and TARL’s superb archaeological collections.
