            Palestine and the Palestinians: A Journey through Time
Instructor:
Dr. Mohammad Mohammad (CAL 4 15, mamohammad@austin.utexas.edu )
Meeting Time and Place TTH 11:00 - 12:30 JES A303A
Teaching Assistant:
Office Hours: MW 2:00-2:50
Politician Newt Gingrich, a historian by training, pronounced during his failed bid for the
Republican Party’s nomination for president that Palestinians are an invented people.
Hearing that, I wondered about my own personal history--I checked Yaquut Al-
Hamawi’s (1178-1225 ) Dictionary of Towns to see if he mentioned my insignificant
ancestral village in historical Palestine. He did.
Gingrich does not stand alone in his perception of Palestine and its people. In fact, as
Yaquut's book reveals, this people has a rich and textured history, which UT-Austin's
course Palestine and the Palestinians: A Journey through Time will explore.
Palestine and the Palestinians: A Journey through Time is devoted to understanding
Palestinian history, politics and culture. In an attempt to understand and analyze the
Palestinian experience, the course draws on materials taken from government documents,
holy texts, scholarship, memoirs, poetry, fiction, folk stories, music, photography and
films (feature & documentary). Since the course is taught in Arabic, English materials
will be used only when they are not available in Arabic. The course addresses the very
important issue of the universality of the Palestinian experience.
Yaquut's book -- and his description of my town, Iksal -- is testament to the richness of
Palestinian history, and will be an important part of the course. For example, he wrote
about Iksal:
                                                                                                       َ ‫أَ ْك‬
                                                                                                  :‫سا ُل‬
   ‫ لها ذكر‬،‫ بينها وبين طبرية خمسة فراسخ من جهة الرملة ونهر أبي فطرس‬، ّ‫ قرية من قرى األردن‬:‫السين مهملة‬
    ‫ي فقتل أصحاب‬ّ ‫ كانت بها وقعة مشهورة بين أصحاب سيف الدولة بن حمدان وكافور اإلخشيد‬،‫في بعض األخبار‬
                                                                                   .‫سيف الدولة كل مقتلة‬
‘Iksal: with un-dotted siin: a village in Jordan. It is 15 miles away from Tabariyya
from the direction of Ramlah and Al-Awja River. Its name occurs in some historical
events, notably a famous battle between the forces of Sayf Ad-Dawlah and Kafuur
Al-Ikhsheedi where the forces of the former were wiped out.’
This is my personal history. Noting that Sayf Ad-Dawlah died in 976 AD, this quote
states that my (really minor) village has been in continuous existence for at least one
thousand years. In the course, we will, therefore, look at a random sample of Palestinian
towns mentioned in Yaquut’s dictionary and observe their place in history.


A Journey through Time
The course begins with a brief survey of Palestinian history: the history of Palestine
starting with Islamic conquests, passing through the period of the Crusades, ending with
modern history.
The course primarily will focus on Palestine’s modern history. We will look at Palestine
through late nineteenth century and early twentieth century documents, notably
addressing the rise of political Zionism, the Arab Revolt, the First World War, the
League of Nations and the British Mandate.
As a result of the wars in 1948 (Nakbah I) and in 1967 (Nakbah II), the Palestinian
society suffered catastrophic consequences with the near-total destruction of traditional
society and the new experience of living as a refugee in camps outside Palestine. We will
examine the lives of Palestinian refugees in the surrounding countries, particularly
Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria.
Materials:
Videos. Palestine Remembered is a massive website that is documenting Palestinian lives
before the Nakbah. Students will view excerpts from these documentary videos on this
site to understand the psyche of the Palestinian and Palestine before 1948. We will also
watch some episodes from TV Ramadan series.
Music. Wedding music has changed since the Nakbah, and varies between regions where
Palestinians live. Folk songs that have been and are played at weddings will give students
an idea of what has been and what is important to the Palestinian people.
Movies. Students will watch three films that chronicle the Palestinian experience:
Wedding in Galilee, Rana’s Wedding, and Paradise Now, and The Dupes, and Kafr
Qasen. The movies shed light on the Palestinian Nakbah.
Literature. The destruction of Palestinian society and the dispersal of Palestinians
touched every aspect of life and culture. We will read excerpts from the following
authors who are Palestinians or are in some way personally touched by the Palestinian
plight:
        Mahmoud Darwish
        Fadwa Touqan
     Ghassan Kanafani
        Ibrahim Touqan
        Emil Habibi
Government documents. Students will study the two most important UN documents
pertaining to the Palestinian question: the UN Partition Resolution 181 (November 29,
1947), and the Right of Return Resolution 194 (November 12, 1948). Significantly, the


‫‪Balfour Declaration will also be studied, as well as correspondence between the Sharif of‬‬
‫‪Mecca and the British.‬‬
‫)‪Reference Books (Will be posted on Canvas, when needed‬‬
                                                                    ‫ساطع الحصري ‪ ..‬حول القومية العربية‬
                                            ‫تاريخ الحركات القومية‪..‬يقظة القوميات االوروبية‪..‬الجزء االول‬
                          ‫تاريخ الحركات القومية‪..‬يقظة القوميات االوروبية‪..‬الجزء الثانى‪..‬الحرية و القومية‬
                                                                              ‫جذور الفكر القومي والعلماني‬
                                                                 ‫يقظة العرب ـ تاريخ حركة القومية العربية‬
                                      ‫األدب الفلسطيني المقاوم تحت اإلحتالل ‪1948‬ـ‪ .. 1968‬غسان كنفاني‬
                                                                        ‫رواية رجال في الشمس‬
                                                                                       ‫عائد إلى حيفا‬
                                                                                  ‫الفلسطينيون الجدد مترجم‬
                                                             ‫أقسام األرضين وأحكامها وحكم أرض فلسطين‬
                                             ‫اقتراح دولة فلسطين وما حولة من مناقشات ألحمد بهاء الدين‬
                                                                          ‫الالجئون الفلسطينيون في الشتات‬
                                                      ‫الموجز في تاريخ فلسطين السياسي إللياس شوفاني‬
                                                                 ‫تاريخ فلسطين الحديث عبد الوهاب الكيالي‬
                        ‫تاريخ فلسطين القديم منذ أول غزو يهودي حتى آخر غزو صليبي _ ظفر اإلسالم خان‬
                                                      ‫تاريخ فلسطين لعمر الصالح البرغوثي وخليل طوطح‬
                                                                            ‫مقدمة في تاريخ فلسطين القديم‬
                                                                                  ‫فلسطين الحقيقة والتاريخ‬
                                                                      ‫هل إلسرائيل حق تاريخي في فلسطين‬
                                                                        ‫قرار تقسيم فلسطين وقرارات أخرى‬
                                               ‫وصف األراضي المقدسة في فلسطين للرحالة األلماني يوحنا‬
                                                                          ‫الالجئون الفلسطينيون في الشتات‬
                                       ‫الدكتور سهيل زكار الموسوعة الشامية في تاريخ الحروب الصليبية‬
                                                                             ‫موجز تاريخ الحروب الصليبية‬
                                                        ‫محمود درويش و األرض المحتلة ‪ --‬رجاء النقاش‬
                                                                  ‫ابراهيم طوقان ‪ -‬األعمال الشعرية الكاملة‬
                                                               ‫األعمال_الشعرية_الكاملة_‪_-‬فدوى_طوقان‬
                                                                  ‫يوميات أو أثر الفراشة ‪ -‬محمود درويش‬
                                                                        ‫محمود درويش ‪ ،‬في حضرة الغياب‬
                                                                          ‫عبّاد الشمس رواية لـ سحر خليفة‬
                                                                            ‫محمود درويش االعمال الكاملة‬
‫‪Grade Distribution:‬‬
   ‫‪‬‬   ‫‪Participation: 25%‬‬
   ‫‪‬‬   ‫‪Students are expected to come to class having read the material assigned for that‬‬
       ‫‪day. Participation is assessed based on the frequency and quality of the questions‬‬
       ‫‪and comments raised in class.‬‬


     Person of the Week 5%
1. Report to class on your “person of the week” (see list in syllabus), providing visuals
and other supporting materials as appropriate. The presentations will be scheduled during
Week 2 of the session.
       Homework/Reaction papers 30%
Students are required to submit weekly written reports reacting to what was covered/read
the week before. These are due on Tuesdays. Homework is due on the date as specified
for each.
       Presentation 15%
Students will present to the class research on any topic relevant to the content of the
course. The presentations will be scheduled during Week 3 of the session.
       Paper or Project 25%
Students are required to read either (available on Canvas)
‫رجال في الشمس‬
Or
‫عائد إلى حيفا‬
READ throughout the semester and write an essay in Arabic
discussing the text.
Due on the last day of classes.
Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies:


Number/Letter grade equivalents are:
 Number       Letter    Number        Letter   Number       Letter    Number       Letter
 94 - 100               87 - 89.9             77 – 79.9              67 – 69.9
            A                        B+                    C+                    D+
90 – 93.9   A-          84 - 86.9             74 – 76.9              64 – 66.9
                                     B                     C                     D
                        80 – 83.9             70 – 73.9              60 – 63.9
                                     B-                    C-                    D-
        (Below 60% = F)
       Grades on the border between two letter grades (89.9 for instance) may or may not be
        rounded up to the next higher letter grade, at the instructor’s discretion.
       Your final class grade will be based on your final weighted average in the class (including
        the final exam grade).
Attendance
You are allowed no unexcused absences. Excused absences include religious holidays,
family emergencies, and illnesses. If you need an absence to be excused, contact me
before the incident or as soon as possible afterwards with appropriate documentation.
Being absent, for whatever reason, does not excuse you from handing the assigned
homework. Each unexcused absence will result in two percentage points being deducted
from the final grade. Eight or more absences, regardless of the reason/reasons an F grade
will be assigned.
Honesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
university. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Special Needs
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented
disability (physical or cognitive) who requires academic accommodations should contact


of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
Person of the Week List:
Yasser Arafat
Mahmoud Abbas
Ahmed Shuqayri
George Habash
Nayef Hawatmeh
Abdel Bari Atwan
Tamam Al-AkHal
Walid Saif
Hanan Ashrawi
Salma Khadra Jayyousi
Ismael Shammout
Sahar Khalifah
Tawfiq Zayyad
Mohammad Mohammad (just kidding)
Azmi Bishara
Ibrahim Abu Lughud
Amin Al-Husseini
Fairouz
Samih Al-Qasem
Anton Shammas
Wadah Khanfar
Michel Khleifi
Jabra Ibrahim Jabra
Naji Al-Ali
Hisham Sharabi
Abdel Rahim Mahmoud
Edward Said
Khalil Sakakini
Imad Hajjaj
Jamal Rayyan
Ghassan Kanafani
Mahmoud Darwish
Fadwa Touqan
Ibrahim Touqan
Emil Habibi
