 UID: 20395
                                                          Text: Learning Processing by Daniel Shiffman
 Meetings: MWF 12-1                                       Instructor: Tyler Coleman
                                                          Office Hours: Mon,Wed,1-2
 Location: JGB 2.218
Abstract
Computational Thinking and Logical Processes to approach technical problems with creative
solutions. Applying creative coding techniques to Games, Viz, Projection & Lighting, and Music
& Sound using languages and tools including Processing, Touchdesigner, Unity, and C#.
Assessment
Challenges 1 - 7 are graded pass/fail for 3- 5 points each, Projects 1-3 are graded out of 15
points. The remaining 15 points of the final grade is based on professionalism and attendance.
One-Week Processing Challenges (3-5 points each)
       Challenge 1: Colors, Shapes & Random (build a “Thing”) (4 points)
       Challenge 2: Variables, Loops, If-Else (update “Thing” with variables) (4 points)
       Challenge 3: Functions, Objects, Datatypes (make “Thing” object/class) (5 points)
       Challenge 4: Arrays, Algorithms, Debugging (create “Thing” interaction) (4 points)
       Challenge 5: Algorithms (3 points)
       Challenge 6: Libraries (5 Points)
       Challenge 7: Audio (5 Points)
Review Quiz (10 points)
Two-Week Projects (15 points each)
       Project 1 (Project 1): Processing Final, complete game, audio experience, or interactive
        story
       Project 2 (Project 2): Touchdesigner for Projection & Lighting
       Project 3 (Project 3): Unity / C# for Games & Viz
Required Equipment
All students MUST have access to a portable computer, either Mac or PC. All software used in
this class is available for free.


Textbook
Learning Processing by Daniel Shiffman (optional but helpful)
Units of Study
       Foundations
            o Logical Processes
            o Programming Basics
       Application
            o Solving problems with code
       Systems
            o Games & Viz, Projection & Lighting, Music & Sound
            o Processing libraries
            o Other creative coding tools for:
Overview of Schedule
Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be
altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design
program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be
announced via Canvas.
Calendar
Week                                                 Book & Tutorials
        Course Intro
1
        Processing Basics
        Understanding Code
2       Demo 1: Shapes, Colors, and Animation        Chapters 1 - 3
        LAB - Building Things with Primitives


  Challenge 1 Due
3 Demo 2: Variables, Loops, If-Else      Chapters 4 - 6
  LAB - Building Things with Variables
  Challenge 2 Due
4 Demo 3: Functions, Objects, Data Types Chapters 7 - 8
  LAB - Make our Thing into Object
  Challenge 3 Due
5 Demo 4: Arrays, Algorithms, Debugging  Chapter 9
  LAB - Interactions & Algorithms
  Challenge 4 Due
6 Demo 5: Libraries                      Chapters 10 - 12
  LAB - Add Libraries to Project
  Challenge 5 Due
7 Demo 6: Images, Sprites, Video         Chapters 13 - 14
  Lab - Animation and Video
  Challenge 6 Due
8 Demo 7: Audio Tools and Application
  LAB - Audio Tools
  Challenge 7 Due
                                         Bonus: 5pts Extra Credit for submitting
9
  Demo: OpenProcessing                   the game to OpenProcessing.org


   Review Quiz
   LAB - Processing Final
   Challenge 8 Due (Processing Final)
   Processing Final Showcase
10
   Lecture: CC for Projection & Lighting
   LAB - Touchdesigner
   Demo 8: Touchdesigner
                                         Video Tutorials created by PLAI Faculty
11 Discussion: Projection & Lighting
                                         (Michael M)
   LAB - Touchdesigner
   Lecture: CC for Projection & Lighting
                                         Video Tutorials created by PLAI Faculty
12 Demo 10: Unity
                                         (Michael M)
   LAB - Touchdesigner Final & Unity
   Challenge 9 Due
   Demo 11: Unity / C#
                                         Video Tutorials created by Game / Viz
13
                                         Faculty (MJ)
   Discussion: Game Design & Viz
   LAB - Unity
   Demo 12: Unity / C#
                                         Video Tutorials created by Game / Viz
14 Lecture: CC for Games & Viz
                                         Faculty (MJ)
   LAB - Unity
   Challenge 10 Due
15 Unity Final Showcase
   LAB - Portfolio Updates


Process
We will work through demonstrations and a number of technical and creative challenges to learn
about multimedia and interactive system programming.
Grades
7 Challenges: 3% to 5% each
Review Quiz: 10%
3 Projects: 15% each.
Attendance and Professionalism: 15%
Bonus: 5%
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
will
be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the grade
of A+.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73


D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
F = 0-60
Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns professionalism
credit. Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to attend class meetings. If
attending a scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are expected to promptly notify the
instructor of extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy
Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or
videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of
class, if possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
Academic Integrity


The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are
expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic
work undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams,
and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
       acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
       complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
        assistance in preparing them;
       follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
        academic discipline;
       and avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
        student.
(adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external site.))
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
such as:
       Cheating
       Plagiarism
       Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
       Falsifying Academic Records
       Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
        extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
       Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
        without authorization to do so)
       Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
(adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
(from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php (Links to an external site.))
Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,


and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-
conduct/).
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside
when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following
policies regarding evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the
building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the
building. • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
class. • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Student Support Services
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
include (but are not limited to) the following:
Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
of services and resources to support students and alumni.
The Undergraduate Writing Center
(512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
their courses.
The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
time-management, and note-taking courses.


University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and
health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
officially enrolled in certain University programs.
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students
with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
in his or her official e-mail address (do so at
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned to
the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication.
Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be
considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-
policy (Links to an external site.))
