                                                                              Wiebe      ALD 331      Fall 2019
                             ALD 331: Restorative Practices in Education
                                                  Fall 2019
Instructor: Molly Trinh Wiebe, Ph.D.
Email: mwiebe@utexas.edu
Unique number: 09145
Class Time and Place: SZB411, T & Th, 2:00-3:30 pm
Office: SZB 436A
Office hours: T 12:30-1:30 pm, Th 12:30-1:30 pm, and by appointment as requested
ABOUT THE COURSE
“Modern Western societies struggle with a lack of connection and with a failure to recognize their
interrelatedness. On the other hand, many highly communal societies struggle to make space for
different voices and perspectives. In our wonderfully complex, multi-cultural society, those two
worldviews are living side by side and have the opportunity to learn directly from each other. The
circle is a crucible for that learning. In the Circle we can find a healthy balance between individual
and group needs.” – Kay Pranis
This course is devoted to learning about and implementing restorative practices in education. It will
focus on exploring models of education discipline policies and practices (e.g., zero-tolerance policy,
suspension, expulsion), and how it adversely affects students’ social and emotional development and
academic trajectories; and most importantly, how restorative practices could serve as an alternative
model to address discipline in schools. The course will give special attention to the history and
principles of restorative practices as it relates to the school and the larger community; and
particularly, how restorative practices could serve as a way to address discipline by shifting the
emphasis from punishment to one focused on responsibility, accountability, respect, and restoration.
It is expected that in this course students will become familiar with the restorative process and will
come to understand how to facilitate restorative circles to build relationship and trust with students,
parents, peers and the community.
COURSEWORK OVERVIEW
This course is a collaborative teaching model that mirrors the restorative process. Students are
expected to contribute toward building and maintaining a deeply respectful and highly participatory
learning environment. Students can draw on their own life experiences, readings, and classroom and
community experiences to participate and contribute to class activities and discussions. Course
materials will be presented through a combination of restorative circles, class discussions, guest
lecturers, role-playing, student presentations and videos.
REQUIRED TEXT:
     • Lang, G. (2016). Restorative discipline practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas
         educators
     • Additional readings on Canvas provided by the instructor
                                                       1


RECOMMENDED TEXTS
    • Boyes-Watson, C. & Pranis, K. (2015). Circle forward: Building a restorative school community
    • Pranis, K. (2005). The little book of circle processes
REFERENCES
Boyes-Watson, C., & Pranis, K. (2015). Circle forward: Building a restorative school community. St. Paul,
         MN: Living Justice Press.
Curtis, K. (2016). Learning from successes and failures: An administrator’s perspective. In Restorative
         discipline practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas educators (pp. 25-39). Austin,
         TX: Park Place Publications.
Lang et al. (2016). Restorative discipline practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas
         educators. Austin, TX: Park Place Publications.
Martinez, D. (2016). Building and maintaining bridges: A restorative coordinator’s perspective. In
         Restorative discipline practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas educators (pp. 66-
         75). Austin, TX: Park Place Publications.
Sepeda, E. Restoring discipline in the classroom: A teacher’s perspective. In Restorative discipline
         practices: A journey in implementation by a community of Texas educators (pp. 40-50). Austin, TX:
         Park Place Publications.
Umbreit, M. S., & Armour, M. P. (2010). Restorative justice dialogue: An essential guide for research and
         practice. New York: Springer Pub.
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY FLAG
This course carries the Independent Inquiry Flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent
investigation and presentation of your own work.
4-HOUR FIELD COMPONENT
This course includes a 4-hour field component: lesson planning, teaching, post-lesson reflection,
and class presentation. The field component is designed to provide you with an opportunity to
engage with restorative practices. This opportunity will allow you to teach a lesson using the circle
process in your practicum classroom, after-school program, student-based organizations, community
spaces, to name a few.
CANVAS
Canvas is the primary platform through which I will communicate with you during the semester.
Please make sure you are receiving Canvas alerts and submit all assignments electronically on
Canvas. If you have any difficulty using Canvas, call 855-308-2494 or live chat with Canvas Support
on-line.
                                                            2


                                                                          Wiebe     ALD 331      Fall 2019
ATTENDANCE POLICY
You are expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing,
and to participate in all in-class activities and discussions.
The course instructor will take attendance at every class:
    •    Missing two to four classes will result in the automatic loss of a letter grade.
    •    Should you miss the equivalent of five class sessions this semester, excused or not,
         you will fail the course.
If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you should contact your
instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, well in advance of the absence, so that alternative arrangements can
be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this reason, provide your
instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University specifies very few
other excused absences (e.g., jury duty). Documented illnesses will be considered on an individual
basis. Please do not make medical or other appointments on class days.
When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from a classmate
or meeting with the instructor to make arrangements to make up work.
Class Tardiness Policy
Three tardies counts as one absence. Arriving at class 20 or more minutes late also counts as an
absence.
WRITING AND PROPER CITATION
All assignments should be written in APA 6 style, meaning 1-inch margins all around, double-
spaced, using Times New Roman 12 point font. You should carefully and thoroughly cite any
information you use from published materials. Failure to do so could have serious consequences,
including failing an assignment, failing the course, or suspension from the University. Policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Here is a web site with information on plagiarism.
Please review thoroughly: http://www.utexas.edu/lbj/writing/plagiarism.pdf
All formal written assignments will be graded according to the following criteria:
    • The degree to which the assignment has been completed thoroughly.
    • The degree to which the assignment has been polished and edited carefully.
    • The degree to which the assignment shows insight/thoughtfulness with respect to the topic,
         other course readings, and other classroom/teaching or reading experiences.
                                                       3


Writing Resources
University Writing Center - http://uwc.utexas.edu/
The UWC is now located in the Perry Castañeda Library’s (PCL) Learning Commons space, and have excellent
online resources as well as trained consultants available to assist you with your writing, free of cost. You can bring any
kind of writing to the UWC, not just academic writing.
Purdue Online Writing Guide (OWL): https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/
One of the best comprehensive tools to tell you everything you need to know about academic citation in various styles of
writing.
     • APA Citation Guide: https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/section/2/10/
     • MLA Citation Guide: https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/747/01/
COMPUTER USAGE
Computers will be used at times for class activities. Otherwise, they should be kept closed unless
you are taking notes. As a professional, it is imperative that you are present mentally,
physically, and emotionally for all parts of class. I expect to see your active participation
throughout the class.
DATA MANAGEMENT
Back up your data! Computers, phones, and all electronic devices with processors, will break or
malfunction. It is your responsibility to manage the data that is important to you, including your
work for this class. You have many options to do so quickly and affordably, from cloud storage
with your UTexas Box account, as well as external hard drives or flash drives.
                                                             4


                                                                           Wiebe    ALD 331   Fall 2019
                                     UNIVERSITY INFORMATION
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS CORE VALUES AND HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Each student in this course is expected to abide by The University of Texas Honor Code. Any work
submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student’s own work.
SCHOLASTIC RESPONSIBILITY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University. So, take care to read and understand the
Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php. If you have
any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the assignment.
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at The University of Texas at Austin, and your instructor
will use this medium to communicate class information. You are therefore required to notify the
University of your preferred email account and to check it daily. All students may claim an email
address at no cost by going to http://www.utexas.edu/its/utmail/.
ACCESSIBLE/COMPLIANT STATEMENT
If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need accommodations
please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). You may refer to SSD’s website for
contact and more information: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
If you are already registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as
possible in the semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations.
ACCESSIBLE, INCLUSIVE, AND COMPLIANT STATEMENT
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment consistent
with university policy and federal state law. Please let me know if you experience any barriers to
learning so I can work with you to ensure you have equal opportunity to participate fully in this
course. If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need
accommodations please contact Services for Students with Disability. Please refer to SSD’s website
for contact and more information: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
If you are already registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as
possible in the semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations.
                                                       5


RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS AND ACCOMMODATIONS
By The University of Texas at Austin policy, you must notify the course instructors of your pending
absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ABSENCE FOR MILITARY SERVICE
In accordance with sections 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code, a student is excused from
attending classes or engaging in other required activities, including exams, if he or she is called to
active military service of a reasonably brief duration. The maximum time for which the student may
be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board as “no more than
25 percent of the total number of class meetings or the contact hour equivalent (not including the
final examination period) for the specific course or courses in which the student is currently enrolled
at the beginning of the period of active military service.” The student will be allowed a reasonable
time after the absence to complete assignments and take exams.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Evacuation Guidelines
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Weather Situations
In the case of inclement weather conditions, check the updated UT weather advisory at
https://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/weather/.
Other University emergency information can be found at
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
The University of Texas at Austin has a wide variety of support services available for emotional,
psychological and academic aspects of campus life. You have access to all of these as a Longhorn.
Mental Health Resources
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050.
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. Your call can be anonymous.
University Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Self-care is a critical part of academic success. The CMHC has confidential counseling and support services, as well as
a de-stress area called the MindBody Lab to help you unplug or refocus.
                                                          6


                                                                         Wiebe     ALD 331      Fall 2019
CARE Counseling
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to need
support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE
Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic
success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her
office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call
512.232.6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a voice mail, please include
your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on Tuesdays and Fridays
from 1:00-2:00pm. You will check-in at the College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216,
and they will let Danie know you are waiting. All services are confidential. None of your
information will be shared without your written consent. Come by and see us, we are here to listen.
                                                    7


Grading Scale, Policies, and Criteria
Grades will be calculated according to the total of points earned (minus points deducted) divided by
the total points possible:
A:         93-100%                               C+:      77-79.9%
A-:        90-92.9%                              C:       73-76.9%
B+:        87-89.9%                              C-:      70-72.9%
B:         83-86.9%                              D:       60-69.9%
B-:        80-82.9%                              F:       Below 60
*Grades will NOT be rounded
Expectations for all assignments will be graded based on thorough completion. This includes
thoughtfulness with respect to the topic, course readings, and experiences and a polished final draft.
Assignments are required to be turned in on time. Grades will be lowered 5% (0.05) for each day
assignments are late. Please communicate immediately if you need more time to complete an
assignment. I will make arrangements with you.
                  Assignments                          Due Date        Percentage Points
1. Attendance, Participation, and                        Weekly             10%          30
Professionalism:                                   Tuesday/Thursday
    • 3 tardies will be considered an absence
    • 2-4 absences will result in the
        automatic loss of a letter grade
2. Reading Responses Part A and Part B                   Weekly             25%          75
                                                   Tuesday/Thursday
                                                        12:00pm
3. Co-Facilitator –                                      Sign-up            15%          45
    Community Building Circle #1
4. Inquiry Reflections                                See Calendar          10%          30
5. Independent Facilitator –                             Sign-up            15%          45
Community Building Circle #2 & Presentation
6. Final Reflective Essay                               Dec 13th            25%          75
                                                      Total Possible:      100%         300
                                                    8


                                                                            Wiebe     ALD 331  Fall 2019
                                      COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
1. Attendance, Participation, and Professionalism – 30 points (10%)
Professionalism includes being on time, prepared for class, and participating actively in whole class
and small group discussions and activities. Computers will be used at times for class activities.
Otherwise, they should be kept closed unless you are taking notes. These expectations will be the
basis for your grade:
    • Actively listening and participating (talking) during whole class and small class activities;
    • Being involved and engaged during the entire class time;
    • Being prepared for class, having read ALL readings and done all assignments/homework;
    • Talking to the instructor about any concerns you have with the class;
    • NOT engaging in activities not related to class (e.g., emailing, texting, social media,
        shopping, work for other classes).
2. Independent Inquiry Process (65%)
          Assignment Descriptions                                                                Points
          Reading Responses – 75 points (25%)
2A.       Reading Responses:                                                                         5
          Across the semester, you will read a diverse selection of book chapters and            weekly
          articles to gain an overview of restorative theories and practices, educational
          discipline policies and practices, restorative implementation and sustainability,
          and humanizing pedagogies. You are responsible for reading all course readings
          and writing a response to share your thinking/questions/experiences with regards
          to restorative practices. *Note: Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and
          due dates.
          Co-Facilitator: Community Building Circle #1 – 45 points (15%)
2B.       Co-Facilitator – Community Building Circle #1 & Reflection (CBC#1):                       45
          You will collaborate with a peer to facilitate a community building circle in class.
          CBC#1 provides you with the opportunity to practice planning and writing a
          lesson plan and facilitating a community building circle with following restorative
          elements: (a) Mindfulness Moment, (b) Opening, (c) Values Round, (d) Round 1
          (Prompt), and (e) Closing. Afterwards, you will write a guided reflection discussing
          your facilitation experience. This experience aims to prepare you to facilitate your
          Independent Community Building Circle. *Note: Refer to Canvas for specific
          instructions and due date.
          Inquiry Reflections (IR) – 30 points (10%)
          Throughout the course, you will have an opportunity to engage in six relevant
          educational activities to reflect on school discipline policies and practices and
          restorative practices. The Inquiry Reflections positions you to gain real-world
          knowledge of the current educational context and political climate with regards to
          school discipline policies and practices and the urgency and need for restorative
          practices in educational settings. The Inquiry Reflections also aims to prepare to
          plan and independently facilitate a meaningful Community Building Circle.
                                                      9


2C. Personal Schooling Experience:                                                      5
    You will take a moment to reflect on your own schooling experiences with
    regards to education discipline policies and practices. You will consider how your
    race/ethnicity, gender, identity, privilege, reputation, cultural and linguistic
    background may have played a role in how your institution determined the type
    of discipline you received as an individual. *Note: Refer to Canvas for specific
    instructions and due date.
2D. Texas Appleseed:                                                                    5
    Texas Appleseed is a nonprofit organization focused on social justice work. A
    guest speaker from Texas Appleseed will visit our class to present and discuss
    their research on school-to-prison pipeline and advocacy for restorative practices
    in education. You will write a 1-2 page reflection discussing your personal
    learning, growth, and questions. *Note: Refer to Canvas for specific
    instructions and due date.
2E. Interview #1:                                                                       5
    You will write interview questions and conduct an interview with either a Student
    (K-12th), Teacher, Administrator (Principal, Vice Principal), School Counselor or
    Psychologist, School Resource Officer (SRO), Family Member, or Peer. The
    purpose of the interview is to learn about your participant’s experiences and
    perspectives with regards to school discipline policies and practices. You will
    interview and analyze your participant’s responses and locate emergent themes
    and form connections to restorative theories and practices. You will write a 1-2
    page reflection discussing your personal learning, growth, and questions. *Note:
    Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
2F. Interview #2:                                                                       5
    You will write interview questions and conduct an interview with either a Student
    (K-12th), Teacher, Administrator (Principal, Vice Principal), School Counselor or
    Psychologist, School Resource Officer (SRO), Family Member, or Peer. You will
    write a 1-2 page reflection discussing your personal learning, growth, and
    questions. *Note: I encourage you to select a participant from a different
    category for your second interview to acquire multiple perspectives. *Note:
    Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
2G. NYOS Charter School:                                                                5
    NYOS Charter School – Not Your Ordinary School – is a free, K-12 public
    charter school. A guest speaker from NYOS will visit our class to present and
    discuss on student discipline and referral and their successes and challenges on
    implementing whole-school restorative practices. You will write a 1-2 page
    reflection discussing your personal learning, growth, and questions. *Note:
    Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
2H. Blanton Museum:                                                                     5
    Sabrina Phillips, Blanton Museum Educator for School and Teacher Programs
    will guide us on an artwalk. Using select pieces of artwork, Sabrina will engage us
    in a dialogue to consider topics and issues related to restorative practices, safe
    spaces, dominant norms and practices, personal bias, community, inclusivity, etc.
    You will write a 1-2 page reflection discussing your personal learning, growth, and
    questions. *Note: Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
                                               10


                                                                                         Wiebe     ALD 331        Fall 2019
            Independent Facilitator: Community Building Circle #2 – 45 points (15%)
2I.         Independent Facilitator: Community Building Circle #2 and Presentation (CBC#2):                            45
            Throughout the course, you will learn about and experience multiple Community
            Building Circles. Using your knowledge and experience, you will write a lesson
            plan and independently facilitate a Community Building Circle as part of the
            course’s 4-hour field requirement. You will video record your Community
            Building Circle and create a PowerPoint presentation to share your experience.
            Your Community Building Circle should have at least 6-10 participants. You may
            facilitate your Community Building Circle in any context such as your practicum
            classroom, after-school program, student-based organizations, community spaces,
            etc. *Note: There will be NO Credit for the course if the 4-hour fieldwork
            requirement is incomplete. *Note: Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and
            due date.
3. Final Reflective Essay – 75 points (25%)
You will reference course readings (7-14 references) and write a final reflective essay (8-16 pages) to
reflect on what you have learned during the course and how it has affirmed, challenged, and/or
extended your thinking about teaching and learning in relation to: restorative framework/practices,
restorative v. traditional discipline policies and practices, your teaching and learning philosophy, your positionality with
regards to implementing restorative practices, educational commitments, building relationships, classroom community,
student-teacher relationships, classroom participation structures, language-culture-identity, academic and social
emotional development, power dynamics, trust, and humanizing pedagogies/frameworks, etc. *Note: You are not
required to discuss all of the above topics; however, I have no objections if that is what you would
like to do. Choose the topics that resonated with you the most to discuss in your essay. *Note:
Refer to Canvas for specific instructions and due date.
                                                               11


                  ALD331: Restorative Practices in Education: Tentative Schedule
                     Please see Canvas for the most recent schedule of readings and assignments
       Class
     Meeting Class Topic and Activities                         Readings Due                     Assignments Due
Introduction to Restorative Practices
1    Thurs      -Review Syllabus                    • Why we need Restorative                   -Reading Response
     08/29      -Review Final Reflective                Practices in Schools? (Video)           #1A & 1B
                Essay                               • Evans et al. (2013)
                -Presentation Sign-up
Restorative Philosophy, Principles, Processes, and Practices
2    Tues       -Model Community Building • Boyes-Watson & Pranis (2015),
     09/03      Circle                                  Theoretical Essay on Why Circles
                -Review CBC#1                           are Important in Schools, pp. 395-
                                                        416
     Thurs      -Model Community Building           • Boyes-Watson & Pranis (2015),             -Reading Response
     09/05      Circle                                  How Circles Work, pp. 27-41             #2A & 2B
                -Review Inquiry Reflection
                (IR): Part 2C
3    Tues       Respect Agreement                   • Boyes-Watson & Pranis (2015),             -CBCA Facilitator #1
     09/10                                              The Theoretical Foundation for
                                                        Circle Practice in Schools, pp. 6-8
                                                    • Ryan & Rudd (2015)
     Thurs      Review CBC#2                        • Boyes-Watson & Pranis (2015),             -Reading Response
     09/12                                              Thinking about Healthy                  #3A & 3B
                                                        Relationships in Schools, pp. 17-26
                                                                                                -CBCB Facilitator #1
Humanizing Educational Theories and Pedagogies
4    Tues       Restorative Chat                    • De Lissovoy (2010)                        -IR: Part 2C
     09/17
                                                                                                -CBCA Facilitator #2
     Thurs                                          • Noddings (2005)                           -Reading Response
     09/19                                                                                      #4A & 4B
                                                                                                -CBCB Facilitator #2
Effects of Zero-Tolerance Policies and Practices
5    Tues                                           • Smith (2015)                              -CBCA Facilitator #3
     09/24
     Thurs      Guest Speaker:                      • Fabelo et al. (2011)                      -Reading Response
     09/26      Texas Appleseed                                                                 #5A & 5B
                                                                                                -CBCB Facilitator #3
                                                         12


                                                                         Wiebe ALD 331     Fall 2019
Judicial Systems: Policies and Practices
6     Tues                                      • “Indigenous Justice Systems    -IR: Part 2D
      10/01                                       and Tribal Society”
                                                  (Restorative Justice On-line
                                                  Notebook, 2007)                -CBCA Facilitator #4
      Thurs      -Formulate 2E & 2F             • Tsui (2014)                    -Reading Response
      10/03      Interview Questions                                             #6A & 6B
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator #4
Global and Local Discourse
7     Tues                                      • Heitzeg (2009)                 -CBCA Facilitator #5
      10/08
      Thurs                                     • Cadezen (2001)                 -Reading Response
      10/10                                                                      #7A & 7B
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator #5
The Facilitator’s Role in Restorative Practices
8     Tues       Academic Circle                • Umbreit & Armour (2011),       -IR: Part 2E
      10/15                                       Chapter 9
                                                                                 -CBCA Facilitator #6
      Thurs                                     • Raye (2004)                    -Reading Response
      10/17                                                                      #8A & 8B
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator #6
Critical Issues in Restorative Practices
9     Tues       Family Group Conference        • Cunneen (2004)                 -CBCA Facilitator #7
      10/22      (FGC)
      Thurs                                     • Lohmeyer (2017)                -Reading Response
      10/24                                                                      #9A & 9B
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator #7
Restorative Practices in Action
10 Tues                                         • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 4-5   -IR: Part 2F
      10/29
                                                                                 -CBCA Facilitator #8
      Thurs      Guest Speaker:                 • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 7-8   -Reading Response
      10/31      Shawn Bliss, Not Your Ordinary                                  #10A & 10B
                 School (NYOS)
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator #8
                                                   13


11   Tues       Circle of Accountability and • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 6        -IR: Part 2G
     11/05      Support (COSA)/
                Re-entry Circle
                                                                                 -CBCA Facilitator #9
     Thurs                                   • Schumacher (2014)                 -Reading Response
     11/07                                                                       #11A & 11B
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator #9
12   Tues                                    • Worthy (2014)                     -CBCA Facilitator
     11/12                                                                       #10
     Thurs      Blanton Museum               • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 10       -Reading Response
     11/14                                                                       #12A & 12B
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator
                                                                                 #10
13   Tues       Peer-led Circle              • Fine (2018)                       -IR: Part 2H
     11/19
                                                                                 -CBCA Facilitator
                                                                                 #11
     Thurs                                   • Boyes-Watson & Pranis (2015), -Reading Response
     11/21                                     Our 7 Core Assumptions, pp. 9-16 #13A & 13B
                                                                                 -CBCB Facilitator
                                                                                 #11
14   Tues               Independent                     Independent                  Independent
     11/26                  Work                            Work                         Work
     Thurs                 Happy                           Happy                        Happy
     11/28             Thanksgiving!!!                Thanksgiving!!!              Thanksgiving!!!
Restorative Practices: Implementation and Sustainability
15 Tues         Celebration Circle           • Lang et al., (2016), Ch. 9        -CBCA Facilitator
     12/03                                   • Lang et al., (2016), Skim pp.     #12
                                               91-106
     Thurs                                   • Code Switch (2017) Podcast:       -Reading Response
     12/05                                     #1: A Year of Love and Struggle   #15A & 15B
                                               in a New High School
                                               #2: ‘They Can’t Just Be Average,’ -CBCB Facilitator
                                               Lifting Students Up without       #12
                                               Lowering the Bar
                                               #3: To Fail or Not to Fail: The
                                               Fierce Debate Over High Standards
                                               #4: Is Ron Brown High School
                                               Working?
                                                14


                                     Wiebe ALD 331     Fall 2019
16 12/9-   Individual     Individual               Individual
   12/12  Conferences    Conferences              Conferences
   M-Th
   12/13     Final         Final             Please post your
   Friday                                    Final Reflective
                                             Paper to Canvas by
                                             11:59pm
                      15
