                              EDP f384D -Group Counseling and Interventions
                                                      74295
                                           Summer 2019 – Session 1
 Class Meets: TWTH 9:00 a.m. – 12:00 p.m. in SZB 268
Instructor: Lindsay Webster, Ph.D., LPC, CSC, NCC            Office: SZB 262J
Pronouns: she, her, hers                                     Office hours:
Email: Lindsay.webster@austin.utexas.edu                     Tuesday and Thursday 12:00 – 1:00 p.m.
Phone: (512) 471-0179
        (512) 522-1898 (cell, text preferred)
                                            Course Description
Catalog Description:
Theory and research in group practice; group functioning and membership; principles of group planning; and
development of leadership skills through structured in-class role-playing. Graded on a credit/no credit basis.
 What will I learn?
 Learning Outcomes
    1) Principles of group dynamics, including group process components, group development theories, group
       member roles, and group therapeutic factors.
    2) Group leadership styles and approaches, including characteristics of various types of group leaders and
       leadership styles.
    3) Theories of group counseling, including commonalties, distinguishing characteristics, and pertinent research and
       literature.
    4) Group counseling methods, including group counselor orientations and behaviors, appropriate selection criteria
       and methods, and methods of evaluation of effectiveness.
    5) Approaches used for other types of group work, including tasks groups, psychoeducational groups, and therapy
       groups.
    6) Professional preparation standards for group leaders.
    7) The impact of social and cultural factors upon group leadership and membership.
    8) Ethical and legal considerations pertinent to group work.
 How will I learn?
    o  Lecture
    o  Group discussion
    o  Case study application
    o  Individual reflection
    o  Real play/experiential learning
 Pre-requisites for the course:
 Graduate standing. An equivalent grade of 80% is required to receive credit for this course
                                                              1


                                              Course Requirements
   Required Materials
   There is 1 required textbook for this course, listed below. Additional readings may be posted on Canvas or assigned in
   class throughout the semester. You are also encouraged to find relevant readings and supplemental resources you find
   interesting or that may be helpful for your own counselor development.
   Required Textbook:
   Corey, M. S., Corey, G., & Corey, C. (2018). Groups: Process and practice (10th ed.). Boston, MA: Cengage.
   Required Devices
   Most of your assignments for this course will need to be submitted through Canvas or UT Box. Access to these internet
   platforms is required for success in this course. Please let your instructor know ASAP if you encounter technical
   difficulties that might delay your completion or submission of a course expectation. Contact IT Services for assistance
   resolving technical issues at help@utexas.edu or (512) 475-9400.
   Instructor’s Expectations
   Developing into an effective and relationally competent professional counselor requires openness to growth and
   change. Growth requires a certain level of risk and many of us are taught that vulnerability or the sharing of one’s self
   represents weakness. By enrolling in this class, I hope that you will deepen your awareness of those things that may
   interfere with your ability to fully engage with the other and to help you build upon your relational strengths. Doing so
   will help you become a more effective helper. You will be challenged to grow from within through supportive and safe
   interactions in the classroom environment, and you are encouraged to share yourself at a level with which you feel
   comfortable. While you are expected to gain knowledge and mastery over the content of the course, a high value is
   placed on what you learn about yourself and how such growth informs your development as a counselor.
   Classroom Expectations
   Class attendance Class will begin promptly each week at 9:00 am. Please plan for traffic, conversations with peers, and
   other obligations to the best of your ability to ensure that you are ready to learn at the beginning of class. All students
   are permitted one excused absence this term without penalty. This allowance is intended to help account for
   unanticipated illness and/or crises. More than one absence jeopardizes your ability to receive credit for the class. You
   must notify the instructor at least 24- hours prior to any absence, except in cases of emergency. Consistent tardiness
   will negatively impact your final grade.
   Class participation Because this course focuses on the didactic and experiential learning of knowledge and skills
   through lecture, discussion, case application, and group exercises, active participation is essential for a passing grade.
   Assignments
1) Participation (35 pts.) Due to the experiential nature of this class, your participation in class activities holds the most
    weight for your overall grade. Your participation will include, but is not limited to, the following activities:
    a. Group Facilitator Participation (15 pts.): You will either facilitate or co-facilitate a minimum of one 80-minute in-
         class process group session. You will be expected to apply group leadership skills, ethical principles pertaining to
         group counseling, and a burgeoning knowledge of group stage development in your facilitation experience. You
         will also be expected to participate in a brief processing of the session you facilitate with Dr. Webster and any
         other co-facilitators.
    b. Group Member Participation (15 pts.): You will be expected to contribute verbally and nonverbally as an active
         member of an in-class process group. It is recommended that you come up with one personal growth goal that
         you are willing to work on during the life of this group. You need to attend 8 sessions in their entirety as a group
         member in order to receive credit for this task.
    c. Research and Share a Group Theory Article (5 pts.): We will discuss the application of various theories and
                                                                   2


        techniques in our 11th class meeting. You will be asked to extend your understanding of group theory by
        researching a peer-reviewed journal article on the use of a theory of your choice in group counseling and sharing
        it with the class. The article may be either conceptual or empirical in nature, and it must have been published
        within the past 8 years. Post it as a PDF or link on the Canvas discussion board by 9 am on Wednesday, July 3rd.
        Be prepared to orally present your takeaways from the article with the class.
2) Check-in Prompts (5 pts.) You will be asked to check in at the beginning of class most days by reflecting on your in-
   class group experience and its connection to course content. These 10-minute check-ins will be submitted in person in
   a variety of ways. At the end of the semester, Dr. Webster will randomly select 5 of these check-in submissions for a
   grade. Each completed response submitted on time will be awarded 1 point.
3) Ethical Issues Case Study (10 pts.) You will be assigned a case study in class on Thursday, June 13th. Before the
   following class meeting, you will be expected to read the case study and respond to the corresponding reflection
   questions with thoughtful attention to ethical issues relevant to group counseling. Your thorough responses should be
   typed in complete sentences and include parenthetical citations of your specialization’s ethical codes. Aim for 3-5
   sentences per question. Upload your responses to Canvas by 9 am on Tuesday, June 18th.
4) Mid-term Exam (25 pts.) You will take a mid-term exam on group counseling course content in class on Thursday,
   June 27th at 9 am. You will have one hour to take it. This exam will be taken via Canvas, so please bring a laptop to
   class or plan on checking one out from the ITO Service Desk in SZB 536. This exam will cover the following course
   topics: types of groups, ethical issues, group counseling from a multicultural perspective, stages of groups, and
   leadership skills.
5) Group Proposal & Presentation (25 pts.) You will work with 1-3 other classmates to create, submit, and present a
   proposal for a group appropriate for delivery in a school, higher ed, or community setting. The proposal should be 5-6
   pages in length, excluding references and title page (double-spaced, APA, 6th ed.), and aligned with the following
   format:
          a. Introduction: Referencing professional literature, support your rationale for utilizing group work and a
              particular group type (task, support, psychoed, counseling, or psychotherapy) for the selected population.
          b. Body: Outline the specifics of the group, including the following information:
                     i. Purpose and goals of the group
                    ii. Eligibility criteria, recruitment strategies, and screening processes
                  iii. Length of group sessions, frequency of meetings, and duration
                   iv. Leadership style and roles
                    v. Group norms, processes, and procedures
                   vi. Activities, techniques, and interventions you would utilize
                  vii. Ethical considerations
                 viii. Evaluation criteria (How will you evaluate the effectiveness of the group?)
          c. Summary: Briefly summarize your proposal and rationale.
   Prepare visual aids and/or a role play segment in your presentation of this proposal. The written proposal should be
   uploaded on Canvas by 9 am on Thursday, July 11th. The presentation will be given in class the day it is due.
   Grading for this Course (80% required to receive credit for this course)
    Assignments & Graded Activities                                           Points possible     Percent of Total Grade
    1. Participation (see specific activities above)                              35 pts.                   15%
    2. Check-in Prompts                                                            5 pts.                    5%
    3. Ethical Issues Case Study                                                  10 pts.                   10%
    4. Mid-term Exam                                                              25 pts.                   25%
    5. Group Proposal & Presentation                                              25 pts.                   25%
                                                                      3


Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to note
these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as much
advanced notice as possible).
  Meeting       Date
                       Class Topics                            Reading Due           Assignments Due at 9 a.m.
                   Intro to Group Work                         Syllabus
  1         June 6 Assign facilitation pairs
                   Assign group presentations
                                                               Chapter 1
            June       Types of Groups
  2
            11         Multicultural Perspective
            June                                               Chapter 2
  3                    Group Leadership
            12
            June       Ethical and Legal Issues                Chapter 3
  4                    Assign case study (due next meeting)
            13
            June       Forming a Group                         Chapter 5
  5                                                                                  Ethical Issues Case Study Due
            18         Process Group #1 (led by Dr. Webster)
                                                               Chapter 6
            June       Initial Stage
  6
            19         Process Group #2
            June       Transition Stage                        Chapter 7
  7
            20         Process Group #3
            June       Working Stage                           Chapter 8
  8
            25         Process Group #4
            June       Final Stage                             Chapter 9
  9
            26         Process Group #5
            June       In-class Exam
  10                                                                                 Mid-term Exam : (bring laptop to class)
            27         Process Group #6
                       Theories & Techniques                   Chapter 4
  11 July 2
                       Process Group #7
                                                               1) Read ASGW Best
                       Best Practices in Group Work
                                                               Practices Guidelines
  12 July 3            Integrative Perspective                                      Post group theory article on Canvas
                                                               2) Read group theory
                       Process Group #8
                                                               article of choice
                       NO CLASS
            July 4
                       Groups in Schools                       Chapter 10
  13 July 9
                       Process Group #9
                       Groups in Communities                   Chapter 11
  14 July 10
                       Process Group #10
  15 July 11 Group Proposal Presentations                                            Group Proposal
                                                                          4


                                                          Policies
 Classroom Policies
 Statement on Learning Success
 Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there
 are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible.
 Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to
 reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you
 with a person or Center if you would like.
 Grading Policies
            Grade            Cutoff
            A                94%
            A-               90%
            B+               87%
            B                84%
            B-               80%
            C+               77%
            C                74%
            C-               70%
            D                65%
            F                <65%
 Late work
 Late work policy: All assignments must be turned in on time. At the discretion of the instructor, late assignments may be
 docked a letter grade for that assignment for each day it is late (e.g., an assignment graded as an "A” would receive a “B”
 if a day late, a “C” if two days late, and so on).
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •   You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •   You have a right to respect.
     •   You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •   You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •   You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •   You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
     •   You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded
         or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
         and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your experience
         with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the
         quality of your peers’ experiences.
                                                                  5


    •     You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
    •     You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
          and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronouns
     Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
     differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class
     rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you
     by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this
     preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
      Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
      University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
      integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own
      (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism
      and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
      understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the
      following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
      If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
      which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
      are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
      http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
      Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
      there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
      possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are
      also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
      that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share
      with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
      committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your
      needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also
      contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
      http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
      on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
      rather than later is often helpful.
                                                                  6


      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
      we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
      improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
      workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
      in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
      (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
      Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
      isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
      sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
      committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
      misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
               1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
               2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
                    involved in a Title IX investigation.
               3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
      which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
      Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
      Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
      they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an
      official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options
      and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
      exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
      given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
      Fire Prevention Services office.
 • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
      Recording Policy
      Excluding students with a documented disability, the use of electronic recording devices in class are prohibited
                                                                 7


without prior permission of the instructor. Also, the recording of clinical material presented in the in-class portion is
prohibited to all students.
Class Visitor Policy
Visitors of any age are not allowed without prior permission of the instructor.
Campus Carry
Students who hold a license to carry are asked to review the following university policies:
General Information
Information for Students
Per her right, the instructor prohibits carrying of handguns in her personal office, SZB 262J. This information will also
be conveyed to all students verbally during the first week of class. This written notice is intended to reinforce the
verbal notification and is not a “legally effective” means of notification in its own right.
                                                          8
