UGS 302 - Mass Media & Society: From Gutenberg to Your iPad (Unique: 62135)                    Fall 2018
Class meeting times: Tues/Thurs, 11-12:30 a.m. in CAL 221
Brad Love, Ph.D.                                                             E-mail: lovebrad@utexas.edu
Office location: BMC 4.342                                                   Telephone: 512-557-2965
Office Hours (4.342 BMC): Tues 12.30-2/Thur 12.30-2,
other times available by appt. (if you need help, please ask)
Course Description and Purposes
This course introduces students to mass media, particularly how communication advancements have
influenced revolutions in society. The course emphasizes the content-dissemination and information-
gathering abilities of media. The history, development and current structure of the media are covered
as well. UGS 302 is most concerned with creating an understanding of how media develop, change,
operate, and influence the greater world.
Students will of course explore the history and current role of mass media from a multicultural
perspective, including how mass media can offer – and deny – a voice for various groups within
society. We will pay particular attention to the impact that technology and regulation have had on
shaping various media and the implications for society and its citizens. Students will be asked to
identify how different media have affected their own development as individuals.
Students should leave the course as wiser consumers of mass media and more engaged citizens. Those
considering a career in mass media should have a deeper understanding of the field. Non-majors will
have a better understanding of the mass media they encounter daily.
Course Objectives
At the end of the course, each student should be able to:
    • Handle the examination and evaluation of ideas
    • Present an overview of communication history and its place in society
    • Present ideas in writing and through effective presentations
Required Readings
    • No standard text is required.
    • Course readings will be posted on Canvas and consist of book chapters, research articles, magazine
        articles, and other relevant texts.
Course Requirements
The class will consist of our regularly scheduled meetings, information delivered through online
technologies, as well as your personal and team participation—all to enrich the experience and
enhance your understanding of the issues and themes explored during the course. Your grade will be
based on three elements: (1) regular papers, (2) a final presentation project, and (3) class participation.
Each of the four papers will be worth 15 percent of the final grade; the final presentation will be worth
30 percent, and class participation will be 10 percent. There are no plans for quizzes, other homework,
or a final exam, but the instructor reserves the right to institute such tests if necessary.


Grade composition:
        Regular papers:         15% X 4
        Final presentation:     30%
        Class participation:    10%
Grades are on a plus/minus basis, as required by the university. “Plus” grades will be the top three
scores within each range, and “minus” scores will be the bottom three results. For example, between
87 and 89 is a B-plus and between 80 and 82 is a B-minus.
Regular papers: These are essays assigned every few weeks through October to demonstrate student
consideration of the class and reading material. They are intended to demonstrate the ability to make a cogent
argument supported by evidence. Students will be encouraged to take the feedback offered and re-submit
further versions of their essays.
Final presentation project: This assignment is a group project and oral presentation intended to show
students’ ability to consider the ideas presented in class and do individual research to respond to the presented
question. Students will receive this assignment on 10 October.
Class participation: Attendance is expected as a starting point. Class participation does include
showing up for regular class sessions and also participating in conversations. It covers attendance
during class visits to special UT institutions such as the Ransom Center and Blanton Museum, which
will play a role in our early semester lessons.
Signature Course Essential Information
The Signature Courses at the University of Texas at Austin will connect students with distinguished
faculty members in unique learning environments. By way of this rigorous intellectual experience,
students will develop college-level skills in research, writing, speaking, and discussion through an
approach that is interdisciplinary, collaborative, experiential and contemporary.
 This course will address the Signature Course essentials in the following ways:
•       Information literacy assignments
•       University gem visits, including the Blanton Museum
•       Writing through regular essays
•       Oral communication, such a brief in-class speeches related to essay development
•       University Lecture Series attendance
Academic Honesty
All students are expected to demonstrate high ethical behavior and conform to the terms and conditions
of The University of Texas at Austin Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness,
and respect toward peers and community.
Violating university rules on academic honesty can lead to disciplinary penalties, including failing
grades and/or dismissal from the university. Because such dishonesty harms the individual, fellow
students, and the integrity of the university, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
The Student Judicial Services Web site has more information in the Office of the Dean of Students
section at: http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/.


Plagiarism
Part of maintaining academic honesty includes avoiding plagiarism. In your work for this class and all
others, you must cite sources if you use words or ideas that are not your own. This obviously includes
quoted material, but it also covers works that may have inspired your thinking or ideas you build upon.
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you
improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you
may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion
of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications
objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established
by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Undergraduate Writing Center
I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center in the PCL Library (PCL 2.330,
http://uwc.utexas.edu). The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with
writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Any undergraduate enrolled
in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any writing project. They work with students
from every department on campus, for both academic and non-academic writing. Whether you are
writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your own poetry, UWC
consultants will be happy to work with you. Their services are not just for writing with “problems.”
Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project.
Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is
intended to foster independence. Each student determines how to use the consultant’s advice. The
consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your
work.
Disability Documentation
Any student requiring special accommodations must obtain documentation from the Services for Students
with Disabilities in the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
(http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ or 512-471-6259 or VP: 512-232-2937). Please present the letter as
soon as possible so that optimal accommodations can be developed.
Religious Holidays: UT policy requires students to notify the professor of an upcoming absence due
to a religious holiday at least fourteen days prior to the holy day. Work missed as a result of the
holiday can be made up within a reasonable period of time following the absence.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students as well as Canvas for Course Materials:
Plan on both being an essential part of how you keep up to date about course happenings. E-mail is an
official mode of university correspondence. This means that students must monitor their e-mail for
university and course-related information and announcements. This also means you have to be sure
that UT has an accurate and functioning e-mail address.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL: 512-232-5050): BCAL is a phone-in resource that allows
UT community members to discuss concerns about another person’s behavior. Staff members will
work with the caller to explore options and provide referrals to appropriate resources. The line is


intended as “a central resource to anyone who is concerned about an individual and may not be sure
about how best to help” and operates around the clock, 365 days a year. Callers’ identities remain
confidential to the extent allowed by law. Emergencies, of course, should still be directed to 911. The
BCAL line is 512-232-5050, and more information is available at: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


Month Day   Module            Topic         Essays & final           Readings & Notes
           Humanity/ Intro/ writing &                        Assign This American Life
 Aug.  30
            learning research                                refugee podcast
                     UT intro/ Comm. as    Assign: Blanton
Sept.   4                                                    Assign: print readings
                     revol./writing        essay
                     UT intro/Medici
        6                                                    Meet at Medici
                     meeting
       11            Blanton meeting                         Meet at Blanton museum
                                           Due: Blanton
                                           essay; Assign:
       13            Writing clinic
                                           most impt. tech.
                                           essay
       18            Offset print/writing                    Discuss: print readings
                                           Due: most impt.
       20            Writing clinic                          Assign: wireless & radio readings
                                           tech.
          Social/    Radio—development Assign: radio
       25                                                    Discuss: radio;
          Culture    & culture             essay
                      nd
                     2 Radio: Murrow &
       27                                                    Assign: paper readings
                     more rubric
 Oct.   2            Hist. of papers                         Discuss: paper readings
                     Innovations &
        4                                  Due: radio essay Assign: movie readings
                     research
          Archive/                         Assign: final
        9            Movie indus.
          Memory                           project
                     Team idea                               Due: movie readings; Assign:
       11
                     generation time                         trend articles
                     Trends/essay          Assign: trend
       16
                     meetings              essay
                                                             Discuss: trend reading; Assign:
       18            Group meetings
                                                             TV
       23            Group meetings
       25            Public speaking       Due: trend essay
          Identity/
       30            Television                              Assign: Internet readings
          Reflection
                     Early digital tech. & Assign: suppr.
 Nov.   1                                                    Discuss: Internet readings
                     WWW                   tech.
                     Emerging digital
        6
                     tech.
        8            Group meetings
       13            Group meetings        Due: suppr. tech.
       15            Group meetings
       20            Pres. work
       22            No class              Thanksgiving


     27 Final pres.   Due: final project
     29 Final pres.
Dec.  4 Pres. review
      6 Course re-cap Last Class Day
