AET 339 (20724)     The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | Department of Arts and Entertainment Tech
Spring 2019         Syllabus
Course              SONGWRITING
Information         Wednesdays 5:00pm – 8:00pm in ART 1.202A
                    Course website at http://canvas.utexas.edu
Instructor          Jack W Stamps, DMA, Lecturer, DAET
                    jstamps@austin.utexas.edu
                    210-849-5347 (cell)
                    office hours: W, 2-3pm in the Foundry (main level, DFA)
Catalog             Explores the process, workflow and technique of writing songs in a digital audio workstation including a
Description         focus on lyric writing, text-setting, chord progressions, form, counterpoint, performance styles and
                    historical milestones in popular music.
Prerequisite(s)     AET 339 Digital Musicianship and/or consent of instructor and the graduate adviser.
Objectives &        By the end of the course, students should be able to:
Assessment          1)    Knowledge of harmonic structure commonly used in popular songs by:
Instruments                    a. Identifying common chord progressions
                               b. Composing short musical pieces based upon common chord progressions.
                    2)    Knowledge of formal structure in popular song by:
                               a. Identifying the various sections that comprise various popular song forms.
                               b. Composing musical pieces consistent with accepted popular song forms.
                    3)    Proficiency in the creation of melodic content by:
                               a. Utilizing various creativity techniques to inspire melodic themes.
                               b. Analyzing melodic ideas for memorability, phrase structure, singability, consistency with
                                    harmony, and aesthetic value.
                    4)    Understanding of the musical and aesthetic qualities that define different genres of popular songs
                          by:
                               a. Differentiating among songs of various styles.
                    5)    Proficiency in the creation of song lyrics by:
                               a. Utilizing various creativity techniques to inspire lyric themes
                               b. Writing lyrics utilizing various rhyming configurations.
                               c. Writing lyrics conveying various themes and ideas.
                               d. Writing lyrics that convey various emotional qualities.
                    6)    Understanding of the role of the title in popular song by:
                               a. Identifying different types of song titles
                               b. Analyzing song titles for memorability and uniqueness.
                               c. Utilizing various creativity techniques to inspire song titles
                    7) Proficiency in the preparation of a song demo by:
                    Producing a simple arrangement of a musical composition utilizing a currently available recording
                    medium.
Course materials    All required readings, listening and other materials will be posted to Canvas.
UT Electronic Mail  Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students.
Notification Policy  Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with


                    University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
                    critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
                   It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or
                    her official e-mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
                    Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for
                    missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a
                    spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
                   (see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
Use of Class       The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments
Materials           are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal
                    law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of
                    class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the
                    University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further
                    disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the
                    purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
                    (from https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Attendance         You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for in-
                   class assignments or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up. However, if a serious
                   medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please
                   inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
                   Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without
                   permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy. Three tardies equals
                   an absence. Four absences will lower your course grade by one letter grade. Additional absences may
                   result in failure of the course.
Religious Holidays Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes
                   or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including
                   travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized
                   for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
                   student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
                   notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be absent from
                   scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
                   (from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)
Classroom          Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the instructor.
Etiquette          1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the beginning of
                    class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t
                    hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an announced break, since often the
                    second part of the class period is when we will engage in group activities.
                   2) Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the classroom. If you forget to do so, and
                    your phone rings, chirps, or vibrates loudly during class, turn it off immediately and discreetly. I reserve
                    the right to penalize repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s assignment.
                   3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights, sounds,
                    and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music,
                    polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.
                   4) Consider bringing earphones and/or earplugs to class for work sessions. If you like to listen to music
                    while you work, you are welcome to do so, so long as no one else can hear it. And if you are easily
                    distracted by noise/conversation, please bring earplugs to wear so that the conversation from desk
                    critiques will not bother you.
Exams              The midterm is Tuesday, 4 March during class. The final exam is Saturday, 10 May, 9:00 AM-12:00 noon.


                   The exams include multiple choice and essay questions on the major themes of the readings and
                   lectures. Note the dates on your calendar and plan any spring break or summer travel accordingly.
Grading            Course work will be weighted as follows in calculating the final grade:
                   10 Creative Techniques Assignments, 4 pts each (40%)
                   Listening Exam (10%)
                   Short Reading Exam (10%)
                   Final Song Demo (30%)
                   Final Performance/Presentation (10%)
Academic           The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide
Integrity          by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to maintain
                   absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the
                   University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors
                   with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
                         • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                         • complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
                              assistance in preparing them;
                         • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
                              discipline; and
                         • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
                   (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic           In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty
Dishonesty         as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
                         • Cheating
                         • Plagiarism
                         • Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
                         • Falsifying Academic Records
                         • Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
                              extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
                         • Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
                              without authorization to do so)
                         • Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
                   (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
                   Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
                   including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
                   (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism         “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining
                   by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas,
                   illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that material as
                   one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement
                   (from Sec. 11-402, http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-
                   discipline-and-conduct/).
Copyright and      Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to songwriters.
Fair Use           Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine
                   of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright holders’ legal
                   rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will discuss these issues
                   during the semester as needed, but when you have questions about whether or when you can
                   appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K. Harper’s Copyright Crash Course,
                   available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Services for       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
Students with      qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
Disabilities (SSD) (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-


                       6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I
                       can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
  Student Support     There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They include (but
  Services             are not limited to) the following:
                      Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
                       of services and resources to support students and alumni.
                      The Undergraduate Writing Center
                       (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
                       their courses.
                      The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
                       time-management, and note-taking courses.
                      University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
                       promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
                       officially enrolled in certain University programs.
                      The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with their
                       personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
 Emergency             Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide students,
 Procedures            faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security of the campus
                       community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff of emergency
                       situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have the ability to
                       disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of users subscribed to the
                       service. Please consider subscribing to this service at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/.
                      (adapted from http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf)
 Campus Carry          The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as
                       buildings and spaces that are accessible to the public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms.
                       It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or about their person
                       at all times while on campus. “About” the person means that a license holder may carry a holstered
                       handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license
                       holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger
                       area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled. A license holder may not carry a
                       partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or
                       walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
                       The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried gun on
                       campus should immediately call 911. (from https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
 Overview of           Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be altered to
 Schedule              accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design program workshop
                       opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be announced via Canvas.
                      Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas. Use the numbers in
                       the left-hand column of this schedule (01, 02, 03,...30) to locate the Canvas module that corresponds to a
                       given day of class (e.g., if you are looking for the reading assignment for the seventh day of class, T 4 Feb,
                       it will be posted to module 07 in Canvas).
Class Time        Topic, Reading, Activities
W 18 Jan          Course Introduction
                  Reading: Ch 2, 7, 8
                  Listening: TBA


W 25 Jan          Song Form
                  Exercise 1: Arrangement Markers in DAW
                  Reading: Ch 3, 6, 9
                  Listening: TBA
W 1 Feb           Motive, Phrase
                  Exercise 2: Creative Techniques
                  Reading: Ch 10, 11
                  Listening: TBA
W 8 Feb           Subject Matter, Lyrics, Mood
                  Exercise 2: Creative Techniques 2
                  Reading: Ch 10, 11
                  Listening: TBA
W 15 Feb          Melody: Setting Words to Music
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques 3
                  Listening: TBA
W 22 Feb          Harmonic Progression
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques 4
                  Reading: TBA
                  Listening: TBA
W 1 Mar           Meter, Rhythm and Tempo
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques 6
                  Listening: TBA
W 8 Mar           Modal and Instrument-Centric Styles
                  Reading TBA
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques 7
                  Listening: TBA
[M 13 Mar–Sat 18 Mar: SPRING BREAK]
W 22 Mar          Song Approaches and the DAW I
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques
                  Listening: TBA
W 29 Mar          Song Approaches and the DAW II
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques 8
                  Listening: TBA
W 5 Apr           Collaboration
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques 9
                  Reading: TBA
                  Listening: TBA
W 12 Apr          Lead Sheets and Live Musicians
                  Exercise: Creative Techniques 10
                  Reading: TBA
                  Listening: TBA
W 19 Apr          Demo Production
                  Listening: TBA
W 26 Apr:         Demo Production


         Listening: TBA
W 3 May: In-Class Demo Workshop, Final Song Demo Due (30%)
         No Final Exam. In lieu, we will be having a live, “open mic” presentation of class songs at a
         venue such at the Cactus Café on the UT Campus or equivalent. More info TBA
