                              Urban Cultures Summer II 2019
                        ANT F345C (79285), M-F, 1-2:30pm, (SAC 4.118)
            Dr. John Hartigan Tel.232-9201; johnhartigan@austin.utexas.edu
                         Office Hours (SAC 4.158): by appointment.
Overview: The city is one of humanity’s most profound and unwieldy inventions. This
course surveys the culture of cities, exploring their historical development and their
current dynamism. Our perspective will encompass the great global cities as well as
major urban areas in the United States. We will frame the urban experience from a
number of perspectives, examining the distinctive forms of expressive culture, ethnic and
racial conflict, and political or economic activity that cities generate. Students will gain
an understanding of the powerful impact of new technologies, immigration, and
gentrification on how cities grow and decline. There is a strong experiential learning
component to this course; students will design and conduct mini-ethnographic projects on
cultural dynamics here in Austin.
Dynamics: Through lectures, readings, and films, students will acquire an informed
perspective on urbanism and be introduced to the methods and theories that
anthropologists rely upon in analyzing urban settings. Lectures will frame the numerous
dimensions that inform city life, while presenting students with a means of thinking
synthetically about these complex interrelations. The readings feature a range of
disciplinary perspectives on the culture of cities, but we will also develop a sustained
attention to the work of urban ethnographers. Daily films will offer vivid, engaging
depictions of particular dynamics related to city life. One in-class exam will test your
comprehension of basic dynamics, key concepts, and critical historical developments
related to urbanism. Then a final ethnographic project will allow you to pull all the
strands of the course together in an applied, practice-based approach to a topic of your
interest.
Grading and Course Requirements:
1)   One exam = 40%
2)   One ethnographic project (12 pages) = 40%
3)   Daily writing (paragraph summaries of topics from the readings and films) and class
     participation (engaging in discussions of readings & films) = 20%
     Attendance is required; 3 unexcused absences will result in a letter-grade reduction.
Required Texts:
Rethinking Urban Parks: Public Space and Cultural Diversity, Setha Low et al.
Triumph of the City, Edward Glaeser
Barrio Dreams: Puerto Ricans, Latinos, and the Neoliberal City, Arlene Davila.
Online Resources:
AnthroSource [UT Library, database] https://anthrosource.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
City & Society: http://sunta.org/publications/city-society/
New Geography: http://www.newgeography.com/
City Lab (Atlantic) http://www.citylab.com/
Cities Project (NPR) http://www.npr.org/series/155914958/npr-cities


Class Schedule:
The Origin and Design of Cities.
June 6: Introduction.
Film: Powerless.
June 7: Anthropology of the City:
Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks, Chp 1; On the Plaza, Chps 1 & 2; Barrio Dreams,
Introduction; and Triumph, Introduction.
Film: 10 Parks that Changed America.
June 10: Origins of Cities and Urban Design pt 1
Readings: Triumph, Chp 1; “Craving for Public Spaces,” and “Forced Out, Evicted
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/02/08/forced-out ; https://evictionlab.org/
Film: Rome: Engineering an Empire.
Assignment: Identify an article focused on urban contexts/dynamics in an anthropology
journal.
June 11: Urban Design pt 2: Grids and plazas.
Readings: On the Plaza, chp.4-5
Film: Paris: From the Haussmann Era to the Ring Road.
June 12: Industrial City, pt. 1: European origins
Readings: Engles, “Working Class Manchester”; Triumph, pgs 135-136 & 152-157.
Film: City Living.
DUE: Journal Article Summaries.
The Industrial and Post-Industrial City.
June 13: Industrial City, pt. 2 Segregation and the inner city
Readings: The Triumph, Chps. 2-3, and Warner, “The Segregated City”; “How Racism
Takes Place,” Lipsitz.
Film: Requiem for Detroit.
June 14: The Post Industrial City
Readings: The Triumph, Chp. 6-7; Harvey, “Time-Space Compression and the
Postmodern Condition”; “LA as Postmodern,” Dear & Flusty.
Film: Paris Ring and Cities on Speed: Mumbai—traffic.
June 17: Urban Ethnography
Readings: Kelley, “Looking for the REAL ‘Nigga’”; Goode, “How Urban Ethnography
Counters Myths about the Poor”.
Film: The Pruitt-Igoe Myth.
June 18: Infrastructure.
Readings: “Designing Urban Democracy: Mapping Scales of Urban Identity,” and
“Water Wars in Mumbai,” Public Culture.
Film: The Water Front.
June 19: EXAM.
Code and Performance.
June 20: Spatializing Culture: Discussion of ethnographic sites.
Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapters 1-3; Triumph, Chp 8. “A Place in Town.”


June 21: Representing the City: Discussion of methods.
Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapters 4-8; Lloyd, “The Celebrity Neighborhood.”
Film: Bomb It.
June 24: Reading the Urban: Discussion of research questions.
Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapter 9; Stevenson, “Meaning and Memory:
Reading the Urban Text” and “Imagining the City: Movies, Maps, and Cyberspace,”
Film: Music in Exile.
June 25: Research on Cities: Discussion of research sources.
Readings: Rethinking Urban Parks Chapter 8
Film: Getting Back to Abnormal.
June 26: Symbolic Economy. updates on ethnographic sites.
Readings: Culture of Cities, Chp.1 & 2
Film: The Gods of Times Square.
June 27: Fieldwork Day.
June 28: Report on fieldwork. [brings notes to class to discuss]
Consuming Cities.
July 1: Disneyfication of Cities.
Readings: Triumph of Cities, Chp 5, and Culture of Cities, Chp. 5 & 6
Film: Malls R Us.
July 2: Gentrification:
Readings: Barrio Dreams, Introduction and Chps. 2-3.
Film: Flag Wars
July 3: Contesting Public Culture
Readings: Barrio Dreams, Chps 4-6; On the Plaza, Chps 8 & 11.
Film: To Be Seen.
July 4: Holiday.
July 5: Fieldwork Day.
The Future of Cities.
July 8: Public Health of Cities.
Readings: The Triumph, Chp. 4. Film: Unnatural Causes.
July 9: Peer-review session [bring written draft and field notes]
July 10: Ethnographic Presentations.
July 11: Ethnographic Presentations.
July 12: Ethnographic Papers due. By 4pm, at my office (SCA 4.158)


Identifying an Ethnographic Site:
After reading discussing chapters from Day One, spend some time in a public place. The
objective is simply to try out Setha Low’s perspective on the production of social space.
By observing how different people occupy a similar locale, Low tries to recognize social
relations and social practices in space, as well as to demonstrate how public space
becomes meaningful to users. She considers how differences in the use of space define
social groups, and she examines the types of boundaries these users construct. This is
what Low means by the “social construction of space”: “the actual transformation of
space—through peoples’ social exchanges, memories, images, and daily use of the
material setting—into scenes and actions that convey meaning.”
So pick a place and observe it. Consider its design features and pay attention to
patterns of usage. Then try to articulate what kinds of meanings are attached to or
contested in this place. Can you picture yourself developing an ethnographic
perspective on this place?
Use of laptops: Refrain from using laptops during any audiovisual presentation, as the
sounds of typing create a distraction. In general, limit laptop usage to notetaking for this
course. If such usage becomes a problem, requiring repeated request to desist from such
usage, your class participation grade will be reduced to zero.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
UT Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html)
Familiarize yourself with University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of
plagiarizing: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Penalties for violation of this Code can include failure of the course and University
disciplinary action.
