                                 Research Methods for Practitioners
                                            Summer 2019
                                               Syllabus
Instructor.     Dr. Mike Parent
Email.          Michael.Parent@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours. Tuesday, 11am-1pm
                Exceptions: No office hours June 11; held on June 13, 11-1 instead.
                                No office hours June 25; Dr. Parent away that week
TA.
Email.
Office Hours.
Course Overview
Welcome to Research Methods for Practitioners!
The purpose of this course is to familiarize yourself with research methods relevant to mental
health practitioners and other consumers of research.
This course will be taught online-only. We will not meet in person. Materials will be uploaded o
of before stated deadlines. All assignments are to be complete and submitted on canvas; do not
send assignments via email.
Relevant CACREP and APA Standards. For those in the class who intend to pursue licensed
professional counselor degrees, this course is designed to meet the standards of CACREP and
APA guidelines for masters programs, for coverage of research methods. Those standards are:
CACREP:
8. RESEARCH AND PROGRAM EVALUATION
    1. the importance of research in advancing the counseling profession, including how to
        critique research to inform counseling practice
    2. identification of evidence-based counseling practices
    3. needs assessments/program evaluation
    4. development of outcome measures for counseling programs
    5. evaluation of counseling interventions and programs
    6. qualitative, quantitative, and mixed research methods
    7. designs used in research and program evaluation
    8. statistical methods used in conducting research and program evaluation
    9. analysis and use of data in counseling
    10. ethical and culturally relevant strategies for conducting, interpreting, and reporting the
        results of research and/or program evaluation
APA:
Scientific Mindedness. By being scientifically minded, students apply appropriate techniques to
identify and answer research questions and to make informed decisions as knowledgeable
consumers of the research literature. The skills involved in achieving this goal enable the student


to evaluate literature sources with informed critical thinking; integrate various concepts,
principles, and theories to formulate plausible explanations for behavior; solve problems in a
variety of settings; and carry out their roles in science and practice with appropriate attention to
cultural diversity and intersecting identities. These skills are essential for master’s-level
graduates whether they become practitioners or scientists. Scientifically minded graduates can
make an impact on society by ensuring that they solve problems and employ interventions with
the knowledge that their strategies have been tested with scientific rigor.
OUTCOMES                            INDICATORS
2.1 Demonstrate                     • Identify researchable questions at appropriate level of
psychological literacy                 complexity
                                    • Access/navigate relevant databases to gather pertinent peer-
                                       reviewed data
                                    • Evaluate quality of sources using critical thinking
2.2 Formulate plausible             • Integrate an appropriate range of psychology concepts to
psychological explanations             explain behavior
for behavioral phenomena            • Identify and rule out alternative explanations.
                                    • Recognize and defend against biases (e.g., personal, cultural,
                                       cognitive) that might distort conclusions
2.3 Engage in innovative and        • Apply specialized expertise to solve problems in applied
integrative applications to            research, consulting, and/or innovating
solve problems                      • Make decisions informed by convergence of evidence in
                                       literature
2.4 Incorporate sociocultural       • Employ research and professional interventions that take into
factors in scientific inquiry          account individual and cultural diversity and its complexity.
                                    • Design interventions for specific age groups and target
                                       populations, considering intersecting identities
Course Modules
    1. Using library systems to obtain primary research.
    2. Quantitative methods
            a. Statistical methods
                      i. Correlation. Review of the basis of correlational designs and correlational
                         statistics (e.g., Pearson’s r, Spearman’s r).
                     ii. Regression. Review of regression-based univariate statistics (e.g.,
                         hierarchical regression, mediation, moderation). Introduction to structural
                         equation modeling.
                    iii. Analysis of variance. Review of group-based univariate designs (e.g., t-
                         tests, ANOVA, ANCOVA).
            b. Cross-sectional/correlational design
                      i. Research. Review of cross-sectional research designs. Review of strengths
                         and limitations of this approach. Review of recruitment of marginalized
                         populations.
                     ii. Program evaluation. Review of needs assessment and program evaluation.
                         Review of data sources and assessments. Review of incorporation of
                         community knowledge into the assessment.


            c. Experimental and quasi-experimental design
                     i. Research. Review of basic experimental research.
                    ii. Program evaluation. Application of experimental designs to program
                         evaluation.
            d. Longitudinal design
                     i. Research. Introduction to basic longitudinal designs.
                    ii. Program evaluation. Needs assessment and program evaluation over time.
    3.  Qualitative methods
            a. Methods of qualitative inquiry
                     i. Grounded theory. Review of the use of GT, particularly in outcome
                         research and program evaluation.
                    ii. Consensual qualitative research. Review of the use of CQR, particularly in
                         outcome research and program evaluation.
    4.  Mixed methods. Review of the utility of mixed methods approaches to outcome research
        and program evaluation.
    5.  Research on counseling
            a. Assessing outcomes in counseling. Review of symptom indexes and other
                measures of outcomes.
            b. Randomized clinical trial research. Review of ideal RCTs, and how RCTs can be
                impacted by practical considerations.
            c. Evaluation of outcome research. Review of assessing outcome research.
    6.  Reporting research. Review of summarizing outcome and program evaluation research
        for non-professionals.
    7.  Critiquing research. Critical evaluation of outcome research.
Pedagogical approaches.
The course will be delivered in an online format. Modules will be arranged such that they are
released in sequence with the course as the summer semester progresses (e.g., only the first
module will be released in week 1).
Modules will include video and audio-recorded lectures for every topic. Lectures will include
practical examples from published research and examples of studies from the relevant topic
areas. Every module will include multiple quizzes on the topic material.
Every module will also include individual work. Individual work will reflect individual
identification and interpretation of relevant research material. For example, in the correlational
design unit a student may find a manuscript that describes research linking an aspect of
personality to attitudes toward therapy, and would have to correctly describe the basic
correlational findings of that study using the material covered in class. Every student will
identify a different article set for this task, of interest to their topic area, to prevent inappropriate
collaboration. All deadlines will be posted in canvas.
Course Schedule
June 6      Thurs      Lecture: Course intro and syllabus review.
                       Lecture: Using library systems to obtain primary research.


              Assessment: Study collection and annotated bibliography development.
              Due June 10.
June 11 Tues  Lecture: Basics and Definitions
              Lecture: Correlation.
              Lecture: Regression.
              Assessment: Basics self-test. Due June 14.
              Assessment: Correlation self-test. Due June 14.
              Assignment: Correlation calculation. Due June 14.
              Assessment: Regression self-test. Due June 14.
              Assessment: Retrieval and summary of regression-based study. Due
              June 14.
June 13 Thurs Lecture: Analysis of variance and t-tests.
              Lecture: Moderation.
              Lecture: Mediation.
              Assessment: Analysis of variance self-test. Due June 14.
              Assessment: Moderation self-test. Due June 14.
              Assessment: Mediation self-test. Due June 14.
              Assessment: Retrieval and summary of group difference-based study.
              Due June 14.
June 18 Tues  Lecture: Cross-sectional designs.
              Lecture: Longitudinal designs.
              Lecture: Experimental designs.
              Assessment: Correlational design self-test. Due June 21.
              Assessment. Longitudinal design self-test. Due June 21.
              Assessment: Experimental design self-test. Due June 21.
June 20 Thurs Lecture: Program Evaluation.
              Lecture. Recruitment of marginalized populations.
              Assessment: Recruitment of marginalized populations study retrieval and
              summary. Due June 21.
              Assessment: Program evaluation self-test. Due June 21.
June 25 Tues  Lecture: Qualitative designs.
              Lecture: Consensual qualitative research.
              Assessment: Qualitative designs self-test. Due June 28.
              Assessment: Qualitative study retrieval and summary. Due June 28.
              Assessment: CQR study retrieval and summary. Due June 28.
June 27 Thurs Lecture: Mixed methods designs.
              Assessment: Mixed method self-test. Due June 28.
              Assessment: Mixed methods study retrieval and summary. Due June 28.
July 2  Tues  Lecture: Assessing outcomes in counseling.
              Lecture: Symptom indices and measures of change.
              Assessment: Assessing outcomes self-test. Due July 6.
              Assessment: Symptom indices and measures of change self-test. Due
              July 6.
              Assessment: Assessing outcomes study retrieval and summary. Due July
              6.
July 3  Wed   Lecture: Randomized clinical trials.


                      Assessment: RCT self-test. Due July 5.
                      Assessment: RCT study retrieval and summary. Due July 5.
July 9      Tues      Lecture: Meta-analyses.
                      Assessment: Meta-analyses self-test. Due July 12.
                      Assessment: Meta-analyses study retrieval and summary. Due July 12.
July 11     Thurs     Lecture: Critiquing outcome research.
                      Assessment: Outcome study retrieval and critique. Due July 12.
Assessments are due by 1:00pm of the day listed in the course schedule. Late assignments are
accepted only with an approved medical excuse.
Grading
Item                                  Number        Points         Total
Study retrievals assignments          11            100            1100
Self-tests                            17            50             850
Total Course pts                      1950
A       1755 and up
B       1580-1754
C       1420-1579
D       1280-1419
F       1279 and below
