Updated as of 1-18-20
                                   ANS 379: Art of Autobiography in Japan (#32300)
                                         Spring 2020, MW 1 – 2:30 p.m. in PAR 10
                            Professor Kirsten Cather, WCH 4.112, kcather@austin.utexas.edu
                                      Office Hours: M 12 – 1 p.m., W 2:30 – 4:30 p.m.
This seminar examines autobiographies written by prominent and marginalized individuals in Japan from the tenth
century to the present. Our primary goal will be to consider how they negotiated their lives and their legacies through
the act of self-portraiture. We will look at how these works are informed by both the historical and cultural contexts in
which they were written and by the genre itself. Examples include works by highborn ladies-in-waiting and imperial
consorts in the premodern era; samurai men who found their class on the verge of extinction in the mid-19th century;
yakuza bosses and their daughters in the 20th and 21st century; writers and filmmakers reflecting on their tumultuous
wartime and marital experiences; a Japanese-American hostess and manga artist; and a 13-year-old boy with
autism. In order to consider how form also guides the content of these self-portraits, our objects of study will
encompass a wide variety of mediums that go beyond the traditional book formats including films and manga.
As a small capstone seminar, the success of this class depends on the active and consistent participation each of us.
Come each week prepared and ready to engage fully with the materials and with each other in vigorous, productive
debate and discussion. This is also a Writing Flag and Global Cultures Flag course. In this class, you can expect to
write and revise regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor and your peers to help you improve your academic writing. You should expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. It is also designed to increase your familiarity with practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Required Materials:
1) Books to Purchase (avail. at UT Co-op for purchase):
     **Lady Kagerō, The Kagerō Diary: A Woman's Autobiographical Text from Tenth-Century Japan, trans.
          Sonja Arntzen (#9780939512812) (NOTE TRANSLATOR/ISBN# to ensure you get correct version)
     **Katsu Kokichi, Musui’s Story: The Autobiography of a Tokugawa Samurai (#9780816512560)
     **Saga Jun’ichi, Confessions of a Yakuza: A Life in Japan’s Underworld (#9781568365046)
     **Mishima Yukio, Confessions of a Mask (#9780811201186)
2) Course Reader is available for purchase at Jenn’s Copy Shop NORTH branch (2518 Guadalupe St, 482-0779).
3) Additional secondary readings and helpful worksheets/assignment guidelines posted on Canvas.
4) A packet of 3”X5” index cards to be used for frequent in-class pop quizzes and group activities.
Standards and Expectations:
     •    Careful, thorough viewing/reading of the assigned texts by the date indicated on the schedule.
          This requires your active engagement with the text. Detailed note taking is essential as is
          bringing your notes and hard copies of readings to class since you will need to refer to them
          frequently for group and class discussion/activities.
     •    Active and considerate participation in and contribution to class & group discussions. Common courtesy is
          expected. Aim neither to monopolize the class discussion nor to shrink into the background. Sleepers &
          disruptive students will be asked to leave. Remember you need to earn contribution points toward your
          grade and these are based on both your participation (active engagement in all classes) and contribution
          (quality of your participation). If it is useful, feel free to use a laptop for note-taking, but please avoid surfing
          the web and other distractions.
     •    Timely completion of assignments. No make-up quizzes or assignments will be given (except for
          legitimate reasons like religious holidays and job interviews, which require one week’s prior
          notice). Your two lowest scores will be automatically dropped for daily in-class work & quizzes.
          Use them wisely. If you encounter family or medical emergencies, please use the Student
          Emergency Services as your liaison to ask for accommodations.
                                                                                                                                1


Updated as of 1-18-20
Grading Policy:
      Grades will be assigned according to the UT +/- system as follows: 93-100 = A; 90-92.9 = A-; 87-89.9 = B+; 83-
      86.9 = B; 80-82.9 = B-; 77-79.9 = C+; 73-76.9 = C; 70-72.9 = C-; 67-69.9 = D+; 63-66.9 = D; 60-62.9 = D-; below
      60 = F. As a rule, I do not grade on a curve or round up grades. If you receive an 89, you will receive a B+. One
      exception to this rule is that a grade that is very close to the next grade level, such as an 89.9 or 79.9, may be
      rounded up to the higher grade if the student has consistently attended class and participated fully in class
      discussions. There are no planned extra credit assignments.
Grading Breakdown:
Attendance/Participation/Contribution = 10% TOTAL
      Note that this is based on both your participation (active engagement in all classes) and contribution (quality of
      your participation) rather than merely on attending classes. To earn the maximum points, you will need to be a
      consistently active and good participant in class discussions. Each unexcused absence beyond one freebie will
      result in an automatic 1% point drop in this grade.
Homework and In-class Writing/Thinking/Oral Presentation Exercises = 35% TOTAL
      A series of scheduled homework assignments (see HW on schedule) and in-class short writing and thinking
      assignments and pop quizzes designed to improve your analytical and writing skills and to check if you have
      done the reading assignments carefully. No lates accepted because we will often workshop these in class on the
      day they are due and participation in those workshops counts as part of your grade. Your two lowest scores will
      be automatically dropped for daily in-class work & quizzes (but not scheduled HW). These are relatively “low
      stakes” in terms of your grade, but crucial to developing the necessary skills for success in this class (see below
      and Canvas for point breakdown for these categories). These will sometimes be open-book, so be sure to bring
      your texts and notes with you to class regularly.
Short Personal Response (PR) Essays and Short Oral Presentations (2 total, 2 pages maximum) = 20% TOTAL
    These two essays are on texts of your choice to be submitted on a day that we are discussing that text. Your
    first PR essay is due by Wed. March 25th at the latest, and your second one by Wed. April 29th at the latest. This
    will ensure that you get early and timely feedback on your writing and ideas. Earlier submissions are welcome. I
    strongly recommend you try to choose texts that you might want to write your final analytical paper on. In your
    PR, you should focus on an in-depth exploration of one (or two, at most) questions from our Expanded Toolkit
    (tailored appropriately to make it most relevant to your response/argument) with concrete evidence from the text
    to make your case. On the day you submit your PR essay, come prepared in class to discuss your ideas with the
    class in a 5-minute oral presentation/discussion. The key is to aim for an engaging, enriching presentation that
    stimulates discussion & debate.
Final Analytical Paper (5-7 pages) = 35% TOTAL
      For this formal analytical paper (5-7 pages), you will submit a 3-page first draft along with a detailed outline that
      will be workshopped in class to help you improve the final version (5% completion and participation grade).
      Paper grades (30%) will be based on your final submission.
                                                                                                                            2


Updated as of 1-18-20
Official Policies
Academic integrity: You are expected to adhere to university requirements on academic honesty and
   integrity. Behaviors, such as plagiarism, copying of another student’s work, or cheating on an exam, are
   serious offenses that will result in the grade of an “F” for the course and will be reported to the
   office of the Dean of Students, where further disciplinary action may be taken. Please refer to the
   following website for information on how to avoid plagiarism in your work and/or discuss this with the
   instructor: https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Electronic Notification Mail Policy: In this course, e-mail will be used as a means of
   communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class
   announcements and assignments.
Accommodations for Students with Documented Disabilities: Students who require special
   accommodations can get a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
   Disabilities (512-471-6529, Videophone at 512-410-6644, or email at ssd@austin.utexas.edu). This
   letter should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of the semester so that appropriate
   accommodations can be made at that time. For more information, please see:
   https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Use of Canvas: Assignments and some of our readings available on Canvas (available at
   http://canvas.utexas.edu). You should print these out and bring with you to class. Please allow
   yourself enough time before an assignment is due. As with all computer systems, there are
   occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Support available by phone or
   Live Chat at: 1-855-308-2494; https://cases.canvaslms.com/liveagentchat?chattype=student.
Religious Holidays: If you will need to miss class or other assignments due to the observance of a
   religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the work you have missed provided you
   notify me at least one week prior to the absence.
Helpful resources on campus:
Counseling and Mental Health Center:
Business Hours: Monday thru Friday, 8:00am - 5:00pm
Appointment-Scheduling hours, Monday thru Friday, 8:00am-12:00pm & 1:00pm-4:00pm
Phone: (512) 471-3515 - Student Services Building 5th Floor - https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center Crisis Line: 512-471-CALL (2255)
Student Emergency Services:
Our office helps students and their families during difficult or emergency situations. Assistance includes outreach,
advocacy, intervention, support, and referrals to relevant campus and community resources. Please note, our office
does not provide counseling services. You can access services available through SES by completing an online
form, calling 512-471-5017 (M-F 8a-4:30p), or stopping by SSB 4.400 (M-F 9a-4p) for a walk-in appointment.
https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
512-232-5050 (24/7), https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line
Are you worried about a student in your class, bothered that your roommate has been acting differently, or concerned
about the behavior of a co-worker? Do you have concerns but are not sure what to do? If so, contact the Behavior
Concerns Advice line at 512-232-5050 or submit your concerns using the online form.
Cases that present an immediate threat to self, others, or property should be considered an emergency and should
be directed to The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD) by calling 911.
                                                                                                                     3


Updated as of 1-18-20
Schedule (subject to change; updated version posted on Canvas):
** Readings/viewings marked with a -- should be completed by the day listed on the schedule.
** All Japanese authors are listed surname first following the Japanese practice. Date of original in parenthesis ( ).
** All films listed with call number on schedule are available for re-viewing at Fine Arts Library (DFA, 3.200).
Week One (Jan. 22): Approaching Autobiography: Theory and Practice
Wed: Self-Introductions
Week Two (Jan 27 & 29):
Mon: HW #1: Autobiography, Writing the self.
           Imagine you were to start writing your own autobiography. Write the first few pages or so. In an
           accompanying personal response reflection essay (about 2 pgs.; 3-page maximum), explain what you
           started with and why. Reflect upon your choices here. For example, how does this opening episode set the
           tone for the rest of your (imagined) autobiography? What kind of character would you be? What kind of story
           would you want to tell? How might you end it or title it, and why? Was it difficult to know what to start and/or
           end with? To pick a title? How does who/where you are today (or who you want to be in the future) influence
           your choices? Your intended audience? If you just can’t figure out a satisfying way to start the
           autobiography, write up a section that you know you would want to include somewhere in it and explain
           how/why this section/episode is important to your self-fashioning. On Canvas, turn in your reflection essay.
           Turning in your autobiography on Canvas is optional. Consult Guidelines for ANS 379 papers on Canvas for
           formatting & style requirements for this and all other papers.
Wed: --Smith & Watson, “A Toolkit: Twenty Strategies for Reading Life Narratives” (pp. 165-179)
           HW#2: Creating & Expanding our Toolkit.
           Read “A Toolkit.” Choose two questions/ideas about autobiography that most interest you. For HW#2, first
           rephrase and elaborate/expand on each of these questions. Aim for a meaty paragraph that has a series of
           related rich and interesting questions/ideas in your own words. Second, come up with one question about
           autobiography of your own. For each question, come up with a short bullet point/title that encapsulates the
           thrust of what you are asking (see my model example on Canvas in the Assignments Folder). We will
           collectively compile a list of these questions to make an expanded toolkit that we can build upon over the
           course of the semester. Submit your HW#2 on Canvas and also add your toolkit questions to the
           collaborative document on Canvas with your name in parenthesis after each question.
Week Three (Feb 3 & 5):
Mon: --Tendo Shoko, Yakuza Moon: Memoirs of a Gangster’s Daughter (2004), p. 1-44 (up to Chapt. 6) * PDF
                     posted on Canvas
           HW #3: Applying Theory to Text.
           Using the expanded Toolkit posted on Canvas, pick 2-3 of the most interesting toolkit questions as they
           apply to Tendo’s memoir. Do at least one question for Tuesday’s reading/class and at least one other for
           Thursday. For each question, sketch out your tentative thoughts and answers, citing evidence from the
           primary text to make your point. Your answers can be in the form of informal sentences and bullet point lists,
           but be sure to cite concrete evidence from the text (with page #s in parentheses). Have a copy of your HW
           available to consult in class for discussion both days. Though not required, I suggest you do this work for
           each text we will read this semester to help prepare you for class discussions and for the final paper.
Wed: --Tendo, Yakuza Moon, pp. 45-79 (to end, Chapt. 9); Hand in HW #3 on Canvas.
                                                                                                                           4


Updated as of 1-18-20
Unit One: Court Ladies’ Chronicles
Week Four (Feb 10 & 12):
Mon: Background lecture on Heian court & culture
         --Preface & Introduction, The Kagerō Diary: A Woman's Autobiographical Text from Tenth-Century
                    Japan (ca. 974), (trans. Sonja Arntzen), pp. ix-50
Wed: --The Kagerō Diary, Book One
Week Five (Feb 17 & 19):
Mon: --The Kagerō Diary, Book Two
Wed: --The Kagerō Diary, Book Three
Week Six (Feb 24 & 26):
Mon: --The Confessions of Lady Nijō (1307), Introduction, vii-xxvii & Book One, pp. 1-66
         HW #4 Part One: Quote Exercise.
         Over the course of her diary, Lady Nijō depicts herself in a strikingly different number of poses or personas
         (as daughter, lover, poet, etc.). As you are reading excerpts from each Book, identify what you think are the
         most important personas she projects in each. Come up with a catchy and apt phrase that captures your
         ideas about this persona (for example, for Kagerō, one might be “Woe-is-me wounded one”). For each key
         persona, find a couple of rich illustrative quotes from the text that support your point. Copy these out in their
         entirety citing the page numbers correctly in parenthesis after each quote. (No need to cite the author or title
         since we are dealing with just one text here). After each quote, explain briefly in informal language why you
         think it’s important. What point(s) does it help you to make? Have a copy available to discuss with the class;
         submit a final version on Canvas by Wed. 2/26.
Wed: --Lady Nijō, The Confessions of Lady Nijō (1307) digest version, pp. 788-819
         See HW#4 above. Do also for excerpts from Books 2 - 5.
Week Seven (March 2 & 4):
Mon: Wrap-up Lady Nijō
         HW #4 Part Two: One Point, One Paragraph.
         Now imagine you had to write a formal analytical essay on the topic of what kinds of personas Lady Nijō
         projects, how, and why. Remember that formal essays differ from personal response essays (consult
         Guidelines for ANS 379 papers). Choose one (or two) of her key personas to describe and evidence
         coherently and persuasively. Write up a single paragraph of this mock essay in which you would use the
         quotes you have gathered for some of your points. You may consider other points of evidence (i.e. plot
         points, style, POV, narrative arc, etc.), but the focus of this exercise is quote analysis and integration. Be
         sure to choose and trim quotes wisely as well as to frame, integrate, and analyze the quotes sufficiently so
         that they work as part of your argument. Review Using Quotes Effectively Worksheet on Canvas under
         Assignments. Submit via Canvas.
Wed: --MariNaomi, Turning Japanese: A Memoir (2016) (*PDF posted on Canvas)
Unit Two: Samurai Stories & Yakuza Yarns
Week Eight (March 9 & 11):
Mon: Background lecture on Edo Period SPAM
         --“Introduction” and first few chapters of Musui’s Story, ix-xxi, pp. 1-42
         In-class read excerpts from Banarasidas, Ardha-Kathanak (1601)
Wed: --Katsu Kokichi, Musui’s Story: The Autobiography of a Tokugawa Samurai (1843), pp. 43-108
         ** Extra Credit Opportunity (5 p.m. Avaya Auditorium):
         Film screening and discussion of Shusenjo: The Main Battleground of the Comfort Women Issue (dir. Miki
         Dezaki, 2019). For 5-10 extra points added to your Personal Response Essay #1, attend this screening and
         talk. In a 2-page maximum Personal Response Essay (due by Friday, March 13th at 5 p.m.), consider how
                                                                                                                         5


Updated as of 1-18-20
         this documentary (and the accompanying Q&A) might be considered an autobiography of sorts. What kind
         of autobiography is it? And whose – the interviewees? Comfort Women? Former soldiers? The director?
March 16-21: Off for Spring Break. Start reading Confessions of a Yakuza over break.
Week Ten (March 23 & 25):
Mon: --Jun’ichi Saga, Confessions of a Yakuza: A Life in Japan’s Underworld (1989), Part I, pp. 1-97
Wed: --Jun’ichi Saga, Confessions of a Yakuza, Parts II, III, & IV, pp. 101-253
         Wrap up Confessions of a Yakuza
         Reminder: Today is the last possible day to submit Personal Response Essay #1 (10%).
Unit Three: Writing War and Storying Sexuality
Week Eleven (March 30 & April 1):
Mon: Theories and Practices of Autobiography Take Two
         --Smith & Watson, “Getting a Life: Everyday Uses of Autobiography” (pp. 1-24)
         --“Politics (of Self): The Subject of Autobiography,” pp. 20-37
         --New York Times op-eds
         HW#6: Expanding our Toolkit (Take Two).
         Look back at our expanded Toolkit. While reading these newer theories of autobiography and thinking back
         on the autobiographies we have read thus far, consider what new questions we need to add to our toolbox
         in order to consider the issues and genres/time periods of autobiography addressed in these pieces. Follow
         the instructions for HW#2 for this assignment. Submit your HW#6 on Canvas and also add your toolkit
         questions to the collaborative document on Canvas with your name in parenthesis after each question.
Wed: --Nosaka Akiyuki, “A Grave of Fireflies” (1967), pp. 445-463
         --Supplementary interviews with Nosaka & Takahata
         --Grave of the Fireflies (dir. Takahata Isao, 1988, 89 min., DVD 1811/17912);
                    also avail. at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vldWhL5JQxg
Week Twelve (April 6 & 8):
Mon: --Tayama Katai, Futon (1907), pp. 35-96
         --Supplementary readings on Katai & Uno & Abe (posted on Canvas)
Wed: --Uno Chiyo, “This Powder Box” (1966), pp. 208-236
         --Abe Akira, “Peaches” (1972), pp. 344-353
Week Thirteen (April 13 & 15):
Mon:      --Mishima Yukio, Confessions of a Mask (1949), Chapters One and Two
         In-class clips of Mishima: A Life in Four Chapters (dir. Paul Schrader, 1985), available on UT Kanopy
Wed: --Confessions of a Mask, Chapters Three & Four
         Wrap up Confessions of a Mask
Week Fourteen (April 20 & 22):
Mon: --Alison Bechdel, Fun Home, A Family Tragicomic (2006); *posted on Canvas
         HW #7: Objectifying the Self. Bring into class today an object that somehow offers an autobiographical
         comment on you. What is your futon or powder box or peach or childhood picture book or home décor of
         choice? What does this object say about you? About others in your life? How and why can an object speak
         about / contain / represent oneself? What are its limits? Write up a short 1-2 paragraph personal reflection
         essay on this object as autobiography. Be prepared to present your object and reflections to the class.
Wed: --Higashida Naoki, The Reason Why I Jump: The Inner Voice of a Thirteen-Year-Old Boy with
         Autism (2013) excerpts
                                                                                                                      6


Updated as of 1-18-20
Week Fifteen (April 27 & 29):
Mon: In-class watch Hara Kazuo (dir.), Extreme Private Eros: Love Song 1974, DVD 7839, 98 min.;
                    also available at: https://vimeo.com/176776589
Wed: Discuss Extreme Private Eros
          --Ruoff & Ruoff, “Filming at the Margins: The Documentaries of Hara Kazuo,” pp. 115-126
          --Ruoff, “Japan’s Outlaw Filmmaker: An Interview with Hara Kazuo,” pp. 103-113
          Reminder: Today is the last possible day to submit Personal Response Essay #2 (10%).
Week Sixteen (May 4 & 6): Final Paper Workshop & Meetings
Mon: Individual meetings on papers (sign-up available on Canvas)
Wed: In-class Paper Writing Workshop: 3-page Draft & Outline of Analytical Final Paper Due (5%).
          Detailed instructions on Canvas. Be sure to bring a printed out hard copy of your draft & outline to
          class for peer-editing. Grade dependent on completion and participation in peer workshop.
Monday, May 18th by 8 a.m.: Final Analytical Paper due (submit on Canvas). Late papers will be docked one full
letter grade per day. Any paper submitted after 8 a.m. on Monday. May 18th but before 8 a.m. on Tuesday, May 19th
will be docked one full letter grade, any submitted by 8 a.m. after Tuesday, May 19th but before 8 a.m. on
Wednesday, May 20th, two full letter grades, etc. No papers accepted after 8 a.m. on May 21st.
                                                                                                                  7
