ARC 327R, ARC 386M, LAS 381, WGS 393
RACE AND GENDER: By Design
SPRING 2019
UNIQUE: 00707/01034/39743/45752
Tuesdays, 5:00 – 8:00 PM, Location: WMB 3.102/3.108
Instructor: Charlton N. Lewis
Office Hours: (by appointment)
Office: GOL. 2.116/SUT. 4.116
email: charltonlewis@austin.utexas.edu
If we cannot now end our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity.
(John F. Kennedy, 35th President of the United States)
Design shapes the way we live. So it ought to serve everyone.
(Eva Maddox, Co-Founder, Archeworks) excerpted from Diversity and Design: Understanding Hidden
Consequences
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This seminar will examine the relationship of design relative to the narratives of race, gender, and diversity.
The course will be organized in related yet distinct topical areas engaging in a critical discourse on
ethnicity, race, gender and sexuality within a multi-disciplinary exploration of design and design issues. The
seminar will leverage a growing understanding and comprehension into shared points of examination and
discussion as we look to seek out and discover a contemporary framing of this complex, critical, and
sometimes personal conversation.
                           RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2019


COURSE AIMS AND OBJECTIVES:
Learning Outcomes:
By the end of this course, the participants will:
         ….have garnered a greater understanding of the myriad of issues and complexities related to an
examination of race, gender, and equity in the built environment
         ….have developed and honed the skills and capacities for a thoughtful and critical discussion and
discourse of these same often complex and intense points of departure
         …..will have further developed analytical skills and sensibilities and leveraged a curiosity and
passion towards furthering an awareness relative to the seminar topics and beyond
CULTURAL DIVERSITY FLAG:
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
marginalization.
SEMINAR FORMAT AND PROCEDURES:
A variety of diverse and compelling essays and mixed media prompts will be posted online weekly for the
seminar to consider in advance of the Tuesday seminar meeting. As a seminar, the interaction will be
circular and not linear. Participants will be required to actively engage in the seminar discussion and to
bring to bear a thoughtful dialogue in regards to the topics presented (for example, Assn. type 1).
After the Tuesday seminar discussion, each participant is expected to contribute to an ongoing journal/
archive/seminar blog of their individual seminar experiences and reflections. (for example, Assn. type 2)
Individual participants will, generally on a rotational basis, take turns uploading responses (for example,
Assn. type 3) to a prompt that will provide a point of departure for the seminar discussion to come. (Note:
At certain points of the semester participants might all be asked to all upload responses, dependent upon
the prompt or engagement)
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
Required Materials and Devices
Access to web-based/online materials (via CANVAS and other means) for uploading and downloading
purpose will be required for this course. Note taking and transcription as a means of archiving individual
seminar engagement is also expected.
Classroom Expectations (Assn. type 1):
The expectations for the seminar participation and discussion are that all viewpoints are inherently
valuable and to be respected in this academic setting. Respect for the multiplicity of viewpoints and points
of discussion is an absolute.
Attendance is expected at all course meeting times and will be recorded. Active participation during the
seminar is particularly critical as the discussion and interaction is primary to the nature of the seminar
typology.
                          RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2019


Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or to miss class and to ascertain if the
absence will be viewed as unexcused. A student who misses classes or other required activities for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence. A student who fails to complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the
normal academic penalties.
COURSE SCHEDULE:
Course Schedule & Delieverables
• Thursdays, Seminar prompt uploaded to CANVAS by Instructor; [or alternatively a seminar
  engagement noted and direction provided]
Student Deliverables:
• Mondays, 9:00 PM; Primary respondents responses to prompts due (“Assn. type 3”, due via CANVAS
  upload); primary respondents rotate per week as directed by Instructor
•Tuesdays, 5:00 - 8:00 PM; Seminar Discussion, in class participation and discussion by ALL (“Assn. type
  1”)
• Thursdays, 9:00 PM; Individual Journal reflections to be uploaded every week to CANVAS by ALL
  (“Assn. type 2” due via CANVAS upload)
                         RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2019


COURSE ASSIGNMENT TYPES
Coursework over the semester will have the following typological and grading breakdown:
ASSIGNMENT TYPE 1: SEMINAR VOICES, spoken _shared (in-seminar participation, engagement,
and discussion) 30%
ASSIGNMENT TYPE 2: SEMINAR VOICE, written _reflection (individual post-seminar summations
submitted back to instructor, via CANVAS, on a weekly basis) 35%
ASSIGNMENT TYPE 3: SEMINAR VOICE, engaged_response (individual content response to
assigned prompts and shared with all seminar prior, via CANVAS, to the next seminar meeting) 35%
       Note: ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK, AND LATE ARRIVALS.
Grading for this Course
In addition to the interactions described above, seminar participants are expected to demonstrate
evidence of having read and prepared materials as required on a weekly basis; participants are
expected to provide reading/content responses prior to the seminar meeting and actively participate in
the seminar discussion. Thoroughness, effort, and engagement to be judged by the level of preparation,
the presentation of ideas, the quality of discussion/questions, and the thoughtfulness of the points of
critique.
SEMINAR RESOURCES:
Preliminary Bibliography (from which content will be extracted as needed):
DIVERSITY AND DESIGN: UNDERSTANDING HIDDEN CONSEQUENCES
BETH TAUKE, KORYDON SMITH AND CHARLES DAVIS.
DARK SPACE: ARCHITECTURE, REPRESENTATION, BLACK IDENTITY
MARIO GOODEN
SITES UNSEEN: ARCHITECTURE, RACE, AND AMERICAN LITERATURE
WILLIAM A. GLEASON
ARCHITECTURE IN BLACK: THEORY, SPACE AND APPEARANCE
DARELL WAYNE FIELDS
THE AESTHETICS OF EQUITY: NOTES ON RACE, SPACE, ARCHITECTURE, AND MUSIC
CRAIG L. WILKINS
GENDER AND ARCHITECTURE
EDITORS: LOUISE DURNING, RICHARD WRIGLEY
FEMINIST PRACTICES: INTERDISCIPLINARY APPROACHES TO WOMEN IN ARCHITECTURE
LORI A. BROWN (EDITOR)
                         RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2019


TRANSGENDER ARCHITECTONICS: THE SHAPE OF CHANGE IN MODERNIST SPACE (GENDER, BODIES
AND TRANSFORMATION) NEW EDITION EDITION, BY LUCAS CRAWFORD (AUTHOR)
GENDER STUDIES IN ARCHITECTURE : SPACE, POWER AND DIFFERENCE
DÖRTE KUHLMANN
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES TO BE UTILIZED: Community events and resources, CANVAS course uploads,
Evernote shared resources, excerpts from Vimeo and YouTube
attendance
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused
absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will
be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances,
absences are only excused with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student
is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
The student is responsible for completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating
communication with the instructor to determine due dates. If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of
class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor
prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding
lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
religious observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is
excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after
the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the
absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within
a reasonable time after the absence.
academic integrity
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
                           RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2019


individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly
enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and
procedures on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php .
University Code of Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/
#universitycodeofconduct
care program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the
colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who
are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
The CARE Counselor in the School of Architecture is Abby Simpson, LCSW. Faculty and staff may refer
students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her.
-     Available by phone M-F 8-5p 512.471.3115 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable) | BTL
114B | cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
For immediate support:
-      Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor |
  512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-      CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
FREE   Services at CMHC:
-      Brief assessments and referral services - cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
-      Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-      MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-      Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
students with disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students
(471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be
presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed
should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
bcal
https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can
be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made
anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
emergency evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency .
                          RACE AND GENDER: By Design SPRING 2019
