ArE 345K: Masonry Engineering, Unique # 15075/15730                                  Fall 2018
                            ARE 345K: MASONRY ENGINEERING
Instructor: Professor Raissa P. Ferron                 Office Location: ECJ 4.704
Email: rferron@mail.utexas.edu                         Office Phone: 512-232-2691
Office Hours: Mondays & Wednesdays 11am to 12pm on Mon and Wed on class days only,
or by appointment. Concealed carry of handguns is not permitted in Dr. Ferron’s office.
Course Website: Canvas. http://canvas.utexas.edu/            Prerequisites: CE329; CE 324P
Meetings Days/Times: Mondays 10:00 – 11:00 am; Fridays 12:00 – 3:00 pm
Lectures Location: ECJ 3.402; Lab Location: TBA
Final Exam: Monday, Dec 17, 9 – 12:00pm
Required Textbook:
    (a) Klingner, R. E., Masonry Course Notes, January 2012, will be posted on Canvas in pdf
        format.
    (b) 2013 Masonry Building Code Requirements and Specification for Masonry Structures
        (TMS 402-13 / ACI 530-13 / ASCE 5-13 →Building Code Requirements for Masonry
        Structures and TMS 602-13 / ACI 530.1-13 / ASCE 6-11 →Specification for Masonry
        Structures)
    (c) 2013 Masonry Designers’ Guide
        Figure 1: Covers of Required Textbook b and Required Textbook c
Notes: Required Textbook b and c will be purchased from The Masonry Society by the instructor
and re-sold at cost to students.
Course Description: This is an introductory course focusing on masonry materials and
design. The objective of this course is to provide an introduction to the behavior of masonry
materials and components and to present methods for design of masonry building, primarily
concentrating on masonry wall systems.
My teaching philosophy: You all belong here and are capable of excelling in this class.
Let’s work together to make that happen.
                                 Updated August13, 2018                                  Page 1


ArE 345K: Masonry Engineering, Unique # 15075/15730                                      Fall 2018
What you will learn: By the end of this course, you should be able to:
                               Discuss fundamental trends in the history of masonry
                                construction.
                               Describe the nomenclature, properties, and material
                                specifications associated with each basic component of masonry
                                (units, mortar, grout, accessory materials).
                               Describe how masonry assemblages behave with respect to
                                differential movement
                               Summarize several current and future challenges in masonry
                                construction
                            
                               Design simple masonry structures (requiring little structural
                                calculation) for satisfactory performance with respect to the
                                characteristics covered in (3) above.
                               Perform structural calculations for unreinforced and reinforced
                                masonry elements, using the strength design.
                                    Construct simple masonry elements.
                                    Identify visually cracking and durability issues in
                                     masonry and provide possible causes for the distress.
Course Grade Distribution: Figure 2 presents the distribution for which the overall course letter
grade is based:
                  Figure 2: Major requirements for course numerical grade
                                Updated August13, 2018                                       Page 2


ArE 345K: Masonry Engineering, Unique # 15075/15730                                   Fall 2018
The plus/minus (+/-) grading system will be used in the final course grade calculation.
Read below for additional details regarding the some of the items shown in Figure 2:
➢ Homework & Labs:
All homework and lab assignments, except specific problems requiring numerical
calculations, must be typed. Non-typed homework problems will receive 15% score penalty.
For numerical calculation problems, the details of relevant calculations must be shown with
the correct units, and the solution should be clearly designated (i.e. boxed off, bolded, etc).
All assignments must have a TYPED cover sheet with the following information:
student(s) name, the class name, assignment number, date assignment is due, and
Professor’s Ferron name. Unless otherwise stated, HW and lab assignments are due at the
beginning of class on their due date within the first 10 minutes. Additional details regarding
HW & Lab policy will be posted on Canvas. Assignments received after the deadline but
before 11:59:59 PM on the same day will be penalized 15% of the total grade; a 25% penalty
will be assigned if it is not submitted by between 12:00:00 AM - 5:00:00 PM CST on the
following day. No assignments will be accepted after this point. Late assignments must be
sent to Prof. Ferron’s inbox through CANVAS.
➢ Exams:
Students are expected to take the exams at the scheduled times. These dates will be posted on
the course schedule. Students must notify the instructor in advance if they are unable to take
an exam. Make-up exams will be given only when adequate supporting evidence is
furnished. A doctor’s note must be provided if an illness prevents you from taking an exam.
➢ Quizzes and Attendance:
Pop quizzes with be held periodically during the semester. These pop quizzes will count
towards your attendance grade. No make ups are allowed on the pop quizzes. Students get
three free waivers for absences on pop quizzes during the semester. No additional waivers
will be allowed regardless of the reason. Once these three waivers have been used, then zero
credit is received for quizzes and attendance. Note, no ‘free’ unexcused absences are allowed
on lab days, field trip days, days with guest speakers, and student presentation days, unless for
observance of a religious holiday or emergency medical reason. If a student misses a lab or
student presentation day, a 50% grade penalty will be applied to your grade on that
assignment. If a student misses a field trip day or guest speaker day, then a 50% penalty
will be applied towards your quizzes and attendance zero grade for the first miss. After
that, zero credit will be received for quizzes and attendance portion of your grade for any
additional misses. No assignment penalty is applied if student misses a lab day, field trip day,
guest speakers day, or student presentation day if the student is absent due to a observance of
a religious holiday, providing student notifies Prof. Ferron at least 14 days prior to the date of
observance of the religious holiday. Otherwise, Prof. Ferron’s discretion will apply in other
situations. If you miss class, it is your responsibility to make sure that you are aware of any
announcements that have been made and that you are familiar with the material covered in
class. You are responsible for all material and administrative instructions given during an
absence.
                                  Updated August13, 2018                                  Page 3


ArE 345K: Masonry Engineering, Unique # 15075/15730                                   Fall 2018
                                      Additional course information
Grade disputes: Any grade disputes must be submitted in writing via email to Prof. Ferron
within 3 calendar days after the graded work is posted on blackboard or distributed back to the
class, whichever occurs first, regardless of whether the student in question was present in class
or not. No dispute will be accepted after the deadline. Prof. Ferron will confirm receipt of your
email via email within 48 hours. If you do not receive email confirmation from Prof. Ferron
that your dispute email was received by her, then you should assume the email was not received
and you should submit the dispute to Prof. Ferron in person.
Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially
important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture,
religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters
are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request
to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Copying and distributing lecture materials: Students do not have the right to copy and/or
distribute the course materials for outside usage unless Prof. Ferron expressly grants
permission. These materials include but are not limited to syllabi, lecture hand outs,
quizzes, exams, in-class materials, review sheets, and additional problem sets.
Professionalism: You are expected to treat your instructor and all other participants in the
course with courtesy and respect. Your comments to others should be factual, constructive,
and free from harassing statements. Unprofessional or disrespectful conduct will result in a
lower grade on an assignment.
Scholastic Dishonesty: Giving aid to a student during an exam or taking information from
another student’s exam constitutes scholastic dishonesty. Submitting another student’s
laboratory report or homework assignment and representing it as your own work also
constitutes scholastic dishonesty, as does copying text from the laboratory manual or any
other published document. Students are not discouraged from working together outside of
class, but submitting identical or similar assignments is unacceptable (with the exception of
explicitly stated team-based homework, projects, or reports). If students are found to have
cheated on homework, exams, or laboratory reports, all students involved will be held
responsible. For additional information regarding academic dishonesty and UT’s honor code,
see the Dean of students’ website and University General Information Catalog at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ and http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/.
Course Evaluation: An evaluation of the course and instructor will be conducted at the end
of the semester using the approved UT Course/Instructor evaluation forms. Students are also
encouraged to provide feedback to the instructor throughout the course.
                                  Updated August13, 2018                                  Page 4


ArE 345K: Masonry Engineering, Unique # 15075/15730                                    Fall 2018
Drop Dates:
     • Undergraduate students: From the 1st through the 12th class day (4th class day in the
         summer sessions), an undergraduate student can drop a course via the web and
         receive a refund, if eligible. From the 13th (5th class day in the summer sessions)
         through the university’s academic drop deadline, a student may Q drop a course with
         approval from the Dean, and departmental advisor.
     • Graduate students: From the 1st through the 4th class day, graduate students can
         drop a course via the web and receive a refund. During the 5th through 12th class
         day, graduate students must initiate drops in the department that offers the course and
         receive a refund. After the 12th class day, no refund is given. No class can be added
         after the 12th class day. From the 13th through the 20th class day, an automatic Q is
         assigned with approval from the Graduate Advisor and the Graduate Dean. From the
         21st class day through the last class day, graduate students can drop a class with
         permission from the instructor, Graduate Advisor, and the Graduate Dean. Students
         with 20-hr/week GRA/TA appointment or a fellowship may not drop below 9 hours.
Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request,
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (Videophone: 512-410-6644) or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Emergency Evacuations: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin
campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit
doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door
may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in
evacuation should send an email to Prof. Ferron during the first week of class to inform
her. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Dept., The
University of Texas at Austin Police Dept., or Fire Prevention Services office. Further
information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Class Web sites and student privacy: Students who do not want their names included in
electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information. For information on
restricting directory information, see the Undergraduate Catalog or go to:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/ug02-04/index.html.
Mental health and Wellness Resources: Being in school, while handling everything else in
life, can be stressful. If you or someone you know is feeling overwhelmed, depressed, and/or
in need of support, please know that services are available:
     • Counseling and Mental Health Crisis Line: 512-471-CALL (2255). This is a
         confidential service that allows you to talk with trained counselors about urgent
         concerns regarding yourself.
     • Counseling and Mental Health Center: 512-417-3515; https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
                                   Updated August13, 2018                                  Page 5


ArE 345K: Masonry Engineering, Unique # 15075/15730                                  Fall 2018
           o Please note, that Jeni Wade is the Counselor in Academic Residence (CARE)
               counselor for CSE. Her office is located in EER 2.812 and office number is
               512-471-8396.
   •   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) 512–232-5050. BCAL is a 24-hour/seven-
       days-a-week advice line, providing students, faculty and staff an opportunity to
       discuss their concerns about another individual's behavior. For more information visit
       the BCAL website: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/
   •   Student Ombuds Office: Call 512-471-3825 or visit
       https://ombuds.utexas.edu/student. This is a confidential service provided you can use
       to discuss interpersonal difficulties, university policies and bureaucracy issues, and
       conflict resolution techniques.
                                Updated August13, 2018                                   Page 6
