                        MBA and MPA Programs: Acc 380K.7– Fall 2019
                                      Financial Statement Analysis
Professor                              Dr. Patrick Badolato, CPA
Office Hours                           T/Th 3-4. RRH 5.406.
Phone                                  (512) 471-7920
E-Mail                                 patrick.badolato@mccombs.utexas.edu
                                       Please post all non-personal questions on our Discussion Board
Course Summary: This Financial Statement Analysis course focuses on using an array of financial
information to best determine the why behind past and current performance. To achieve this we combine
quantitative and qualitative factors to understand drivers of performance and to tell the story of the firm.
With a solid understanding of the past and current conditions, we move towards motivating sound
forecasts and briefly discuss well-supported inputs to valuation models.
This course is advised for individuals who possess all of the following:
    1)  an interest in learning and a willingness to develop new skills and perspectives;
    2)  an interest in how businesses operate, make decisions, change and report their performance;
    3)  a willingness to benefit from and contribute to the UT/McCombs’ educational experience;
    4)  a general, but strong, understanding of financial accounting at an introductory level as the logical
        language of business. This course builds off introductory Accounting classes.
What you should expect:
Historically this has been a challenging class that requires a commitment. It is not challenging as you
must memorize complex formulas that you could easily look up, but as it will challenge perspectives and
require critical thinking and the synthesis of information. This is also a class that actively shuns
memorization of terms and formulas and the regurgitation of anything. We will not waste your time (and
your educational investment) with memorizing items such as ratios or formulas or emphasizing jargon
and catchphrases over thoughtful analysis. Instead we will focus on more useful ways of approaching
various issues. Therefore, you may hear many “Yes, but…” questions: “Yes, but in your own words.”
“Yes, but why? “Yes, that is the general economic argument, but how has it played out in this scenario?”
“Yes, that is the change, but what drove that change? …We will get dirty trying to best understand
various firms and how to best use financial information. You need to be involved in these discussions.
How to do well and get the most out of the experience:
This class is also one that has a straightforward plan for success as directly affirmed by former students.
Students who truly commit to all of the following usually end up with solid grades: (1) consistently
preparing for class, using the materials provided and asking questions when needed; (2) being active
learners within the classroom and (3) thoughtfully reviewing the material (with peers) after class.
Individuals who do not do or want to do the work, check out during class or miss class, believe they
know everything, maintain a closed mind or refuse to be thoughtful usually find this class to be dreadful.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                            Fall 2019
                                    A Broader Background of the Course
Our objectives include:
     •   Increase our understanding of financial filings (including financial statements, managers’ commentaries,
         footnotes and other sources of financial information) in order to:
              o Understand how firms operate and create value—we put considerable emphasis on understanding
                  how financial information helps us understand and guide operating decisions.
              o Concisely articulate the firm’s past—without this, valuation and forecasting could be misguided,
                  so we must be able to tell the story of the firm.
              o Increase our understanding and ability to use tools to analyze information presented in financial
                  statements. Understand the benefits and limitations of financial information provided in financial
                  filings and the motivation for and process of making adjustments to this information—we will
                  adjust, change and challenge ratios, metrics and formulas to ensure they work in specific real-
                  world situations.
              o Use our understanding of the firm and its financials to make informed predictions about future
                  performance—we will stress how understanding financial information provides us with an
                  excellent framework for considering the future.
              o Motivate, understand, construct and implement various inputs in valuation models—we will very
                  briefly note the mechanics of valuation while stressing the more useful and challenging steps of
                  motivating inputs to valuation. Valuation is not only a mindless mechanical exercise.
The course will be taught using a combination of examples, discussion questions, cases and homework problems.
We will learn new concepts using various firms’ historical and current financial data. To achieve these objectives,
during the semester we will learn a framework for business analysis and valuation. The steps in the framework
include:
     (1) Business Strategy Analysis: The purpose of business strategy analysis is to assess the profit potential of
         the firm at a qualitative level. This involves an understanding of the firm’s strategy and its industry and
         considering how these affect and are affected by the firm’s financial performance.
     (2) Financial Analysis: The purpose of financial analysis is to assess the firm’s historical financial
         performance in the context of its goals and strategies. Tools used for financial analysis include ratio
         analysis, cash flow analysis, and common-size financial statements. Ratio Analysis is not computing
         ratios (i.e., division), but carefully using and changing ratios to provide us with information.
     (3) Accounting Analysis: The purpose of accounting analysis is to develop an understanding of whether a
         firm’s accounting captures its true underlying economic condition(s). This involves understanding
         accounting transactions, identifying accounting flexibility, evaluating the appropriateness of accounting
         policies and estimates, and at times, altering financial statements to enhance decision making.
     (4) Valuation/Prospective Analysis: The purpose of valuation/prospective analysis is to forecast the firm’s
         future financial performance and determine a potential valuation of the firm—our best assessment of
         intrinsic value. To do this we will learn the mechanics and intricacies of forecasting financial statements
         and we will (very briefly) note the components and usage of valuation models.
We will review (and learn) accounting concepts as this knowledge is critical to making decisions with financial
information. However, the primary objective of the course is not to improve our understanding of Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (US GAAP or IFRS); the goal is to improve our ability to interpret and use
financial statements in a variety of settings including a primary focus on credit and equity analyses and
supplemental coverage of corporate finance, planning and control. This is not a journal entry class; in fact, we
will likely not see any journal entries during the entire semester (unless specifically requested by students).


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                             Fall 2019
                                     Structure, Materials and Logistics
Course Structure
    •    The class format involves coverage of the main areas and tools noted above. In addition, there will be a
         considerable amount of discussions/cases that focus on specific firms and specific financial issues. These
         cases will involve a careful analysis of the financials, the opportunity to dig deeper to support (or
         challenge) information that is presented, and the consideration of the benefits and limitations of various
         tools, metrics and ratios.
    •    The course will be taught using a combination of examples, discussion questions, cases and homework
         problems. We will learn new concepts using various firms’ historical and current financial data.
    •    A tentative schedule of class meetings is attached to the end of this document. This schedule may be
         revised and all updates will be posted on Canvas or discussed in class.
Materials
    • Required: Cases, slides and other materials created by the professor and available on Canvas.
         Students are required to access Canvas, read takeaways, exam questions, case feedback
         commentaries and other class materials and post any unanswered questions directly to Canvas.
         There is no substitute for the vast amount of information that will be on Canvas.
           o To ensure the highest dissemination of information and to maintain a fair
                playing field, all non-personal questions must be asked on the Discussion
                Board and not emailed to me.
    •    Required: It is required that you read, used and retained the materials and information from an
         financial accounting class. Our course builds off these.
    •    Recommended Text: The textbook for the course is Financial Reporting, Financial Statement Analysis
         and Valuation: A Strategic Perspective by Wahlen, Baginski and Bradshaw, eighth edition. ISBN: 978-
         1285190907
           o    The textbook is recommended for students who have not had sufficient exposure to the material we
                cover in class. The class moves fast and assumes you mastered material from prior classes. We do
                not have slides from, cover or read from the text; it provides background reading.
           o Suggested Texts:
                 Accounting for Value by Stephen Penman; Ben Graham’s The Intelligent Investor; Michael
                 Lewis’s The Big Short; Pat Dorsey’s The Little Book that Builds Wealth and Michael Shearn’s The
                 Investment Checklist: The Art of In-Depth Research. James Marshall’s The Three Little Pigs.
                 Business and economic-focused podcasts including Freakonomics, Planet Money and Masters in
                 Business. This is not a comprehensive list and I am open to your suggestions and will post more
                 on Canvas. That being said, it is worth emphasizing that quality (thoughtful use of the materials
                 we use in class) will be far more useful than quantity without thoughtfulness or mindfulness.
    •    Throughout the course we will be examining publicly available material including corporate press
         releases, corporate filings (10K’s, etc.), analyst reports, and articles from the business press. When
         appropriate, these and other supplemental information (or links to these documents) will be provided via
         the Canvas. You will be responsible for downloading and printing these articles and using links posted on
         Canvas. UT Box links expire 30 days after posting—please download the files you need in a timely
         fashion.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                    Fall 2019
                       Assignments and Grading Information (page 1 of 5)
Disclaimer: The following contains extensive details about each part of the class and expectations.
If this seems excessively specific and elaborate, I apologize in advance. This is only included as a
small percent of individuals (in your program) have truly struggled with these areas.
Course Requirements and Grading
We will determine the final distribution of letter grades at the end of the semester. This means that
numerical scores on specific assignments do not correspond to a particular letter grade prior to the end
of the semester. Final grades are determined by summing up all pieces, then ranking all students and
then following the class distribution provided by the respective Program(s). Some areas of the
distribution may be very tight. This means that it is mathematically unavoidable that some students
with similar grades do not get the exact same final letter grades. Ultimately, someone must fall at each
“break point,” which means that someone gets the lowest of one grade (for example, the lowest A-) and
someone else, with similar grades, gets the highest of the next letter grade (for example, the highest B+).
The class’s distribution dictates the percentage of each of the letter grades. That is, you and your
classmates’ performance, more than I, determine your final letter grade. Students may not ask for
exclusive extra credit or grade changes at the end of the semester. This is unprofessional and requesting
specific treatment violates our University’s academic goals.
The letter grades will be determined by the guidelines set out by the MBA and MPA Programs for
upper-level classes. Numerical points will be accumulated as follows:
Description of Requirements
Exam (35%)
There will be one exam. The final exam schedule is not known at this time but is released to the students
and faculty at the same time (I will post it to Canvas once I learn). This is cumulative exam covering all
classes. The exam will involve the lessons from class applied to a set of financial information from one
or a small number of publicly traded firms. Please notify me within 72 hours of the exam date being set
if you have a conflict with the exam date. Outside of this 72 hour window, there are no makeup exams,
except for SSD accommodations. Please check here for the exam date:
https://registrar.utexas.edu/students/exams
The exam is primarily built around class discussions and cases and involves your analysis of an actual
company’s (or companies) financial information. This exam is not one for which you should try to cram.
You prepare for the exam by doing the work day to day in this class and then by relaxing the week
before the exam. Cramming is not useful and a class for which you can cram is a good example of a
class not worth taking. Please do not interpret “no cramming” as “no need to work.” The work is done
on the cases, in class and in your reviews week by week. Also, the cases provide a general idea of the
exam questions (although the time to complete and grading differs between the cases and the exams) and
other types or examples of questions are posted on Canvas.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                             Fall 2019
                         Assignments and Grading Information (page 2 of 5)
Cases (35%)
The primary objective of the Cases is to help you gain exposure to the material before attending class. The fancy
term for this is the “flipped classroom,” but this is simply old-fashioned education from your rather old-school
professor that helps ensure you can master the material by getting exposure and taking direct ownership. This is
not a class in which I lecture at you all semester long and you passively take notes, so case preparation before
class is essential. As these cases are not simply mechanical or term/theory regurgitation, you will likely encounter
ambiguity and have questions as you complete the cases—this is by design. Unless clearly noted otherwise, all
Cases are due before class.
There are numerous cases required by all students and associated each of the classes. Details are provided
on Canvas. Cases cannot be submitted late. Cases must be submitted on Canvas in the respective link. All
assignments should be submitted electronically through Canvas using a program that is compatible with Microsoft
Office. Students are responsible for uploading the final version, checking and re-checking any issue with
formatting or other errors before submission. While the specific scenario differs, it is common for some students
to have an occasional health/family/work emergency and instead of investigating each one or trying to apply
subjective judgment, we allow one case to be dropped for any student with no questions asked or documentation
needed. That being said, of course, students should still work on each case as each is excellent practice for any
student who is trying to improve their skills at Financial Statement Analysis.
Case Guidelines
Cases must be written in a professional manner. This means; write in complete sentences and paragraphs and
ensure that your answer and support is clear to your reader; use spellcheck (of course, these need to be typed);
report financial numbers in a professional way (e.g. the numbers are aligned and do not have seven decimal
places); and clearly label/number each of your responses (e.g. 1-5). You must provide support for all answers that
ask for it. Assignments that do not hit all of these criteria for professionalism or are not professional in another
way will get a 25% penalty for the first occurrence and then 50% or less credit thereafter. Assignments that are
late, but before class, will get a 25% penalty for the first occurrence and then 50% or less credit thereafter.
Assignments that are turned in after the class begins are not accepted.
Cases, Group Work, Collaboration and File Sharing.
Group work and collaboration are common in academia and the business world. Group work and collaboration do
not mean that individuals should plagiarize the work of others, misrepresent attribution, avoid doing any
meaningful work, or misreport information in any way.
In this class, unless otherwise noted, students must submit their own document for every Case completed
outside of class. In an effort to facilitate useful collaboration, unless noted otherwise, students are encouraged to
work in a group of up to three people on the Cases. The goal of allowing groups is to enable students to actively
share ideas, but still be involved—active discussions are the primary reason for allowing collaboration. Group
work means you are encouraged to discuss the questions and answers, not rely on or copy the work of others; that
is, each student needs his or her own submission, in which he or she adds value. As reiterated below, directly
sharing files or copying answer (including copied answers with minor edits) across group members and/or other
groups or individuals is a violation of these policies and will not be accepted. At the minimum, a violation results
in a 0 for the case for all individuals involved in the violation. Specific examples are noted below.
Groups of four or more are not allowed and must split into smaller groups. There is a cap to group sizes as large
groups remove the benefit from actively discussing the material.
Complete and honest attribution is required. Students must list the other people who they worked with on the
case. If a name is missing or does not match up, all members get a 25% penalty for the first transgression, a 50%
penalty for the second occurrence, and a 100% deduction thereafter.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                      Fall 2019
                       Assignments and Grading Information (page 3 of 5)
A non-exhaustive list of acceptable and unacceptable submissions:
 1. Acceptable: Three students work together in a breakout room and discuss the Case. Each student is
     actively engaged in the discussion. Later they write up their answers and have some shared themes.
     Each student directly acknowledges the collaboration of all three individuals.
 2. Acceptable: Two students chat via a video call regarding a Case. Both students are actively
     engaged in the discussion. The students write up their answers as they discuss and have some
     shared themes, but also take different approaches on many of the questions. Both students directly
     acknowledge the collaboration.
 3. Unacceptable for both students: Student A asks Student B for Student B’s work. Student B
     emails/post the file to a shared folder. Student A makes minor edits and submits the case and tries
     to make it look like collaboration. Both students note each other’s name on the submission. For
     example:
 a. The most informative metric regarding profitability for this company is operating margin. The main
     reason for this is that there are a variety of expenses, other than cost of sales, which are essential for
     this company’s sustained operating success, including as Research and Development, Selling and
     Marketing expenses. These expenses are critical as innovation and customer acquisition and
     retention are critical in this industry. During this period, the company’s operating margin decreased
     as it both lowered its prices in light of increased competition and began to spend more on R&D and
     Selling and Marketing expenses, which increased to 10% and 12% of Revenue, respectively.
 b. Operating Margin is the most informative metric regarding profitability for this company. This is
     because a few expenses other than cost of sales are essential for this company’s sustained operating
     success, including as Research and Development (R&D), Selling and Marketing (S&M) expenses.
     These expenses are critical as customer acquisition/retention and innovation are critical in this
     company’s operating environment. During this period, the company’s operating margin decreased
     for two main reasons. First, the company decreased its prices in light of increased competition.
     Second, the company began to spend more on S&M and R&D expenses, which are currently 12%
     and 10% of Revenue, which is an increase from 11% and 8%, respectively.
 4. Unacceptable for both students: Student A asks for Student C’s work. Student C has already
     worked with two other students and completed the Case, but sends the file to Student A anyway.
     Student A makes numerous edits and submits the case. Student A notes that he worked alone.
 5. Unacceptable for all students: Student A asks for Student C’s work. Student C has already worked
     with Student B and completed the Case, but sends the file to Student A anyway. Student A makes
     edits and submits the case. Student A notes that he worked with Student C, Student B notes that she
     worked with Student C, Student C notes that he worked with Students A and B.
    If this appears complex, the simple solution is business professionalism: work alone or if you
 choose to work together as group, do so as an actual group and have direct, honest and complete
                                   communication across all group members.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                            Fall 2019
                         Assignments and Grading Information (page 4 of 5)
Class participation and leadership (10%)
Much of class is conducted in a discussion setting during which we will analyze specific firms and
discuss which metrics are important, the reasons for our approach, and the implications of our choices.
The assignments are geared to prepare you to participate in and learn from these discussions.
Accordingly, your completion of the assignments and your participation in our discussions are vital. If
you are not involved in the discussion on your own, you should prepare for cold calling. At times, I will
only be a facilitator of your discussions with each other. After most classes, I will make class notes, with
particular attention to the quality of comments or questions, not the quantity. You do not need to be
correct to participate: insightful questions and thoughtful answers are also important and I encourage
students to answer, even when they are unsure. Moreover, a strong, smart and vibrant academic
community is a part of why you and your classmates are here at the University of Texas.
Consistent with what is noted above and in light of the expectations of this program and surely your
jobs, you are clearly expected, but not forcibly required, to attend all classes. As your absence can
detract from the learning experience of others, if you will miss part of or a whole class, you should post
to our Discussion Board before (or after) class when this occurs. The post can include an apology to
your classmates, if sincere, and can include whatever information you believe is both personally and
professionally prudent. If, for any reason, you are uncomfortable posting the circumstance to the class,
you may email me. That being said, you do not need to apologize to me—you and your classmates, not
I, lose out from your absence. If you miss class you should obtain the slides, talk to your colleagues
(classmates) about the course materials and discussions and post any unresolved issues to the Discussion
Board.
Here’s a general idea of how I plan to grade your class participation over the course of the semester:
• Outstanding Contributor: Consistent and sustained contributions to large-group discussions reflect thorough
      preparation. Ideas offered are usually substantive, provide good insights and sometimes change the direction
      of the class for the better. Arguments, when presented, are generally well-substantiated and often persuasive.
      If this person were not a member of the class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished
      significantly. In addition to exceptional large-group discussion contributions, also actively participates in
      small-group discussions.
• Good Contributor: Consistent contributions to large-group discussions reflect satisfactory preparation. Ideas
      offered are usually substantive, generally provide useful insights, and occasionally offer a new direction for
      the discussion. Arguments, if presented, are reasonably well-substantiated. If this person were not a member
      of the class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished. In addition, also offers
      comments in small-group discussions.
• Marginal Contributor: Generally routine contributions to large-group discussions reflect preparation. Ideas
      offered are occasionally substantive but seldom provide clear insights or new directions for the discussion.
      Arguments may be occasionally presented that are interesting, but are generally not well-substantiated. If
      this person were not a member of the class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished
      only slightly. In addition, also offers consistent comments in small-group discussions.
• Non-participant (around 0-2 percentage points out of 10%): This person has maintained good attendance,
      but has said little or nothing in class apart from the small group discussions; hence there is no adequate basis
      for evaluation. If this person were not a member of the class, the quality of the discussions would be
      unchanged.
• Low attendance (0 percentage points out of 10%). This person has missed numerous classes or if present,
      contributions to discussions reflect inadequate preparation. Ideas offered are rarely substantive, provide few,
      if any, insights and never offer a constructive direction. At best, contributions are obscure, confused, and
      indicate a lack of familiarity with the fact of the issues under discussion.
• Disruptive Contributor (negative points): Comments demonstrate disrespect for others in the academic
      community. Student does not participate in small group discussions. If this person were not a member of
      class, valuable airtime would be saved.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                    Fall 2019
                       Assignments and Grading Information (page 5 of 5)
        o Disruption includes consistently arriving late, leaving or packing up early, side conversations,
            or using a cell phone during class or other disruptive behaviors. I hope no one achieves this
            grade as this represents a major lack of professionalism and respect for our University. A
            student in this category may not pass the class, regardless of the other grades.
Our class will also make use of Discussion Board. This is the forum for outside-of-class questions
related to assignments, our class coverage and any related current events. In addition, as the Discussion
Board is an important way to share information and knowledge across the class, each student must post a
constructive question or comment or respond a class-related post at least once during the semester.
Moreover, constructive Discussion Board involvement can help enhance your Class Participation and
Leadership grade, but the primary driver of performance is the classroom experience. (Logistical
questions such as “Where is the Excel file?” are always welcomed, but cannot enhance your grade.)
Grading Disputes
My TA/grader and I make every effort to grade all of your work fairly and accurately, but grading errors
can occur. If you believe there is an error, you may request a re-grading of the assignment. Be aware,
however, that grading errors can occur in both directions - errors can make grades too high as well as too
low. Therefore, if you request a re-grading, your entire assignment will be re-graded, and all grading
errors will be corrected. By requesting a re-grade, you accept the possibility that your grade may go
either up or down. To request a re-grade, you must submit a written request to me within 72 hours from
the time in which the assignment’s grade was released to students (whether or not you were present in
class on that day or checking email). The request must be accompanied by the original, if I do not retain
it, and must state the area of dispute, your recommendation for change in grade, an explanation or
justification for your recommendation and any limitations to this recommendation. Moreover, the
request, should articulate (in person or in writing) how the submission compared to the discussion from
the class (and/or any posted materials). The re-grade request must refer to the guidelines established in
this syllabus and Canvas and not involve any misrepresentation or unprofessionalism.
Case Feedback
Informal discussions about how a student can perform better are allowed, but a student must articulate
(in person or in writing) the specifics of how their submission compared to the discussion from the class
(and any posted materials). The request must also include a direct discussion of any expectations noted
in this syllabus or on Canvas.
Formal or informal requests that do not abide by these policies will be considered unprofessional,
may not be addressed and can lead to a meaningfully lower grade.
The same policies apply to emails/notes about grades or other subjects that misrepresent facts,
avoid personal responsibility, do not answer pertinent questions, or are unprofessional in their
language, subject or approach.
Group Project (20%)
There will be one group project due towards the end of the semester, which will focus on evaluating
similar companies. More details will be posted on Canvas during the semester and/or noted in class.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                             Fall 2019
                     Academic Integrity and University Policies (page 1 of 2)
Cheating involves copying work across groups, cheating on the exam, plagiarizing your assignments and other
things as well. Don’t cheat as (1) it is wrong; (2) the costs far outweigh the benefits: you don’t want to get
kicked out in a short-sighted attempt to make a B a B+; and (3) there is a very good chance that your cheating
will be revealed and we will all be extremely disappointed.
                                            Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both
students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement
on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course,
I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you
have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the Statement
on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me
for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Copyright and Intellectual Property
The course packet and other materials are the intellectual property of your professor and are given to you, for free,
on an individual basis only. You may not, in anyway, share, distribute or post electronic, hardcopy or other
versions of the class materials with other people or on websites or other avenues of social media without explicit
permission from me. Posting or sharing materials, or even snippets of materials, will be considered a violation of
our University’s Academic policies for all parties involved and may lead to a failing grade in this class. This
includes all websites, file sharing folders, apps and social media; the only exception is that you may post class-
related material to our class’s Canvas Discussion Board during the semester.
Recording Class:
Recording all or any part of class without explicit written permission from the professor is strictly prohibited.
Violations will constitute a violation of the academic integrity policies of our University and may lead to a failing
grade in this class and legal prosecution. If you need to record the class, please email me to seek permission at
least a week in advance and include details about the date, topics, individuals involved and a clear explanation of
the reasons for this need.
Privacy in Canvas:
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. If applicable, please be aware that I will use a merged
Canvas site for all sections, if there is more than one, of a course that I teach. This will allow students in other
sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not
actually learn your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any
concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from view of other
students.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                         Fall 2019
                     Academic Integrity and University Policies (page 2 of 2)
                                          Additional Important Notifications
                                               Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                                  Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
                                          Students with Personal Challenges
If you face any personal challenges that may affect your coursework or need advice or assistance for any serious
health or personal matter, please reach out to the Student Emergency Services. Information can be found here:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                    Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
    • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
         outside.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first week
         of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    • Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
    • Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
         http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                              Fall 2019
 Draft of the Schedule (It is quite possible that the schedule will be amended; updates will be on
                                          Canvas). This is only a draft!
    Case and class details are provided on Canvas; see each specific class page for the official
       assignments and schedule. Exam information, when available, can be accessed here:
                                 https://registrar.utexas.edu/students/exams
