ARH 372           Asia in Global Contemporary Art
                  Tuesdays-Thursdays 9:30-11:00am in ART 3.432
Professor Ariel Evans
ariel.evans@gmail.com
Office hours: ​Tuesdays 11-2 in DFA 2.130
Zhang Huan, ​To Add One Meter to an Anonymous Mountain​, 1995.
Course description
This class examines globalism and globalization in the arts since 1980; looking specifically to Asia’s
place within these phenomen​a​. Through artworks, exhibitions, and publications of artwork from China,
Japan, South and Southeast Asia, Korea, and the Middle East, this seminar investigates how Asian artists
and curators represent their art worlds to global audiences – and how, in turn, such audiences come to
understand Asian art. Combining artistic practice and cultural geography, students will consider Asia’s
role in the significant historical transformations of today’s global art world.


     Global Cultures Flag
     This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
     familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
     portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at
     least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Assignments and grades              Art, like morality, consists in drawing the line somewhere. ​―G.K. Chesterton
Your final grade will consist of the following:
20%      Focus exhibition presentation
35%      Five reading responses [7% each]
35%      Final project (exhibition proposal and presentation)
10%      Attendance and participation
Focus exhibition presentation​: On most Thursdays, we will focus on an exhibition (see the course
schedule below). You and a partner will present ONE of these focal exhibitions. Further instructions will
be handed out during the second week of class.
Five reading responses​: Every 2-3 weeks, I will collect reading responses from the class. For these
responses, you will pick one of the readings discussed in that section and write a 250-500 word summary
and analysis of that reading.
Final project​: Your final project involves proposing an exhibition of contemporary Asian art. You will
need to choose a curatorial premise, select artworks, write sample wall texts and an introduction. Further
instructions will be handed out later in the semester.
Participation and attendance​: Showing up to class on time, prepared with course reader and readings
completed and having questions and ideas about the readings is essential – which is why 10% of your
grade depends on your ability to engage in class discussions (which also means being physically present,
hence attendance).
Grade rubric
A (excellent) = fluidly synthesizes information from class and readings across assignment; applies visual
     and critical thinking skills to craft a strong argument or answer; follows the assignment’s
     requirements.
B (above average) = incorporates some information from class and readings, makes some connections but
     these are sometimes awkward or trivial; argument is not particularly strong or well-thought-out.
C (average) = incorporates information from class with little or no reference to the readings; makes only a
     few connections between visual observations and critical insights; repeats information from lectures
     without making a coherent argument; answer is vague.
D (unsatisfactory) = mostly does not follow assignment.
F (failing) = Incomplete assignment; does not answer question.


Late papers
Papers are due in class, and due dates are listed on the course schedule below. You will lose a full letter
grade for each day that your paper is late.
Grade Scale
Your final grade will be calculated according to the following scale:
Grade            Percent
A (4.00)        93-100
A- (3.67)        90-92
B+ (3.33)       87-89
B (3.00)        84-86
B- (2.67)        80-83
C+ (2.33)       77-79
C (2.00)        74-76
C- (1.67)        70-73
D+ (1.33)        67-69
D (1.00)        64-66
D- (.67)         60-63
F (0.00)         ≤59
Classroom rules and e-mail etiquette Like any artist without an art form, she became dangerous. ―Toni Morrison
Lectures are technology-free for the students. ​This means NO phones, NO tablets​. This policy is for your
benefit! Recent studies, here at UT no less, show that having your smartphone within eyesight reduces
brain power (see: ​https://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/2017/06/170623133039.htm​). A fully
functioning brain is the most important thing you can bring to class.
Laptops and tablets are not allowed either unless acc​ompanied by a note from ​Services for Students with
Disabilities (contact information below).​ In this ​case, laptop users will be asked to sit at the back of the
lecture hall.
Bright lights, moving boxes, texting others, or watching videos et cetera etc. are extremely distracting,
both to me and your fellow students. I have seen all these things happen at UT and I do ​not ​make
exceptions. If I see any unauthorized lights flash while I’m talking, I will ask the culprit to leave class
without warning​, and they will receive an absence for the day. There is a clock in the room for you to
check the time if you must. The best thing is for you to simply turn your phone off for the duration of
class.
You should feel free to email me​; though coming to office hours is better. Please bear in mind that I
receive many emails from students. I check my email at least once a day, but it may take me up to 2-3
days to answer. I also do not answer emails on weekends.


Professional email etiquette is required for any correspondence with me. Your subject line should indicate
the content of your email and should include a proper greeting (Hello Ariel, Dear Ariel, Hi Ariel) and
sign-off, such as: Best Wishes, Thank you, Respectfully Yours, Oh Glorious Art Historian Whose
Munificence Remains the World’s Delight … the possibilities are endless.
Correct English grammar and spelling are also required; emails sent with texting language or
smileys—lol, TLDR, brb, tho, sup grrl, ¯\_(ツ)_/¯, etc.—are not appropriate. If you send me a
disrespectful email, you won’t receive a reply.
The same goes for emails asking for information ​already contained in the syllabus!​ For example, where
my office is, or what next week’s readings are, or what my policy on late assignments is. If you do not
hear back from me within 2-3 days and know that your email was perfectly polite, check the syllabus for
the answer to your question.
Academic honesty
As students at the University of Texas, you are expected to be honest in all interactions with your
instructors and fellow students and to behave according to the highest ethical standards.
Note that ​plagiarism includes any unacknowledged copying or “borrowing” of another person’s words or
interpretation.​ Plagiarism (a form of cheating) has become an even greater problem in the age of the
Internet (see this recent ​New York Times​ article about plagiarism:
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/02/education/02cheat.html?_r=1​). Accordingly, new students
unfamiliar with the rules of citation for academic writing may want to consult ​the UT Honor Code (or
statement of ethics) at ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/​.
Please remember that I have sophisticated tools with which to catch cheaters, and also that the ease with
which you find Internet sources is surpassed by the even greater ease with which I find those specific
sources too. So CITE YOUR REFERENCES AND WRITE YOUR OWN THOUGHTS!!! ​Please please
please ​see me if you feel confused about this, because:
Any type of cheating, plagiarism, collusion, etc., is grounds for an immediate F in the course; a second
cheating offense often means expulsion from the University.​ I ​WILL​ file the paperwork on this issue
with Student Judicial Services, I consider these matters to be extremely important.
Religious Holy Days
It is university policy that you must notify me of a pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, assignment, examination or in-class project
in order to observe, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.


CANVAS
In this class I use CANVAS—a Web-based course management system with password-protected access at
http://canvas.utexas.edu​—to distribute course materials and collaborate online. If you require support in
using CANVAS call the Information Technology Services Help Desk at 512-475-9400, Monday-Friday,
8AM-6PM, please plan accordingly.
Documented Student Disability
The University provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice)
or 512-232-2937 (video phone).
Other Resources Available
The University has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning:
     ● The UT Learning Center: ​http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
     ● Undergraduate Writing Center: ​http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     ● Counseling & Mental Health Center: ​http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     ● Career Exploration Center: ​http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
     ● Student Emergency Services: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center, the Employee Assistance Program, and The University of Texas Police Department. Call
512-232-5050 or visit ​https://www.utexas.edu/campus-life/safety-and-security​.


                                      ✽    Class schedule ✽
1 Hello
Aug 30​ | Syllabus, introductions, group assignments
2 Introduction to postcolonial theory
               ​ dward Said, “Introduction” and Chapter One in ​Orientalism​ (London: Routledge, 1978).
Sep 3​ | ​Read E
Sep 5​ | ​Read D​ avid Clarke, “Contemporary Asian Art and Its Western Reception” (2002) in
    Contemporary Art in Asia: A Critical Reader,​ eds. Melissa Chiu and Benjamin Genocchio
    (Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2011).
Gayatri Chakravortry Spivak, “Can the Subaltern Speak?” in ​Colonial Discourse and Post-colonial
    Theory, ​eds. Patrick Williams and Laura Chrisman (New York: Columbia University Press, 1993).
3 The Asia Society, New York
Sep 10​ | Apinan Poshyananda, ​Contemporary Art in Asia: Traditions/Tensions,​ Asia Society Galleries,
New York, 1996.
  Class readings from exhibition catalogue
  Thomas McEvilley, “Exhibition Strategies in the Postcolonial Era”
  Jim Supangkat, “Multiculturalism/Multimodernism”
Sep 12​ | Focus: Gao Minglu, curator ​Inside Out: New Chinese Art, A​ sia Society Galleries, New York,
1999.
  Group 1 presents exhibition
  Class readings from exhibition catalogue
  Garry Garrels and Colin Mackenzie, “Introduction”
  Gao Minglu, “Toward a Transnational Modernity: An Overview of ​Inside Out: New Chinese Art
  Hou Hanru and Gao Minglu, “Strategies of Survival in the Third Space” A Conversation on the
       Situation of Overseas Chinese Artists in the 1990s”
4 Cities
Sep 17​ | ​Read ​Arjun Appadurai, “Disjuncture and Difference in the Global Cultural Economy” in
    Modernity at Large​ (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1996).
Saskia Sassen, “Spatialities and Temporalities of the Global: Elements for a Theorization” in
    Globalization​, ed. Arjun Appadurai (Duke University Press, 2001).


Sep 19​ | ​→ !!! ​FIRST READING RESPONSE DUE​ !!! ←
Focus: Iwona Blazwick, curator. ​Century City: Art and Culture in the Modern Metropolis,​ Tate Modern,
February-April 2001.
Read​ Hou Hanru and Hans-Ulrich Obrist, “Cities on the Move” in ​Cities on the Move ​(Ostfildern-Ruit:
     Verlag Gerd Hatje, 1997).
  Group 2 presents exhibition
  Class readings from exhibition catalogue
  Blazwick, “Century City”
  Geeta Kapur and Ashish Rajadhyaksha, “Bombay/Mumbai 1992-2001”
5 Truth and reconciliation
Sep 24​ | ​Read ​Sabine B. Vogel, “Introduction” “New Social and Political Developments,” “Global Art
     and Contemporary Art” and “Potentials and Limitations of Biennials” in ​Biennials – Art on a Global
     Scale (​ Vienna: Springer-Verlag/Wien, 2010).
Okwui Enwezor, “The Black Box” in ​Documenta11_Platform5: Exhibition Catalogue​, ed. Okwui
     Enwezor (Ostfildern-Ruit: Hatje Cantz, 2002).
Sep 26​ | Focus: Okwui Enwezor, curator, ​Documenta 1​ 1 Platform 2, ​Experiments with truth: transitional
justice and the processes of truth and reconciliation,​ New Delhi, May 8-11, 2001 (Ostfildern-Ruit: Hatje
Cantz, 2002).
  Group 3 presents exhibition
  Class readings from conference proceedings​ [pick 2 of 3]
  Mahmood, Mamdani, “Making Sense of Political Violence in Postcolonial Africa”
  Urvashi Butalia, “The Persistence of Memory: The Search for Truth, Justice, and Reconciliation”
  Rustom Bharucha, “Between Truth and Reconciliation: Experiments in Theater and Public Culture”
6 Biennales
Oct 1​ | ​Read​ Britta Erickson, “The ​Rent Collection Courtyard​ Copyright Breached Overseas: Sichuan
     Fine Arts Institute Sues Venice Biennale (2001);” Dao Zi, “The Reproduction of ​Rent Collection
     Courtyard ​and Postmodernism” (2000); and Liu Xiaochun, “Quoting Does Not Equal Plagiarism”
     (2000) in ​Contemporary Chinese Art: Primary Documents,​ ed. Wu Hung (New York: The Museum
     of Modern Art, 2010).
Oct 3​ | ​→ !!! ​SECOND READING RESPONSE DUE​ !!! ←


Focus: The First Guangzhou Triennial, ​Reinterpretation: A Decade of Chinese Experimental Art ​(2002),
curators Wu Hung, Feng Boyi and Wang Huangsheng.
  Group 4 presents exhibition
  Class readings from exhibition catalogue
  Wu Hung, “Introduction: A Decade of Chinese Experimental Art”
  Pi Li, “Systems of Chinese Experimental Art in the 1990s” ​OR​ Britta Erickson, “The Reception in the
  West of Experimental Chinese Art of the 1990s”
7 ​ArtAsiaPacific 1​
Oct 8​ | ​GROUP WORKSHOP ON EXHIBITION PROJECT
Oct 10​ | Focus: ​ArtAsiaPacific ​no. 39 (Winter 2004).
  Group 5 presents magazine
  Class readings from magazine issue
  Franklin Sirmans, “Editor’s Letter”
  Reiko Tomii, “Who Needs Globalism: Echigo-Tsumari Triennial” [feature]
  David Hunt, “The Prince and the Pauper: Yoshitomo Nara” [feature]
  Ken Johnson, “​Wave UFO:​ Mariko Mori” [feature]
  Sirmans, “Time after Time: Asia & Our Moment” [review]
  Colette Chattopadhyay, “Yutaka Sone” [review]
8 Ariel out of town
Oct 15 | NO CLASS
Oct 17 | NO CLASS
9 Global feminisms
Oct 22​ | ​→ !!! ​THIRD READING RESPONSE DUE​ !!! ←
Trinh T. Minh-ha, “Difference: A Special Third World Women Issue,” in ​Woman, Native, Other: Writing
    Postcoloniality and Feminism (​ Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 1989).
Jeannine Tang, “The Problem of Equality, or Translating ‘Woman’ in the Age of Global Exhibitions” in
    Politics in a Glass Case: Feminism, Exhibition Cultures and Curatorial Transgressions​, eds. Angela
    Dimitrakaki and Lara Perry (Liverpool: Liverpool University Press, 2013).
Oct 24​ | Exhibition: Maura Reilly and Linda Nochlin, curators. ​Global Feminisms​, Brooklyn Museum,
New York, 2007.


  Group 6 presents exhibition
  Class readings from exhibition catalogue
  Maura Reilly, “Introduction: Toward Transnational Feminisms”
  Joan Kee, “What is Feminist about Contemporary Asian Women’s Art?”
10 Nationalism and modernity
Oct 29​ | Exhibition: ​Amrita Sher-Gil: An Indian Family of Artists​ at the Tate Modern in Britain and Haus
der Kunst, 2007.
Read ​Geeta Kapur, “Globalization: Navigating the Void” in ​When Was Modernism: Essays on
     Contemporary Cultural Practice in India​ (New Delhi: Tulika, 2000)>
---. “Gender Mobility: Through the Lens of Five Women Artists in India” in ​Global Feminisms,​ eds.
     Reilly and Nochlin.
  Ariel presents
  Class readings from exhibition catalogue
  Deepak Ananth, “An Unfinished Project”
Oct 31​ | Peer-editing workshop: first draft of exhibition proposal due
11 Matter and medium
Nov 5​ | ​→ !!! ​FOURTH READING RESPONSE DUE​ !!! ←
Readings TBA
Nov 7​ | Focus: Wu Hung, curator. ​The Allure of Matter: Material Art from China,​ 2019-2020
  Group 7 presents exhibition
  Class readings TBA
12 Collectives: ruangrupa and Raqs Media Collective
                ​ amela M. Lee, “On Pseudo-Collectivism; or, How to be a Collective in the Age of the
Nov 12​ | ​Read P
     Consumer Sovereign,” in ​Forgetting the Art World ​(Boston: The MIT Press, 2012).
Nov 14​ | ruangrupa to direct 2022 ​Documenta
No one presents, we all converse


Read ​David Teh, “Who Cares a Lot? Ruangrupa as Curatorship” ​Afterall​ no. 30 (Summer 2012).
Nuraini Juliastuti, “Ruangrupa: A Conversation on Horizontal Organisation” ​Afterall​ no. 30 (Summer
   2012).
13 Student presentations
Nov 19 | ​→ !!! ​FIFTH READING RESPONSE DUE​ !!! ←
Nov 21 |
14 Student presentations
Nov 26 |
Nov 28 |
15 Student presentations
Dec 3 |
Dec 5 |
