                                                                          The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                   Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
Syllabus: Advertising Intelligence ADV/PR 378 & ADV 391K
1. COURSE INFORMATION
Spring 2020
ADV 378: 06679 / PR 378: 07117 / ADV 391K: 06799
Wednesdays 9 a.m. – 12 p.m., BMC 4.206
Instructor: Christa Rose
Office Hours: Friday 11:30a – 1:30p
Office: Small Conference Room, BMC
Email: christa.rose@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION
How do advertising practitioners use, and go beyond, facts to uncover the insights that lead to
the world’s best and most awarded campaigns? That’s what this course is all about.
First, the course provides a guiding framework to get to an insight (not a research report of facts)
and ties the triumvirate of problem definition, research and interpretation to arrive at a
meaningful, useful insight through real-world use cases.
Second, this course will introduce more sophisticated advertising research tools and techniques
for future advertising professionals who want to work in brand management, marketing
management, strategic planning, account planning, account management, consumer insights,
influencer marketing or social media management.
Finally, the course provides a ‘Progressive Brand Challenge’ of a fictional brand for which
revenues are declining, and thus the brand’s senior management is seeking a brand
revitalization campaign to reverse this dire business challenge.
With each new Advertising Intelligence technique learned, week by week, you’ll learn how to
methodically uncover the insight upon which the world’s best campaigns are built.
OVERALL ACADEMIC GOALS
There has been a sea-change in the world of advertising and public relations. Analytics has
become a critical component of the creative process. Proficiency in handling data and
analytics is now a must-have skill for college graduates entering the workforce.
The desired outcome of this course is that students engage in critical thinking to formulate a
foundational perspective on how data and analytics is used in the creative process as well as a
practical skill set in processing data, interpreting data and applying data in a variety of contexts.
This course is designed to prepare students for the advertising agency environment. Students will
be presented with real-world scenarios as hands-on exercises to experience evaluating
questions that advertising and public relations professionals must solve for, building analytics
frameworks to address these questions using data, and applying analysis techniques to derive
insights and develop informed strategy.
                                                   ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                 1
                             Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                              The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                       Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
This course structure will give students the opportunity to gain confidence in applying data
throughout the creative process to enrich insights and generate more robust client work.
WHO WILL BENEFIT FROM TAKING THIS COURSE?
Future advertising leaders who will work in brand management, marketing management,
strategic planning, account planning, account management, consumer insights, influencer
marketing, community management or social media management fields.
COURSE FRAMEWORK
The course structure outlined here attempts to give students the tools they will need as
advertising and public relations professionals, to:
     1.   Integrate data into the creative process;
     2.   Work with data and apply analytics to derive insights;
     3.   Bridge the divide between technologists and creative practitioners; and
     4.   Utilize data to optimize advertising and public relations campaigns.
Each class session will begin with a discussion of current events in advertising analytics. Students
will then engage in discussion based on case studies and/or course content. Participants will
then be presented with analytic methodologies and applications to the advertising field.
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas
website. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at instructor’s discretion and if circumstances require. It
is the student’s responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best
to ensure that you receive the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
          Progressive Brand Challenge Assignments
          The Progressive Brand Challenge will give students the opportunity to apply data analytic
          skills to real-world scenarios as if they were an advertising agency practitioner working
          with a fictional brand to use data to develop strategy for a revitalization campaign.
          Brand Challenge Assignments are designed to track the course material so that students
          can build on their practical skill set with each of the concepts presented.
          Each Brand Challenge Assignment will present the opportunity to use a specific analytic
          methodology in an advertising application, such as building a persona, creating an
          advertising campaign or developing brand strategy.
          Strategic Analytics Group Project
          The Strategic Analytics Group Project is another opportunity to learn using a real-world
          scenario; students are formed into groups as the fictionalized research and analysis team
          at an advertising agency. This team will be tasked with creating a research proposal to
          use data for strategic analytics to solve a client need, executing analysis and
          communicating findings in a research report, and presenting the findings to the client’s
          leadership team.
          This exercise will mimic the process that research teams execute on to use data for
          strategy development to inform client decision-making.
                                                     ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                   2
                               Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                                The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                       Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
        Class Participation
        This course is designed for much of the learning experience to occur during the class
        sessions, and grading will include an assessment of contributions made in class.
        Instruction will use the inquiry-based learning framework, with classes consisting of open
        discussions that contain formative feedback from both peers and the instructor.
        Therefore, it is important that students attend class and come prepared to make a
        meaningful contribution to class discussion.
                 Attendance
                 Attendance is required for all class sessions. Advance notice is required for missing
                 a class session. More than two absences will result in the reduction of one letter
                 grade.
                 Preparation and Discussion
                 Completing the assigned readings for each course session is important to ensure
                 that all of the students in the class receive an enriched experience, therefore, all
                 readings are mandatory. Please prepare by reading or listening to the assigned
                 material and noting observations or questions prompted by the material.
                 During class discussion, the instructor will assign points for participation. Elements
                 of participation include active listening, engaging with questions or comments
                 fielded by other students, referencing the reading material and coming prepared
                 with thoughtful questions.
                 Current Events
                 Each student will be assigned one course session to bring a current article,
                 presentation or client situation that pertains to use of data and analytics in the
                 advertising field. We will discuss these examples at the beginning of each class.
                 Electronic Devices
                 Please use electronic devices only when indicated during the course to add
                 value to the course content. Please be respectful of others when using electronic
                 devices. Cell phones should be silent and put away during the class session.
        Midterm and Final Exams
        There will be midterm and final exams to ensure that students have internalized the
        concepts and skills presented in the course material. Exams will consist of multiple-choice
        questions and short-answer questions.
TEXTBOOK AND REFERENCE MATERIALS
As analytics is a rapidly developing field, this course will require students to read and/or view
several articles, case studies, blog posts and presentation videos.
                                                   ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                     3
                              Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                              The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                       Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
The materials required for each week are detailed in the COURSE SYLLABUS section of this
document.
The textbook for this course is Business Analytics, 3rd Edition. Jeffrey D. Camm, James J. Cochran,
Michael J. Fry, Jeffrey W. Ohlmann, and David R. Anderson. 2019.
CASE STUDIES
This course will use case studies as a learning tool for students to engage more deeply with the
material. All case study materials will be included in the course packet. Each case study presents
a scenario with accompanying questions to prepare for class discussion.
Students are expected to be conversant with the Case Study material and are encouraged to
bring perspectives based on their own reading or experiences, as well as questions, to the group
discussion.
SOFTWARE
Every student will require access to Microsoft Excel.
We will use an Excel add-on called Analytic Solver, which aligns with the course textbook,
provides templates for analysis problems and gives students the opportunity for independent
exploration.
GRADING POLICY
The course grade will be comprised of performance on five component elements out of a total
of 125 points for GRADUATE students and 105 points for UNDERGRADUATE students:
                                                                  UNDERGRADUATE           GRADUATE
            a) Progressive Brand Challenge Assignments            40 points               60 points
                 Total of 6 Assignments, 10 points each.
                 UNDERGRADUATE students: best four of six.
                 GRADUATE students: six of six.
            b) Group Project
                     i)   Research Proposal                        5 points                5 points
                     ii)  Research Report                         10 points               10 points
                     iii) Final Presentation                       5 points                5 points
                          (Group Presentation)
            c) Class Participation
                     i)   Case Discussions                        10 points               10 points
                     ii)  Current Events                           5 points                5 points
            d) Midterm Exam                                       15 points               15 points
            e) Final Exam                                         15 points               15 points
The final grade is calculated based on the weighted value of all components.
                                                 ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                    4
                             Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                               The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                       Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
Each member of the team that receives the most votes for its Group Oral Presentation will earn 5
bonus points.
        Peer Evaluations
        Separate peer evaluations will be conducted for the Group Project and on participation
        in Case Discussions in aggregate. The peer evaluations will be averaged and the points
        earned for the component element will be adjusted as follows:
                        Peer Evaluation   Effect on
                        Score             Points Earned
                        5/5               100%
                        4/5               90%
                        3/5               80%
                        2/5               70%
                        1/5               60%
                        0/5               50%
        Grading Scheme
                        Percent           Grade
                        ≥93%              A
                        90% – 92%         A-
                        87% – 89%         B+
                        83% – 86%         B
                        80% – 82%         B-
                        77% – 79%         C+
                        73% – 76%         C
                        70% – 72%         C-
                        65% – 69%         D+
WRITTEN ASSIGNMENTS
Written assignments are expected to be completed and turned in no later than 11:59 p.m. on
the day they are due. Written portions should be turned in as Microsoft Word documents or PDFs,
data portions should be turned in as Excel (xls or .xlsx) files. Both the written and data portions
should be submitted via Canvas.
Written assignments are expected to use an easy-to-read format, including font, text size and
spacing. Instructor may request changes as needed. Please include assignment title, your name,
question numbers and page numbers.
                                                ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                    5
                          Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                              The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                    Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
Some assignments will have specific requirements in terms of answer format and/or deliverable.
Please read supplemental instructions carefully.
Grammar, punctuation and spelling matter. Points will be deducted if there are more than five
errors in a single assignment.
Even the best writers sometimes struggle when learning the unique language of communication
professionals. Whether you’re writing your first news story or advertising copy or you’re polishing a
screenplay, the Moody Writing Support Program can help boost your skill while providing
encouragement to succeed. You can schedule a one-on-one session with a qualified writing
coach from your department to brainstorm ideas, polish skills or work on problems.
CLASS CONDUCT
Students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and
show respect for one another’s opinions. We will not, nor should we, always agree with one
another. In this environment we should be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and
sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. However, students are
expected to engage one another with respect and professionalism.
INSTRUCTOR AVAILABILITY
In the interests of this course being a valuable learning experience, the instructor will endeavor
to be as available to students as possible; including holding office hours and corresponding via
email: christa.rose@austin.utexas.edu.
ABSENCES
Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate
any unexpected, unfortunate personal crisis, I encourage you to contact me as soon as
possible. I will do my best to come up with an individualized plan for you to complete the course
requirements.
if you find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, please also consider taking
advantage of resources in the Student Health Center.
If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team
with the necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in
communication with your team members; you are responsible for letting both instructor and your
team know if you cannot make it to a class.
         Excused Absences
         The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
         extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to
         observance of a religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You
         will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be responsible for any work
         you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
                                                  ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                   6
                             Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                             The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                      Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
        If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise questions,
        you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific
        questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time.
MAKE-UP WORK
Make-up work will receive an automatic letter grade reduction. The terms of make-up work are
at the discretion of the instructor upon a written request from a student.
LEARNING SUCCESS
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both
your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the
student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to
connect you with a person or center if you would like.
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS POLICIES
        Academic Integrity
        Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
        “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
        University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
        Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
        previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
        subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
        responsible for understanding UT’s Standards of Conduct and Academic Integrity
        principles.
        Q Drop
        If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop
        before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester.
        Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public
        Texas institution.
        Religious Holy Days
        Please notify me at least fourteen days prior to the date of the observance of a religious
        holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment or a project in
        order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
        missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
        Services for Students with Disabilities
        This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
        there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you
        have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
                                                  ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                  7
                             Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                            The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                     Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
        arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
        committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only
        do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
        confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with
        Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
        Counseling and Mental Health Center
        Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising,
        avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
        help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
        All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
        helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience
        is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
        If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or
        feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support at the
        Counseling and Mental Health Center.
        Moody Writing Support Program
        Even the best writers sometimes struggle when learning the unique language of
        communication professionals. Whether you’re writing your first news story or advertising
        copy or you’re polishing a screenplay, the Moody Writing Support Program can help
        boost your skill while providing encouragement to succeed. You can schedule a one-on-
        one session with a qualified writing coach from your department to brainstorm ideas,
        polish skills or work on problems.
        The Sanger Learning Center
        Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger
        Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are
        welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
        specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70
        courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please call 512-471-3614 or
        drop in for a visit at JES A332.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. You can also submit a report online at the
BCAL web site. Your report can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t.
Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Campus Safety and
Security.
                                                  ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                  8
                             Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                               The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                       Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
     •     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
           building.
     •     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
           the first week of class.
     •     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
           re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
           University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
The office of Emergency Preparedness provides information on safety apps for your mobile
device, emergency preparedness manual, and a guide for surviving an active shooter situation.
TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in
our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
           or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents
that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any
faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit the Title IX Office web site or contact
them by email at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                      ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                                     9
                               Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                     The University of Texas at Austin
                                                            Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
2. COURSE SYLLABUS
WEEK 1        QUANTIFYING CONCEPTUAL MEASURES IN ADVERTISING
DATE: 1/22/20 Pre-Work
              Obtain course materials.
              Learning Objectives
                   1. Understand the need for data-informed decision making in
                      advertising practice to define objectives, measure impact and
                      derive strategy.
                   2. Introduce the course structure and learning objectives.
                   3. Differentiate between data points and insights; apply the “So What
                      Factor” to data analysis.
              In-Class Discussion
                   1. Review of course objectives.
                   2. In-Class Team Exercise: What Makes Good Advertising?
                   3. In-Class Team Exercise: Understanding Influence
                   4. Most common advertising intelligence decisions for practitioners.
              Application Points
                   1. Industry use of data for: segmentation, positioning, product
                      development, promotion, advertising response.
WEEK 2        DATA AND THE CREATIVE PROCESS
DATE: 1/29/20 Pre-Work
              Be ready to share a link to an advertising or branding campaign you think
              is effective (in any channel).
              Materials
                   1. “Business Analytics” Chapter 1.1 – 1.5
                   2. “8 creatives share how they’ve evolved from ‘data vs. creativity’ to
                      ‘data-inspired creativity” Think with Google. Roberta MacDonald.
                      https://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/advertising-channels/-
                      technology-and-creativity/ June 2019.
                   3. “How AI is bridging the gap between creativity and data” The
                      Drum. Maria Flores Portillo.
                      https://www.thedrum.com/industryinsights/2018/12/03/how-ai-
                      bridging-the-gap-between-creativity-and-data December 2018.
                   4. “Creativity drives data drives creativity for Spotify ads” Marketing
                      Media Money, CNBC. Alex Bodman
                      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cshKKhKnSgY November
                      2018.
                                        ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                         10
                   Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                                          Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
             Learning Objectives
                1. Understand and apply the Research Process – Problem, Design,
                   Data Collection.
                2. Define a research problem and identify a qualitative vs.
                   quantitative design approach.
                3. Frame research questions (KPIs) in order to end up with meaningful
                   answers.
             In-Class Discussion
                1. Advertising examples: guesses vs. data-driven strategy.
                2. Data as an untapped gold mine for advertisers.
                3. How to apply data seamlessly throughout the creative process as
                   the basis for advertising strategy and proof points for clients.
             Application Points
                1. Research Process
                2. “So What Factor”
                3. Framing Analysis
                4. Building Research Proposals
             Data Skill Sets
                1. Setting up analysis
WEEK 3       WHO: AUDIENCES AND SEGMENTATION
DATE: 2/5/20 Pre-Work
             Materials
                1. CASE 1: Reaching Unreachable Audiences: Validating Customer
                   Assumptions (Fuel Ethanol)
                2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 6.1 – 6.5
                3.  “Focus groups shape what we buy. But how much do they really
                   say about us?” Vox. Joseph Stromberg. https://www.vox.com/the-
                   goods/2019/1/22/18187443/focus-groups-brand-market-research
                   January 2019.
                4. “The Value of Ethnography in a World of Big Data” Murtell, Jennifer.
                   American Marketing Association. https://www.ama.org/marketing-
                   news/the-value-of-ethnography-in-a-world-of-big-data/. October
                   2019.
             Progressive Brand Challenge #1 DUE: Asking the Right
             Questions in the Right Way (Survey Guide)
             Learning Objectives
                1. Key pillars of successful qualitative research programs.
                2. Framing survey and in-depth interview questions.
                3. Role of ethnographies in advertising and developing insights from
                   ethnographic data.
                                      ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                      11
                Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                                         Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
                 4. Understand and apply hypothesis testing.
                 5. Understand and apply quantitative methods of collecting data
                     and conducting analysis for advertising purposes.
                 6. Conducting focus groups online and in-person.
              In-Class Discussion
                 1.  In-Class Team Exercise: Developing Effective Questions
                 2.  Insights from primary customer research
                 3.  Importance of sampling plans
                 4.  GROUP PROJECT #1: Research Proposal assignment handed out
              Application Points
                 1.  Building a sampling plan
                 2.  Framing survey questions
                 3.  Framing in-depth-interview questions
                 4.  Using ethnographic research to develop insights
                 5.  Conducting focus groups
              Data Skill Sets
                 1. Translating qualitative data into quantitative
                 2. Hypothesis testing
WEEK 4        CUSTOMER JOURNEY AND PERSONAS
DATE: 2/12/20 Pre-Work
              Materials
                 1. CASE 2: Electric Vehicles for the Future (Electric Vehicle Industry
                     Association)
                 2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 2.1 – 2.5
                 3. “How to Create an Effective Customer Journey Map” Panetta,
                     Kasey. Gartner.
                     https://www.gartner.com/en/marketing/insights/articles/how-to-
                     create-an-effective-customer-Journey-map. June 2019.
              Progressive Brand Challenge #2 DUE: The Right Product for the
              Right Person at the Right Time (Persona)
              Learning Objectives
                 1. Importance of understanding the environment of your audience:
                     decision makers, decision process, purchase cycles, influences.
                 2. Identify entry points.
                 3. Quantitative methods of collecting data via surveys.
                 4. Understand and apply scatter plots and histograms.
                 5. Understand and apply mean, median mode.
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. Identifying decision makers.
                                       ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                       12
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                                                           Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
                 2. Differences in purchase process based on vertical.
                 3. Using data points to connect the dots on customer journey.
              Application Points
                 1. Identifying entry points
              Data Skill Sets
                 1. Scatter Plots
                 2. Histograms
                 3. Mean, median, mode
WEEK 5        SOURCING DATA FOR THE CREATIVE PROCESS & BASICS OF
DATE: 2/19/20 QUANTITATIVE METHODS
              Pre-Work
              Materials
                 1. CASE 3: Make it Clean: Identifying Decision Makers and Entry Points
                    (Professional Cleaning Products)
                 2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 2.6 – 2.9, 10.1 – 10.5
                 3. “Machine Bias” Angwin, Julia; Larson, Jeff; Mattu, Surya; Kirchner,
                    Lauren. ProPublica. https://www.propublica.org/article/machine-
                    bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-sentencing. May 2016.
                 4. “How We Analyzed the COMPAS Recidivism Algorithm” Angwin,
                    Julia; Larson, Jeff; Mattu, Surya; Kirchner, Lauren. ProPublica.
                    https://www.propublica.org/article/how-we-analyzed-the-
                    compas-recidivism-algorithm. May 2016.
              Progressive Brand Challenge #3 DUE: Electric Vehicle
              Awareness Campaign (Synthesizing Data)
              Learning Objectives
                 1. Basics of quantitative methods
                 2. Source data for specific objectives.
                 3. Integrate client/environmental constraints.
                 4. Triangulate to arrive at best path; optimizing for specific outcomes.
                 5. Understand and apply random sampling, normal distribution,
                    central tendency, dispersion, confidence intervals
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. How do we build and measure awareness?
                 2. Balancing client asks/constraints and data-indicated entry points.
                 3. Sources of customer-owned data.
                 4. Optimizing for specific outcomes.
              Application Points
                 1. Synthesize data from various sources.
                                       ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                       13
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                                          Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
                 2. Integrate client/environmental constraints.
                 3. Accounting for bias.
              Data Skill Sets
                 1. Location-based data
                 2. Random sampling
                 3. Normal distribution
                 4. Central tendency
                 5. Dispersion
                 6. Confidence intervals
WEEK 6        WHAT & WHERE: INSIGHTS FOR CONTENT & CHANNEL
DATE: 2/26/20 OPTIMIZATION
              Pre-Work
              Materials
                 1. CASE 4: Professional Grade: Clearing Up Marketplace Confusion
                    (Electronics Manufacturer)
                 2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 3.1 – 3.3
                 3. “Content Optimization: How to Make Content Better.” Birkett, Alex.
                    AlexBirkett.com. https://www.alexbirkett.com/content-
                    optimization/ March 23, 2018.
                 4. “How to Create Great Content: A Step-by-Step Guide to Content
                    Marketing that Delivers Real Results.” Haden, Jeff. Inc. Magazine.
                    https://www.inc.com/jeff-haden/how-to-create-great-content-a-
                    step-by-step-guide-to-content-marketing-that-delivers-real-
                    results.html January 2010.
                 5. “Why Knowing Your Target Audience is Key in Content Marketing”
                    Buryan, Marta. SocialBakers.com.
                    https://www.socialbakers.com/blog/knowing-your-target-
                    audience-is-key-in-content-marketing March 2018.
              Group Project #1 DUE: Research Proposal
              Learning Objectives
                 1. Translate data into insights that are applicable to creative decision-
                    making.
                 2. Prepare and examine data for quantitative analysis
                 3. Developing recommendations for creative professionals and
                    message development.
                 4. Work with website search data and user data.
                 5. Understand and apply significance testing, A/B testing, pivot tables
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. In-Class Team Exercise: Convincing the Client
                 2. How channels make a difference in outcomes.
                 3. Key metrics by channel.
                                      ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                      14
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                                         Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
             Application Points
                 1. Message development
                 2. Using website search and user data
                 3. Matching the message to the channel
                 4. Using data to convince the client.
             Data Skill Sets
                 1. Significance testing
                 2. A/B testing
                 3. Pivot tables
WEEK 7       WHEN: DATA FOR PERSONALIZATION, EXPERIENCE AND
DATE: 3/4/20 CUSTOMER CARE
             Pre-Work
             Be ready to share a problem that you would go through customer care
             channels to solve.
             Materials
                 1. CASE 5: Digital First: Transforming Call Centers
                    (Telecommunications)
                 2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 4.1 – 4.2
                 3. “Jay Baer: Hug Your Haters” Baer, Jay. Brand Manage Camp 2017.
                    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RysLXx2cEyU October 2017.
                 4. “How Hong Kong Airlines Increased Brand Sentiment by 212%”
                    Hootsuite.com. https://hootsuite.com/resources/how-hong-kong-
                    airlines-increased-brand-sentiment-by-212-percent
                 5. “Natural Language Processing for Call Centers – What’s Possible
                    and What’s Valuable.” Faggella, Daniel. Nerd.
                    https://emerj.com/partner-content/natural-language-processing-
                    call-centers-whats-possible-whats-valuable/ November 2018.
                 6. “Using Text Analytics in Call Centers.” Laghaeian, Raymond.
                    Microsoft Azure Blog. https://azure.microsoft.com/en-
                    us/blog/using-text-analytics-in-call-centers/ June 2019.
             Progressive Brand Challenge #4 DUE: Letters Into Numbers
             (Frequency Analysis)
             Learning Objectives
                 1. Understanding (semantic) textual analytics and natural language
                    processing.
                 2. Identify data and insights that can be derived using textual
                    (semantic) analytics.
                 3. Understand and apply pattern recognition, frequency analysis,
                    correspondence analysis and cluster analysis.
                                       ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                     15
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                                                           Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
              In-Class Discussion
                  1. In-Class Team Exercise: How Customer Care Affects Brand
                      Experience.
                  2. Using data to create brand advocates.
                  3. Using data to create “alignment” with customer base.
                  4. GROUP PROJECT #2: Research Report assignment handed out
              Application Points
                  1. Using data to engage and build customer relationships
                  2. Generating data insights from textual analysis
              Data Skill Sets
                  1.  Pattern recognition
                  2.  Frequency analysis
                  3.  Correspondence analysis
                  4.  Cluster analysis
WEEK 8        MAKING DATA MEANINGFUL THROUGH VISUALIZATIONS
DATE: 3/11/20 Pre-Work
              Be ready to share a data visualization that you think is particularly
              effective.
SPRING BREAK: Materials
                  1. “Business Analytics” Chapter 3.4 – 3.5
NO CLASS:
                  2. “Storytelling with Data: A Data Visualization Guide for Business
3/18/20
                      Professionals” Nussbaumer Knaflic, Cole. Authors at Google.
                      https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8EMW7io4rSI November 2015.
              MIDTERM EXAM
              Learning Objectives
                  1. Role of data visualizations and dashboards for teams and for
                      executives.
                  2. Effective metrics for dashboarding.
                  3. Role of Business Intelligence tools.
              In-Class Discussion
                  1. What makes a data visualization effective?
                  2. Data visualizations for specific audiences.
                  3. Solutions for real-time data visualizations.
              Application Points
                  1. Making data meaningful for specific audiences
                  2. Storytelling with data
                  3. Integration with Business Intelligence tools
                                        ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                       16
                  Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                                         Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
              Data Skill Sets
                 1. Effective metrics for dashboarding
WEEK 9        CAPITALIZING ON SOCIAL MOVEMENTS
DATE: 3/25/20 Pre-Work
              Materials
                 1. CASE 6: What Makes a Movement? (Omidyar Network)
                 2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 7.1 – 7.5
                 3. “Engines of Change” Omidyar Network.
                    https://www.omidyar.com/sites/default/files/file_archive/Pdfs/Engi
                    nes%2520of%2520Change%2520-%2520Final.pdf and bit.ly/omidyar-
                    civic-tech-report-data June 2016.
                 4. “Social Movements and Climate Change” Harvard University
                    Center for the Environment.
                    https://environment.harvard.edu/news/huce-headlines/social-
                    movements-and-climate-change June 2013.
                 5. “One Year Later, what Did We Learn from Nike’s Blockbuster Colin
                    Kaepernick Ad?” Beer, Jeff. Fast Company.
                    https://www.fastcompany.com/90399316/one-year-later-what-did-
                    we-learn-from-nikes-blockbuster-colin-kaepernick-ad October
                    2019.
              Progressive Brand Challenge #5 DUE: Identifying Influence
              (Regression Model)
              Learning Objectives
                 1. Advertising in an “always-on” environment.
                 2. Elements of successful corporate social responsibility campaigns.
                 3. Understand and apply regression to interpret data relationships
                    and trends.
                 4. Understand and apply bucket/cohort analysis.
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. Point at which a behavior pattern becomes a trend,
                 2. When does it make sense for a brand to engage with a cultural
                    trend?
                 3. Brand fails
              Application Points
                 1. Identifying trends in data
                 2. Effective brand presence with cultural trends.
              Data Skill Sets
                 1. Regression for data relationships, trends, forecasting and scoring
                 2. Bucket/cohort analysis
                                      ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                     17
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                                                          Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
WEEK 10      LIFE IN THE WAR ROOM: PUBLIC OPINION CRISIS 1
DATE: 4/1/20 Pre-Work
             Materials
                 1. Case 7A: That’s Not Good: Public Opinion Crisis (Financial Services)
                 2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 5.1 – 5.6
                 3. Boolean Training Guide
             Progressive Brand Challenge #6 DUE: Social Campaign
             Analysis (Social “Listening”)
             Learning Objectives
                 1. Understand and apply digital and social media measurement
                 2. Identify immediate, medium-term and long-term objectives and
                    assign data points to set up baselining and tracking over time.
                 3. Understand data limitations and manage team resources.
                 4. Understand and apply use of conditional probability and random
                    variables.
             In-Class Discussion
                 1. In-Class Team Exercise: Real-world crisis simulation.
                 2. In real time – who matters, audiences, voices, public figures,
                    publications.
                 3. Time trade-offs, what can we learn given time constraints for
                    research
                 4. Managing client emotions, using data to speak to power
             Application Points
                 1. Define key performance indicators.
                 2. Limitations of digital/social analytics tools.
             Data Skill Sets
                 1. Baseline and track key indicators
                 2. Conditional probability
                 3. Random variables
WEEK 11      THE WAY BACK: PUBLIC OPINION CRISIS 2
DATE: 4/8/20 Pre-Work
             Materials
                 1. Case 7B: Down But Not Out: Public Opinion Crisis (Financial
                    Services)
                 2.  “Business Analytics” Chapter 8.1 – 8.5
                 3. “Case Study: After a Crisis, Who Should Take the Fall?” Seijts, Jana.
                    Harvard Business Review. https://hbr.org/2015/05/case-study-after-
                                       ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                       18
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                                            Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
                     a-crisis-who-should-take-the-fall July 2015.
                  4. “Fight Viral with Viral: A Case Study of Domino’s Pizza’s Crisis
                     Communication Strategies” Young, Cory L., Flowers, Arhlene. Case
                     Studies in Strategic Communication, 1, 93 – 106.
                     http://cssc.uscannenberg.org/wp-
                     content/uploads/2013/10/v1art6.pdf 2013.
                  5. “Lessons in Crisis Management” Bannister, Kristian.
                     Brandwatch.com. https://www.brandwatch.com/blog/lessons-
                     crisis-management-united-incident/ April 2017.
              Group Project #2 DUE: Research Report
              Learning Objectives
                  1. Build strategy for crisis recovery using multiple sources of data.
                  2. Design research programs to address the path forward.
                  3. Use multiple sources and layers of data analysis to increase
                     effectiveness.
                  4. Apply multiple discriminant analysis, time-series patterns,
                     forecasting, moving averages.
              In-Class Discussion
                  1. In-Class Team Exercise: Real-world crisis simulation
                  2. Defining the road back using key performance indicators.
                  3. Learnings from Group Project #2: Research Report
              Application Points
                  1. Using data to develop strategy
                  2. Bringing in multiple sources of data to broaden analysis
              Data Skill Sets
                  1. Multiple discriminant analysis
                  2. Time-series patterns
                  3. Forecasting
                  4. Moving averages
WEEK 12       ATTRIBUTION AND CONTEXTUAL (COMPETITIVE) ANALYSIS:
DATE: 4/15/20 BUILDING A CASE WITH DATA
              Pre-Work
              Be ready to share an example of advertising that uses data in a persuasive
              way.
              Materials
                  1. CASE 8: But, What Are They Doing?: (Competitive Consumer
                     Electronics)
                  2. “Business Analytics” Chapter 12.1 – 12.7
                  3. “All 11 Marketing Attribution Models, Explained” Con, Jordan.
                                        ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                        19
                  Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                                          Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
                    Bizible.com. https://www.bizible.com/blog/marketing-attribution-
                    models-complete-list July 2016.
                 4. “How to Do Conversion Attribution Modeling” Birkett, Alex.
                    ConversionXL.com. https://conversionxl.com/blog/conversion-
                    attribution-modeling/ December 2016.
                 5. “Developing More Robust Marketing Accountability Models” ARM
                    Treasure Data & Forbes CMO Practice.
                    https://get.treasuredata.com/rs/714-XIJ-402/images/forbes-
                    marketing-effectiveness-arm-treasure-data.pdf 2018.
              Learning Objectives
                 1. Understand the need for contextual metrics for validation.
                 2. Justify advertising spend using attribution.
                 3. Make the case for recommendations using data.
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. Accounting for bias in data and analysis.
                 2. Understand the limitations of the data set you are working with.
                 3. What makes a competitor?
                 4. GROUP PROJECT #3: Final Presentation assignment handed out
                 5. STRATEGIC ANALYTICS GROUP PROJECT Workshop
              Application Points
                 1. Build an attribution model
                 2. Justification for deep vs. wide strategy
              Data Skill Sets
                 1. Attribution modeling
WEEK 13       TEAM DYNAMICS AND EFFECTIVE PRESENTATIONS
DATE: 4/22/20 Pre-Work
              Materials
                 1. “Business Analytics” Chapter 11.1 – 11.2
                 2. “The Magical Science of Storytelling” Phillips, David J.P. TEDx Talks.
                    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Nj-
                    hdQMa3uA&list=PLyoKDRCO9tQyaF-M4_WujVa3ieQ0HtruG March
                    2017.
                 3. “The Storyteller’s Secret” Gallo, Carmine. Talks at Google.
                    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RbA2eHO_YdY March 2016.
              Learning Objectives
                 1. Create a compelling storyline by connecting the data points.
                 2. How to appropriately frame presentations for the audience.
                 3. Understand technology limitations and setting technologists up for
                    success.
                                       ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                      20
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations


                                                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                                                          Advertising Intelligence Course Syllabus
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. In-Class Individual Exercise: Build an executive summary
                 2. Potential challenge points.
                 3. STRATEGIC ANALYTICS GROUP PROJECT workshop
WEEK 14       Final Group Oral Presentations
DATE: 4/29/20 ASSIGNMENT DUE: Final Group Presentations
              Learning Objectives
                 1. Bring together learnings from throughout the course
                 2. Practice presenting research and data
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. Which team would you hire and why?
                 2. Which research was the most persuasive?
WEEK 15       GO FORTH AND DATA
DATE: 5/6/20  FINAL EXAM
              In-Class Discussion
                 1. Near- and far-horizon in advertising intelligence
                 2. Course review
                 3. Go forth and data
                                      ADV/PR 378 & ADV391K – Spring 2020
                                                                                      21
                 Stan Richards School of Advertising and Public Relations
