BIO 325 – GENETICS (unique numbers 85005, 85010, 85015, 85020)             Mon - Fri
Summer 2019                                                         11:30-1:00      PAI     4.42
Professors: Alan Lloyd, Vishy Iyer
TAs: Gustavo Ochoa, Santos Alejandro Acosta
                      COURSE INFORMATION AND POLICIES
TEXTBOOKS—you must have access to the 2 textbooks!
    1. Genetics: From Genes to Genomes – 6th edition by Hartwell et al.; McGraw-Hill
Publishers. Sorry, 5th edition won’t do!
    2. Solutions Manual for problems in Hartwell textbook (authored by Nero).
You should get access to a digital version when you buy the textbook.
LECTURES
This course will consist of a series of lectures, activities, and discussions covering a broad
range of topics in GENETICS. Lectures will be based mostly, but not entirely, on material
in the textbook.
We will test you only on the material we cover in class.
Please be prepared to discuss the material during lecture. It’s very useful for us to stop
occasionally and get a read for how you are doing and what you are thinking.
We will not take attendance in lecture. However, we will be doing in-class activities on
occasion and your participation will be part of your grade. You can miss two of these
activities and still get full credit. There will not be any make-up for missed class activities.
We will collect your homework in Wednesday and Thursday Discussion sessions and this
will also be part of your grade. In addition, many of you will be lost if you don’t attend class
every day. We’re here to help you learn the material and we will try to make lectures and
discussions interesting and useful so that attendance is worth your time.
We will take attendance during discussions. Attendance to discussion will be part of
your grade. You can miss two discussion sessions and still get full credit.
HOMEWORK AND STUDYING
You should read the chapters before lecture and come with any questions.
You will get a homework assignment for every chapter (except chpt 1). All homework from
the previous week will be due the following Wednesday or Thursday during the discussion
section (or as announced). Late homework will not be accepted. It will be worth 5% of
your total grade. These will not be corrected. You will get credit just for completing the
problems. We will check them to make sure you made a real attempt at answering the
problems and they will be handed back during class or discussion.
The University Course Guidelines suggest that for each hour a course meets, an average
of 2 additional hours of studying is expected of the student. Therefore, you may need to
devote at 10 to 15 hours per week of studying time, on average, to this course. The course
material is highly analytical and draws from a broad knowledge base. Thus, it will require
                                                  1


a lot of time. If you cannot commit that kind of time, I would strongly urge you to take this
course sometime when you do.
DISCUSSION SECTIONS
85005 MW 1:00-2:30 GDC2.210; 85010 TTh 1:00-2:30 GDC4.302; 85015 MW 2:30-4:00 GDC2.210;
85020 TTh 2:30-4:00 GDC4.302
Each section has 2 discussion sessions per week. The purpose of the discussion sections
is for you to avail yourselves of your TA, who will be there prepared to answer any
questions you might have about the lecture material and homework problems. Attendance
is mandatory - the discussion sections are your opportunity to meet with your TA and ask
questions. Also note that we will collect your homework during the Wed and Thurs
discussions. Please remember that it is not the job of the TA to be anyone’s personal
tutor. This means that you cannot expect to be able to meet with the TA outside of
discussion sections for private help sessions. There are 3 hours per week when your TA
will be there, ready, willing, and able to help you! Please also remember that NOTHING
MAGICAL is going to happen in discussion section. By this we mean that merely
attending discussion sections is NOT a substitute for your own personal studying. Taking
personal responsibility to work hard on your own, and bringing your questions and
difficulties to discussion section is the only way to do well in this class.
EXAMS
There will be four exams in the course. The three midterms will be given during class and
the final will be given at the university scheduled time (see schedule) and all tests are
CUMULATIVE. All exams, including the final, are equally weighted. Look at the dates
and times of the exams in order to be certain that you are able to attend. Note that
there will be a mid-term exam on Friday July 5. Make-up exams will be given only
for officially sanctioned reasons such as documented serious illness, etc. Not
weddings, family vacations, or anything of that sort. Don't make any travel plans
until after the official Final exam schedule is posted.
Policy on calculators:
You may use a calculator (web-dead, digit-only memory) in exams. NO programmable
calculators, or smartphone calculators, or web-enabled devices of any kind during exams.
GRADES
Your final course grade will be computed as follows:
3 (out of 4) exams = 85% of grade (~28.33% for each exam)
Homework = 5% of grade
Class activities, etc. = 5% of grade
Discussion session attendance = 5% of grade
Total= 100% --90%=A, 80%=B, 70%=C, 60%=D
The lowest of the 4 exams will be dropped.
Homework score will be the percent of the homework assignments completed x 5.
If you miss 2 or less of the class activities, you will receive all 5 of the activity points. If
you miss 3 you get 4 pts. Miss 4 and you get 3 points. Miss 5 and you get 2 pts. Etc.
                                               2


If you miss 2 or less of the discussion sessions, you will receive all 5 of the discussion
points. If you miss 3 you get 4 pts. Miss 4 and you get 3 points. Miss 5 and you get 2 pts.
Etc.
The final class grades will be curved if scores warrant it but it has not been necessary to
curve in recent years. We will not use +/- grades.
You are required to take the last exam even if you don’t feel like it. In order for us to drop
your lowest exam score, your final exam score must be at least 70% of your next lowest
exam score. If you don’t take the last exam, or you score below 70% of your next lowest
score, we will not drop your lowest exam.
If we feel it is necessary, we will give graded pop exams or other in-class assignments,
which will become part of the Homework score.
REGRADES If you feel that a mistake has been made in grading your Exam, you
must submit your exam for regrade WITHIN TWO CLASS DAYS FROM THE DAY IT IS
RETURNED IT TO YOU. Please hand the test to the Professor (not the TA) before or
after class with a succinct written explanation as to what you think the grading mistake is.
Exams submitted after the 2-day deadline will not be regraded.
OFFICE HOURS
Alan Lloyd: NMS 5.122                  Tuesday & Wednesday 1-2 pm (until June 25)
Vishy Iyer: MBB 3.204                  Tuesday & Wednesday 4:00-5:00 pm (after June 25)
Gustavo Ochoa, Santos Alejandro Acosta: TBA
PLEASE DO:
     Ø Come to our office hours to introduce yourself!
     Ø Come to our office hours to ask questions about the course material.
PLEASE DON’T:
     Ø    Come to our office hours to ask us to work the problems in the book.
Please bring those questions to discussion section. Answering those questions is one of
the TAs’ essential jobs in this class.
It is not possible for us to answer detailed questions about the course material by email
or over the telephone.
Canvas---
We will use the Canvas website for this course to post the following:
     1)  Slides
     2)  Weekly problem sets
     3)  Announcements
     4)  Detailed answers to the Exams
We may also email the class as a whole to let you know about anything relevant to the
class. We will use your email address as listed in the UT directory, so please make sure
that it is current and correct.
                                                 3


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Information about University of Texas policies pertaining to each of these subjects is
available on the UT website.
Administrative Deadlines: It is your responsibility to keep track of the deadlines for
dropping the course, changing to Pass/Fail, etc., etc., etc.
Academic Dishonesty: There is a ZERO TOLERANCE policy for academic dishonesty
of any kind in this class.
Special Needs: If you need special treatment for a disability or for religious reasons we
are happy to accommodate. Please inform us of these matters in a timely manner and
according to University policy.
                                           4
