                                       The University of Texas at Austin
                                           Race, Sex, and Tourism
                                             AFR 317E, ANT 310L
                                         Flags: Global Cultures, Ethics
                                                  Spring 2020
Prof:    Dr. Traci-Ann Wint
Course Description
What does it mean to be a tourist? What role do race, class, gender, and sexuality play in our
understandings of tourism? How do race, sex, gender, and class impact how, where, and why people
travel? This course introduces students to debates, methods and conceptual frameworks in the study of
race, sex, and tourism. We’ll examine the nuances of how and why people travel, the trials and benefits of
being a host location or destination, and we’ll interrogate what happens when tourist and local meet.
Through a review of travelogues and travel guides, tourism advertising paraphernalia, novels, and films,
and blogs we’ll discuss tourism and its relationship to colonialism and imperialism, and race, as well as
the commodification of culture and the role of the “exotic” in our globalized world. Tourism has often
been touted as the key to economic development and the improvement of living conditions in developing
countries. However, scholarly work has shown that the impact of tourism on people, culture and
environment is complicated and tourism has varied positive and negative effects. We’ll examine the
social, political and ethical considerations that undergird travel as we explore tourism and development;
eco-tourism; wellness or health tourism; all-inclusive and cruise tourism; heritage and cultural tourism;
and dark tourism in locales ranging from the Caribbean and the Americas to Africa and Europe.
Course Goals
Students will gain a solid foundation in the main themes and theories of tourism studies, Further, students
will learn to think critically about issues of race, gender, sexuality, class, and ability as they impact
tourism Students will also be exposed to a growing and interdisciplinary body of research, literature and
culture material about tourism, tourists and host nations.
Course Flags
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
This course carries the Ethics flag. Ethics courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary
for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the process of applying
ethical reasoning to real-life situations.
Required Texts
So much of what we know about the world today we learn through the internet. This course is committed
to engaging public thought alongside academic or scholarly work. We will as such engage work about
race, sex, and tourism in multiple forms including but not limited to academic articles and books, black
feminist scholarship, blogs, vlogs and op-eds, movies and music videos.
There is only one full-length academic text required for the course and it is available for purchase at the
University Co-op Bookstore
                                                        1


Jamaica Kincaid A Small Place
Social Media.
The course has a Facebook page https://www.facebook.com/Race-Sex-and-Tourism-
108898793990751/?modal=admin_todo_tour On this page you will find links to blogs, videos and op-eds
discussed in class as well as links to other articles and media relevant to the course. Please visit the page
often and “like” it to be updated about posts. If you wish to share something please contact me so that I
can facilitate your engagement with the class community in this way.
The course also has a twitter account – @racesextourism. Please visit, reply and retweet!
Course Requirements:
Class Attendance and Participation (10pts)
Students are expected to attend every class session having completed all readings and assignments and
prepared to engage in discussion. This is a discussion-oriented class and student participation is essential.
Students should come to class with a copy of the reading assignment (whether hard copy or electronic), as
well as their notes and questions about the material to add to the class discussion. In addition to class
discussion we will often engage in in-class activities. Students will be evaluated on elements including
their attendance to and participation in discussion and activities in lecture and in discussion group
sessions.
    • Attendance breakdown out of 5 points
             o Students who attend 90% of all classes recorded will earn 5pts
             o Students who attend 80-89% of all classes recorded will earn 4pts
             o Students who attend 70-79% of all classes recorded will earn 3 pts
             o Students who attend 60-69% of all classes recorded will earn 2pts
             o Students who attend 50-59% of all classes recorded will earn 0pts
             o Students who attend less than 50% of all classes recorded will automatically fail the
                 class.
    • Participation breakdown out of 5 points
             o Students participation score will be calculated out of 5 based on their engagement with
                 class activities and discussion
Reading Reflections /Conversation Pages (10 pts)
Beginning the 2nd week of class students will be required to complete a 1-paragraph to 1-page long
reading reflection. Completed in the Canvas discussion board, these responses should include your key
thoughts on at least 2 of the readings for the week and at least 1 critical question that you’d like us to
address in class. They are intended to provoke discussion so while you must address the week’s readings,
you don’t need to summarize. These are due at 9 pm on Thursdays. Students may opt out of responses
twice during the semester without penalty, resulting in a total of 10 discussion posts per student.
Group Presentations / Discussion Facilitation (10 pts)
On Wednesdays beginning in the 3rd week of class, students – in groups - will be responsible for a short
(10-15 minute) presentation on the topic and readings for the week. Presenters are required to draft
questions for discussion which they will facilitate along with the instructor. A presentation/facilitation
outline should be submitted to Canvas by 9pm on the Tuesday before presentation. While your
presentations should center the readings for the week feel free to be creative. You can consult websites,
the readings, twitter, instagram or other online sources for ideas.
Stakeholder Perspective Analysis Papers (30pts)
There will be three 2-4 page stakeholder analysis essays due throughout the semester. Each paper will ask
students to identify and analyze the stakeholders in a particular situation, analyze the ethical dilemma they
                                                        2


are faced with and explain clearly why they have taken the position that they have taken and identify the
ethical framework guiding their decision. Your essays should take into consideration factors such as
global positioning, race, gender, class, stereotyping etc. Essays are worth 10 points each and are due at
noon on their due date.
Midterm (15%)
Students will complete a take-home midterm examination that will evaluate understanding of concepts
covered during the first half of the semester. Midterm exams are due by 12 noon on Friday March 13.
Final Project – Destination/Theme Analysis Story Map (25%)
The final for this class will be a research project testing students accumulated knowledge throughout the
semester. Students will develop their final project in consultation with the professor. The project will be
presented in the form of a digital story map of a particular destination or tourism theme to be
accompanied by a 2-4 page explanatory analytical document. Each student will present a portion of their
storymap to the class during the final weeks of the semester. Students MUST submit a proposal for the
project by March 6. Guidelines for both the paper and proposal will be posted on canvas. Students who
do not submit the proposal will automatically lose 5 points off their final paper/project grade Papers and
projects are due IN CLASS on the last class day – Friday May 8.
Graded Assignments:
Final                                                                        25
Midterm                                                                      15
Stakeholder Analysis papers                                                  30
Reflection pages                                                             10
Presentation/Facilitation                                                    10
Attendance and Participation                                                 10
TOTAL                                                                        100 pts.
Points to letter grades for final grade:
                          A = 94-100 pts.            A- = 90-93 pts.
B+ = 87-89                B = 84-86 pts.             B- = 80-83 pts.
C+ = 77-79 pts.           C = 74-76 pts.             C- = 70-73 pts.
D+ = 67-69 pts.           D = 64-66 pts.             D- = 60-63 pts.
F = 0-59 pts.
                                                Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, rubrics, digitally available readings and videos and other essential
information will be on the Canvas website https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1269816
Announcements about any changes will also be posted to Canvas. Please check the site regularly and
ensure that your email address is correctly set up to connect to Canvas. The Canvas page is organized into
Weekly modules. Readings and assignments for each week will be placed in the corresponding module.
                               Schedule of Topics, Readings and Assignments
                    Schedule and readings may be adjusted by Professor Wint at any time
                                                        3


Section 1: Tourism Past and Present
Week 1:        Introductions
Wed Jan 22     Introductions and logistics (no reading assignment)
Fri Jan 24     Tourism, the Tourist and the Gaze
Week 2:        Consuming Leisure: Making the Tourist
Mon Jan 27     John Urry and Jonas Larsen. The Tourist Gaze 3.0 Mass Tourism
Wed Jan 29     Polly Pattullo The Holiday and its makers in Last Resorts the Cost of Tourism in the
               Caribbean
Fri Jan 31     Discussion
Week 3:        Creating Paradise: Tourism and Colonialism
Mon Feb 3      Krista Thompson Introduction and Developing the Tropics in An Eye for the Tropics
Wed Feb 5      Frank Fonda Taylor Introduction in To Hell with Paradise (group 1)
Fri Feb 7      Travel Guide/travelogue review (borrow from library or find online)
                                   Section 2: Tourism and Desire
Week 4:       Tourism and Desire Sex Tourism in Latin America
Mon Feb 10     M. Jacqui Alexander Imperial Desire/Sexual Utopias in Pedagogies of Crossing
               Kamala Kempadoo : For Love or Money in Sexing the Caribbean
               Amalia Cabezas Eroticizing Labor in All-Inclusive Resorts in Economies of Desire Sex
               and Tourism in Cuba and the Dominican Republic
Wed Feb 12     Erica Williams: Racial Hierarchies of Desire and the Specter of Sex Tourism in Sex
               Tourism in Bahia (viewing section of how Stella Got her groove back) (group 2)
Fri Feb 14     Alexandra Talty - The Secrets of Sex Tourism in the Caribbean (link)
Week 5:        Sex Tourism: Political Economy and Moral Geographies
Mon Feb 17     Thanh-Dam Truong – The Dynamics of Sex Tourism: The Case of Southeast Asia
Wed Feb 19     Armadine Charpius – Touring the Immoral: Affective Geographies of visitors to
               Amsterdams Red Light District (group 3)
Fri Feb 21     Sex Tourism is Changing….can Asia Keep up? (link)
               Sex Tourism in Laos (link)
                        First Stakeholder Analysis paper due noon Fri Feb 21
                    Section 2: Tourism, Sex, and the Nation: Paradise for Whom?
Week 6:        Tourism and Nation: Paradise for Whom?
Mon Feb 24     M. Jacqui Alexander Erotic Autonomy as a Politics of Decolonization
Wed Feb 26     Colleen Ballerino Cohen Making Paradise as Destin-Nation (group 4)
Fri Feb 28     The World’s Newest Nation Bids you welcome (link)
Week 7:        The Costs of Tourism
Mon Mar 2      Jamaica Kincaid A Small Place (life and debt in class)
Wed Mar 4      Polly Pattullo The Lock and the Key: History and Power in Last Resorts and Like an
               Alien in wi Own Land (group 5)
Fri Mar 6       Carolyn Cooper No Beach for Local Tourists & Another Beach Gone Private
                               Storymap Proposal Due Friday March 6
Week 8:        Tourism and Politics– Cuba, Mexico and Visa Politics
                                                    4


Mon Mar 9    excerpt from R. Schwartz Pleasure Island: Tourism and Temptation in Cuba
              Cuba’s Surge in Tourism Keeps food off residents’ plates (link)
Wed Mar 11   excerpt from Ruth Hellier-Tinoco Embodying Mexico (group 6)
              Despite Violence Tourism is Strong in Mexico’s resort areas (link)
Fri Mar 13    Story Mapping Workshop
                                    MID-TERM DUE at NOON
                        Week 9: SPRING BREAK MAR 16-20 NO CLASS
Week 10:      Culture on Tour – Heritage Tourism in West Africa
Mon Mar 23    Excerpt From Edward Bruner Culture on Tour,
              Sandra L. Richards What is to be Remembered
Wed Mar 25    Excerpt from Jemima Pierre The Predicament of Blackness (group 7)
              Edward bruner - The Maasai and the Lion King:
Fri Mar 27    Saidiya Hartman Lose your Mother (excerpt)
Week 11:      Tourism and the Spirit: Pilgrimage and Religious Tourism
Mon Mar 30    Research Day (No Class Meeting)
Wed April 1   Henderson Religious Tourism and Its Management (group 8)
              TBD
Fri April 3   Dubai’s Demand for Niche Spiritual Retreats on the rise (link)
Week 12:      Eco Tourism – Land Displacement and Expectations
Mon Apr 6     Guest Lecturer Sara Diamond – reading TBD
Wed Apr 8     S. Mollett – A modern Paradise: Garifuna Land…and displacement in place (group 9)
Fri Apr 10    Guest Lecturer – D. Guzman. Reading TBD
                            2nd Stake holder analysis due Friday April 10
Week 13       Disaster and Dark Tourism
Mon Apr 13     D. Robbie Touring Katrina: Authentic Identities and Disaster Tourism
              V. Kaussen Zooming In: Virtual Disaster Tourism in post earthquake Haiti
Wed Apr15      Excerpt from Slum Tourism: Poverty Power and Ethics (presentation 10)
Fri Apr 17    TBD
Week 14       Dark Tourism Cont’d – When Tourism Hurts
Mon April 20 TJ Potts Dark Tourism and the Kitschification of 9/11
              The morality and impacts of holocaust tourism (link)
Wed Apr 22    Adams Dark Zombie Tourism in Indonesia (group 11)
Fri April 24   NPR tourist attractions around the world dealing with overcrowding (link)
              From Amsterdam to Venice the impact of overtourism (link)
                                        3rd Stakeholder Analysis due April 24
Week 15:       Returning the Gaze
Mon Apr 27    Mimi Sheller Returning the Tourist Gaze in Citizenship From Below
Wed Apr       TBD (group 12)
Fri May 1.    Story Map Presentations
Week 16       Conclusions
Mon May 4     Story Map Presentations
                                                  5


Wed May 6          Story Map Presentations
Fri May 8          Conclusions (last class day)
                             Final Paper/Project Due IN CLASS Friday May 8
                                   Classroom Expectations and Guidelines
Active and Respectful Learning Environment.
This is a discussion-based course. While we will do some lecturing, the expectation is that all students
will come to class having completed the reading assignments and equipped with notes and questions
ready for discussion. Students are required to bring all necessary materials to actively engage in
discussion with them each day. These include, but are not limited to, a hard or electronic copy of the
article/book(s) assigned for the day. In this course we will engage material that deal explicitly with issues
of race, sex, gender, and sexuality. If you agree to take this class, you have agreed to respect our
classroom space as a safe one. Racism, sexism, homophobia, transphobia, xenophobia, classism, and
ableism will not be tolerated. As this is a discussion-oriented class an open environment of respect is
essential. It is our hope that students will feel free to be candid and direct in sharing their informed and
grounded opinions, but we also expect that students will treat each other with kindness, sensitivity,
consideration and respect. My teaching philosophy is one of active and engaged learning and
democratized knowledge, this means that I acknowledge that we all have something to learn from each
other and trust that we will give each other safe space to think, speak, and learn.
Course Communication
We will use Canvas announcements and email to be in touch regarding updates to assignments and
readings. Please note that it is the students’ responsibility to ensure that your email address is up to date in
the system.
Code of Academic Conduct
Academic integrity is central to the mission of the university. Each student is expected to turn in work
completed independently, except when assignments specifically authorize collaborative effort. It is not
acceptable to use the words or ideas of another person without proper acknowledgement of that source.
This means that you must use footnotes and quotation marks to indicate the source of any phrases,
sentences, paragraphs, or ideas found in published volumes, on the Internet, or created by another student.
For more information about the university’s expectations for academic integrity, see:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Responsible use of electronics
While this course encourages students to call on their facility with electronic media, use of electronic
devices will only be allowed for particular class activities which I will announce. Outside of these
Computers, tablets, and phones are to remain off and/or unopened during lectures and discussions.
Students who do not comply will be given one warning and then will be asked to leave the lecture hall for
the remainder of the class period.
Accommodations
Students with Disabilities: Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 512-471-6259 or 512-410-6644 (video phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
                                                         6


Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the university
schedule please speak with me about possible accommodations.
Other Resources
University Writing Center: I strongly encourage the use of the University Writing Center in the PCL.
The UWC offers free, individualized, cross-disciplinary assistance with writing for any UT undergraduate
student, by appointment or drop-in - (512) 471-6222
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the
professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further investigation any information
concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking
committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also
requires reporting incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct
(collectively known as Title IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information
about any such incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can
maintain confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-
6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We
strongly urge you make use of these services for any needed support and that you report any Title
IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
Other UT Austin Resources and Contact Information
    • Counseling and Mental Health Center (and VAV) (512)-471-3515
         https://cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/vav_contact.html
    •    Services for Students with Disabilities (512)-471-6259
         Email: ssd@austin.utexas.edu
    •    BCAL (Behavioral Concerns Advice Line)
         (512)-232-5050
         Submit concerns here: https://utexas- advocate.symplicity.com/care_report/index.php/pid471457?
    •    Ombuds Office
         (512)-471-3825
         Call to schedule an appointment
    •    Student Emergency Services (512)-471-5017
         Email: studentemergency@austin.utexas.edu
General Course Protocols:
•   Rules for respectful discussion will be followed. These rules will be established and agreed upon by
    everyone early in the semester. If a student violates these rules, that student will be counted as absent
    for the day.
•   Written assignments are due as indicated on the syllabus unless otherwise specified. Late assignments
    will not be accepted unless an acceptable excuse is provided before the due date.
•   The University of Texas rules and regulations regarding plagiarism and intellectual honesty will be
    enforced. For details please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
•   Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
    Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
    http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
                                                      7


8