ARC 328W / 392W
Wood Design                                                                   Instructor – Mark Maček
Unique # 00780 / 01195                                                           mmacek@utexas.edu
Spring 2019                                                                                 office hours
TTh 2:30 - 5:30 pm                                                                     by appointment
Build Lab GOL 1.101                                                                        GOL 3.106
Objectives
Practice woodworking skills: tool sharpening, layout, millwork, joinery, gluing, & sanding.
Learn the characteristics of the material wood, including specific species.
Analyze the strength of wood joints.
Design a piece of furniture based on a program, with materials and techniques in mind.
Understand the point of view of the maker within the design process.
Complete the final project.
Schedule
The first six weeks, we practice solid wood joinery using hand tools and power tools. This is a
crucial time to attend every day and stay current. There will be an assignment each week due on
Tuesday morning. Students sharpen chisels and mill lumber so it’s flat and straight. Our discussions
are grounded in wood’s cellular structure and anisotropy. Strength derives from long grain,
weakness from the lack of long grain. Changing moisture content creates expansion and
contraction in predictable ways. We will study furniture design history and visit the shops of Austin
craftspeople to see how they work.
The final project is one piece of furniture of your choice of program. It must be mostly solid wood,
no digital fabrication, and no larger than 25 cubic feet. Final project design assignments include
sketches, scaled drawings, models at 3”=1’-0”, and full-scale mock-ups. The class holds two
design reviews before construction begins, allowing seven weeks for completion. The class
participates in school-wide final reviews with other design studios. Begin now thinking about what
you want to build for your final project. On the seventh week, your proposal will be locked in.
Week 1, Jan 22
Thursday - Handout and lecture on the properties of wood: cellular structure, grain direction, and
movement with changes in moisture. Demonstration of milling lumber to S4S (surfaced four side)
with joiner, planer, table saw, and chop saw.
Assignment – Students repeat milling procedure on 2x4’s which they have purchased. Closely
observe the results. Due Jan 29
Week 2, Jan 29
Tuesday - Review milling exercise results and discuss grain direction. Demonstration of chisel
sharpening with bench grinder and whetstones. Discussion of router, changing bits and to use the
router to cut hinge mortise, how to use the chisel to cut the corners square.
Assignment – Repeat hinge mortise exercise 3 times in 2x4’s and once in hardwood sample.
Assignment (Design/build 1) – Build a wood box by next Tuesday, 27 cubic inches inside, any
method. No joinery has been taught yet, so students must improvise. Gluing wood together is
acceptable. Due Feb 5
Thursday - Demonstration of Japanese saw for cross-cutting 2x4 by hand. Demonstrate the dado
saw and the fence to cut a precise half-lap joint in 2x4’s, using test pieces
Assignment – Using Japanese saw, cut four samples of 2x4 square on ends.
Assignment – Repeat dado saw half-lap exercise on 2x4’s.


Week 3, Feb 5
Tuesday - Review box designs and use the boxes to discuss craft techniques and gluing wood
cross-grain. Review cross-cuts and half-laps. Discuss the hand tools in the class locker.
Demonstrate hand plane use and care. Slide show of Design History images of furniture design,
particularly Eames, Aalto, Nakashima, Wegner, differences between solid-wood construction and
veneer or laminated construction, compare bent-lamination technique to steam-bending.
Assignment – Cut Block (see drawing) from cherry lumber with hand tools only. Discuss specific
techniques. Due Feb 12
Thursday - Distribute handout with comprehensive list of joint types. Discuss joint names,
mechanical properties, and strength analysis. Demonstrate mortise-and-tenon joint in 2x4’s with
horizontal mortiser, chisel, and dado saw.
Assignment – Repeat mortise & tenon exercise. The goal is tight fit on long grain and shoulder.
Assignment – Read David Pye, The Nature and Art of Workmanship, chapters 1-4, 7, 11, 12.
Week 4, Feb 12
Tuesday - Review Block. Review m&t joints. Discuss Pye. Define craft, workmanship of risk,
workmanship of certainty, diversity of scale, rough vs. precise, and designer’s intention. Slide show
featuring examples of wood movement, wood engineering characteristics, shaping wood in 3D,
fasteners, construction techniques, laminated products, and some architectural applications.
Assignment – Schematic Design of Final Project, choose program, discuss parameters. Schematic
Design review Feb 19
Thursday – Demonstrate edge-gluing two boards and clamping tactics. Demonstration of screws,
pilot holes, counter bores. Demonstrate slip tenons such as biscuit joiner and Domino machine.
Week 5, Feb 19
Tuesday - Final Project Schematic Design review and discussion with entire class. Demonstrate 3D
shaping tools and techniques.
Assignment (Design/build 2) – Make a Handle for prospective application by shaping wood in
3D. Handle due Feb 26.
Thursday – Class field trip locations:
The house of Jean Mather whose husband Bob Mather taught Wood Design for ten years. There
are many examples of Bob’s furniture, architecture, and interior design.
Second stop is the studio of Philippe Klinefelter, public art sculptor, friend and cohort of Bob
Mather. Philippe has over 10,000 hours experience in three media- wood, metal, and stone.
Maček Furniture Company to see current projects and older designs.
Week 6, Feb 26
Tuesday – Review Handle assignment. Discuss buying lumber at hardwood lumber stores,
nomenclature, lumber grading, define the unit of one board-foot. Demonstrate hand cutting single
dovetail joint using hand tools.
Assignment - Repeat dovetail joint four times in two species of wood.
Assignment – Final Project Design Development, required model at 3”=1’-0” due Mar 5.
Thursday – Discuss hardware, hinges, drawer slides
Week 7, Mar 5
Tuesday - Design Development Review with guest critic.
Assignment – Make design revisions based on review discussion.


Thursday – Discuss handouts regarding construction drawings, cut lists, and full-scale mock-ups.
Discuss wood species characteristics with 25 samples of hardwood, softwood, and engineered
products. Discuss imported lumber vs. domestic and standards of sustainably harvested wood.
Assignment – Work on shop drawings and cut list.
Week 8, Mar 12
Tuesday – Read handout comparing wood finishes. Look at finish sample library and discuss.
Hold individual desk crits with students needing design advice.
Assignment – Buy lumber for final project
Thursday – The rest of the semester, studio time is devoted to individual discussions with students
regarding technique, design, construction sequence, and schedule.
Assignment - Begin full-scale joinery details, create schedule for final project.
Week 9, Mar 19 - Spring Break
Week 10, Mar 26 - work and desk crits
Week 11, Apr 2 - work
Week 12, Apr 9 - work
Week 13, Apr 16 - work
Week 14, Apr 23 - work
Week 15, Apr 30 - work
Week 16, May 7 - work, final project review on May 10
Readings
Required reading: The Nature and Art of Workmanship by David Pye.
There will be handouts. List of bookmarks at www.diigo.com/user/wooddesign
Design History images on Canvas
Grading
First 6 weeks                      25%
Final project                      75%
The first six weeks are graded on effort, timeliness, and craft. I evaluate final project designs
based on intent (expression of a design idea), process (self-criticism, iterations, variations), and
resolution (effort and craft). After the last day of the semester, the wood shop hours are
shortened. A grade of incomplete will only be granted for illness or family emergency.
Safety Training
All students must take UT’s Environmental Health and Safety department online training
(https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ehs/class.WBX?s_course_comp=0&s_course_prefix=OH&s_course_nu
mber=0500 ) and pass a short exam at the end in order to enter the shop.
All Wood Design students are required to take John Vekho’s shop safety orientation.
Accommodations
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
Absence policy
Four unexcused absences will result in a full letter drop in your grade for the semester. Contact me
ahead of time if you plan to miss class, and notify me as soon as possible if you are sick or have a
family emergency. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day. You will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. Please keep me informed
so that I can help you.


Required supplies
Lock for desk
Tape measurer, combination square, 1” chisel
Dust masks. The good ones have two straps.
Lumber
Keep the shop clean
CLEAR your bench top and sweep the floor at the end of work day.
The only available scrap wood is in the scrap bins.
When gluing, cover the bench top with newspaper or wax paper.
Observe safety rules and tool maintenance
Wear hearing, eye, and respiratory protection.
No MDF. No reclaimed lumber unless specifically approved.
