                           THEUNIVERSITYOFTEXASATAUSTIN
                ACC F383K.4, Fraud Examination (unique no. 71165)
                                          Course Syllabus
                                    Summer 2019 (First Session)
Time and Location:
    Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 8:00 – 10:00 a.m. in CBA 5.328.
Instructor
    Mark Bradshaw, J.D., M.P.A., M.B.A.
    Lecturer, McCombs School of Business (2006 - Present)
    KPMG Professor in Residence (2007)
    Of Counsel, Matheson, Keys & Kordzik PLLC
    Office: GSB.5.124E; Ph.: 512-475-8852; E-mail: mark.bradshaw@mccombs.utexas.edu
    Office hours: Tuesdays from 10:00 – 11:00 a.m. and by appointment.
    Please e-mail if you wish to reach me outside of class and office hours.
Teaching Assistant
    Anastasia Graves
    E-mail: anastasia.graves@utexas.edu
    Office hours: As announced, following the return of graded cases.
    Anastasia will assist with the grading of cases and exams. After graded cases are returned, she
    will schedule office hours to discuss such assignments. If you have grading questions
    concerning a case, please make every effort to attend the scheduled office hours for the case
    (or, prior to such time, make other arrangements if you have an unavoidable conflict). Please
    bring all other questions (including questions concerning case preparation and exam-related
    matters) to my attention.
Canvas
    We will use the web-based University of Texas at Austin "Canvas" system extensively. To
    access Canvas, go to http://courses.utexas.edu or follow the links from other University
    websites.
    I will use Canvas to post announcements, class materials and scores. Please check Canvas
    frequently and before every class. You can also use the Canvas discussion feature to post
    comments, questions, and responses to others' posts. If you have a course-related question that is
    not a personal matter, please use Canvas, not e-mail, so that all students can benefit from the
    question and response(s).
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                Page 1


Enhancing the Enjoyment of this Course
    I prefer an informal classroom, as I have found such an environment to be more enjoyable and
    conducive to student attendance, participation and learning. I hope you will let me know
    during class if you have a question, comment or response. In this class, silence is not golden!
    Please assist me in maintaining a positive, productive learning environment by showing
    courtesy and respect for your fellow students (and me). To that end, please make all
    reasonable efforts to be on time to class and exams. Entering the classroom after class or an
    exam begins is disruptive to me and those around you. Frequent tardiness, or tardiness for an
    exam, will be a factor in determining your participation grade.
    The use of electronic devices in class is not permitted, unless otherwise announced.
    Accordingly, please turn off and put away your laptop, tablet, cell phone and other devices
    before class begins. Use of such devices in violation of course policy will (i) result in a
    deemed absence for any class in which attendance is taken and (ii) be a factor in
    determining your participation grade.
    PowerPoint slides for lectures will be available on Canvas before class. Although only a small
    portion of such slides will be covered in class – they are provided primarily to assist you with
    exam preparation - I recommend that you print out the slides (4 or 6 to a page) before each
    class and write your notes in the margins or space provided as we cover selected material.
    You will have a formal opportunity to provide feedback on the course via the end-of-semester
    Course Instructor Survey, but please stop by and see me during the semester if you wish to
    discuss any aspect of the course in person.
Required Course Materials:
    Course files. As noted above, I will provide PowerPoint slides, cases, supplemental non-textbook
        readings, and other course materials on Canvas. These materials do not substitute for class
        itself, so it is important to attend each class session.
    A Guide to Forensic Accounting Investigation, 2nd edition, by Skalak, Golden, Clayton & Pill
        (Wiley, 2011), available online at no charge via the UT Library (sign-in needed) at
        https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/doi/book/10.1002/9781119200048. If you
        would like a free hard copy of the 1st edition of the text, which has similar (but not the same)
        content as the 2nd edition, please pick one up in the Accounting Office (CBA 4M.202) during the
        first two weeks of class.
Course Objectives
At the end of the course, you will have a better understanding of the following:
1. Fraud examination as a profession;
2. Differences between audits and fraud investigations;
3. Independence, legal and other obligations of the auditor and fraud examiner with respect to fraud;
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                    Page 2


4. Financial reporting fraud, asset misappropriation, bribery and corruption, Ponzi and other fraud
      schemes, their red flags, and their means of detection;
5. Fraud psychology;
6. Fraud detection and investigation techniques;
7. The role of management, internal audit and other parties in fraud detection, deterrence and
    investigations;
8. Commencing and conducting a fraud investigation;
9. Working with counsel;
10. Handling anonymous communications and other pre-investigation considerations;
11. Interviewing skills;
12. Investigation reports;
13. Legal proceedings involving fraud claims;
14 Money laundering; and
15. Domestic and international anti-corruption laws.
Grading
        Course grades will be based on a 350-point scale, as follows:
                                                                   Points Possible
 Midterm examination                                                 100 (28.5%)
 Final examination                                                   100 (28.5%)
 Cases (3)                                                           100 (28.5%)
 Class attendance and participation                                   50 (14.5%)
 Total possible points                                             350
     I do not have fixed point or percentage cut-offs in mind regarding letter grades. I will make
     these determinations at the end of the semester based on both relative and absolute
     performance considerations. Historically, my grade distribution in this class has been
     approximately 35-40% A, 15-20% A-/B+, 40-50% B, with the remainder B- or below.
     However, each class is different and this course’s grade distribution may vary from the
     foregoing.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                   Page 3


Each graded component is described below:
Examinations (midterm and final each worth 100 points)
         Examinations will emphasize concepts and issues discussed in class and in the PowerPoint
slides, although any material from assigned readings is "fair game" for testing. Exams will contain
objective (multiple choice and true-false) questions, short answer and/or essay questions. I will provide
additional exam-related information and preparation guidance prior to each exam.
         The midterm examination will test material covered to that point in the course, as announced.
The final examination will cover the remainder of the material in the course (i.e., it will not be
“cumulative,” as such term is normally used). Of course, as some material in this course builds on
previous concepts, the final examination will be “cumulative” in the broad sense of that term.
         Any failure to be seated at the beginning of an exam (i.e., being late for an
exam) will result in a reduction of your exam score, based on the circumstances.
Cases (100 points)
         To refine your writing skills and your ability to deal with more realistic problems in fraud
examination, there will be three case exercises based on real-world examples that have been adapted for
teaching purposes.
         Cases will be graded for breadth and depth of analysis, quality of writing and professional
impression. Case questions may, in certain instances, be subjective issues for which there will be no
single “right answer” and multiple views can be defended. It is important to be both complete and
concise in your case analyses. Do not repeat or summarize the case facts, except where needed to
support a position. Your case analyses will be limited to four pages each and must be double-spaced,
use a font no smaller than 10, and have left and right margins of at least 1”.
         In the formative stage of a case assignment, you are welcome to discuss the case with other
students in this class (but not others outside of this class), including on Canvas. However, copying or
paraphrasing from another student's draft or final solution, in whole or in part, is scholastic
dishonesty, and will be penalized severely. See "Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty" later in this syllabus
for clarification.
         The assigned cases will be posted on Canvas. Due dates will be as set forth in the “Anticipated
Course Schedule” at the conclusion of this syllabus, unless changed per class announcement. Each
case will be worth 30-40 points, as announced when each case is assigned.
         All cases will be due in class on the day indicated, unless otherwise announced. Time permitting,
we will discuss the first two cases in class, on or after the due date. Discussion of cases is an important
part of the course, so please be prepared to discuss and defend your positions in class (see “Class
Attendance and Participation,” below).
Class Attendance and Participation (50 points)
          Your consistent attendance and active participation will make this course substantially more
enjoyable (for you and me) and significantly enhance the clarity of points discussed in class. To give you an
added incentive to attend and participate, 50 points will be based on your attendance and my largely
subjective (but genuine) assessment of your cumulative participation and contribution in this class.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                       Page 4


Assessing participation at the conclusion of the course requires my judgment, but you can trust me to do my
best to form a fair assessment of your participation and contribution.
           To earn points for participation and attendance:
       • Ask and answer questions and offer insights in class discussions.
       • Actively participate in any discussions led by guest speakers.
       • Attend class.
          To earn a high participation score, substantial classroom participation and consistent
attendance is necessary.
          Attendance will usually be taken on days when we have guest speakers and video presentations and
do in-class group exercises (which video presentations and exercises may not be announced in advance), but
may be taken any day in my discretion. Attendance is a material factor in determining your overall
participation score. In addition, any student who is absent 50% or more of the days on which attendance is
taken (as indicated by sign-in sheets I will circulate) will receive an attendance and participation score of
zero (out of 50) in the course.
          In evaluating course performance, I also reserve the right to take into account any violations of
course policies, such as consistent tardiness or arriving late for an exam, the use of electronic devices in
class, or any other activities that are disruptive to the class.
Don’t be Shy!
          As in any course, it is common for some students’ early performance in the course to fall short of
their goals or expectations. Unfortunately, it is also common for such students to not seek input or assistance
in a timely manner, leading to anxiety and diminished opportunities for a particular grade.
          If at any point you have a concern about your performance in the course, please see me – do not
wait until it becomes too late. I will be happy to provide suggestions on how you might improve your
performance.
Discussion Board
          Along with other features of Canvas, I strongly encourage you to take advantage of the
discussion boards for this course. Postings can relate to class discussions, case issues, exam-related
questions, current events, or any other topics/issues that are relevant to this course (including career-
related matters). I monitor the discussion board periodically, and more frequently approaching case due
dates and exams.
Ground rules for Canvas Discussion:
1. For questions or comments of general interest to the class (i.e., non-personal matters), please
       use a discussion board, not e-mail!
2. Be professional and courteous. Discussion forums of this type are used throughout the business
       world. You do not need to be overly formal, but forums such as this offer a good opportunity to
       practice professional business communication. Please keep in mind that I will read your posts.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                        Page 5


3. Do not be a free rider. If you benefit from reading others’ postings, consider adding your own
insights. Also, reply to inquiries from your fellow students.
4. Even if you have nothing to post, please get in the habit of accessing the discussion board
      frequently, and before each case due date and exam. I will often use Canvas to communicate
      important announcements and clarifications.
5.    I will establish a special forum for each exam and case. To maximize the usefulness of your post,
      please use such forums for case- and exam-related questions.
Canvas downtimes and cases:
          As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well
as unanticipated interruptions of the Canvas system. Notification of these disruptions
will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for
turning in a case late or failing to complete other course requirements. However, if there
is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will make an adjustment if
it occurs close to the due date. As downtimes are often unpredictable, I advise you to
print out case materials as soon as they are available.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
         In general, medical emergencies, family emergencies, university-sponsored conflicts and
religious holidays (see below) are the only valid reasons for missing an examination or the due date
of a case. In all such instances, I require some form of supporting documentation, such as a signed note
from a physician or a University official, and ask that you register your situation with the Office of
Student Emergency Services (OSES) consistent with OSES policies, if possible. At that point I will
decide the best make-up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a make-up exam or
recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed component, depending on the circumstances.
Examinations or assignments that are missed or late for reasons other than such emergencies or
university-sponsored conflicts will generally receive no, or substantially reduced, credit. In the case of a
conflict due to a university-sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of the
conflict and before the examination date or assignment due date.
         Please note that interviews and office visits are not valid reasons for missing an examination
or turning in a case late. If you anticipate a conflict with an exam or case due date (see “Anticipated
Course Schedule” below), I urge you to make alternate arrangements for that activity or event (or
plan to turn in your case early), and to maintain availability throughout the finals period until
confirmation of the day and time of the final exam.
Religious Holidays
          Religious holy days sometime conflict with class and examination schedules. By University
policy, you must notify me of your pending absence prior to the date of observance of a religious holy
day. If you must miss an examination or class in order to observe a religious holy day, appropriate relief
will be provided.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                    Page 6


Policy on Students with Disabilities
         The University strives to accommodate qualified students with disabilities. Students with
disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD), 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. If you are a qualified student with a disability, please see me
to discuss any appropriate accommodations that have been recommended by the SSD office for this
course.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
          All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Electronic Class Roster and Student Privacy
          The University has requested that students be notified of their privacy rights in regard to
electronic class rosters:
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at the
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information
that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail
rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of
the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory
information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar.
Assistance with Case Writing
I encourage you to use the University Writing Center (UWC), located in the Learning
Commons of the Perry Castaneda Library (PCL), to assist you in writing your case
analyses. The UWC offers constructive, expert help with writing, by appointment or on a
drop-in basis (although I suggest you make an appointment and not wait until the “last
minute”). The UWC works with students on both academic and non-academic writing
and their services are not just for writing with “problems.” Getting feedback from an
informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help
students develop strategies to improve their writing. Further, the assistance they provide
is intended to foster independence - each student determines how to use the consultant’s
advice and the consultants are trained to help you in ways that preserve the integrity of
your work.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 7


Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Cases
Policy of the Department of Accounting
         The Department of Accounting has a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA
Program. It is available via the Department website at https://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-
Codes-of-Ethics.
         The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Department's Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By
teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described
in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of
our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You
should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
         Integrity is a public good from which we all benefit and a trait of successful businessmen and
women. I intend to conduct this course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only achieve
this, however, if you maintain absolute ethical integrity in this course. If in doubt, ask me!
Personal Policy on Working Together on Cases (applies only to this course)
         For this course, you may discuss issues related to assigned cases with other students in this class
(but not other persons). You may work in the formative stages of an assignment with others to clarify
issues or exchange ideas. However, the joint or collaborative preparation of case solutions is not
permitted and I expect the final product of each collected assignment to reflect individual thought
and composition. You may not copy or paraphrase from others' draft or final solutions. Examples
intended to clarify this policy follow.
Examples of acceptable collaborative efforts (apply only to this course):
• A student is confused about an ambiguous aspect of a case, and asks another student in the class
      what s/he thinks.
• Students ask questions and share helpful insights in class or on Canvas.
Examples of collaborative efforts that are unacceptable:
• Student A completes a case before student B. B asks A for (or A offers) A's solution. B bases
      his/her solution on A's solution. Both A and B are guilty of scholastic dishonesty.
• A student finds a source relevant to a case and copies extensively from it, without using quotation
      marks, indentation or other references to acknowledge the source. This example constitutes
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 8


     plagiarism, which is a clear case of scholastic dishonesty.
• A student finds or is given a solution to a case, whether online or provided by another source (e.g.,
     a former student in the course), and bases his/her solution, in whole or in part, thereon.
• Any collaboration, breach of security or other cheating on a course examination.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
-- Occupants of buildings on the University campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
-- Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building.
-- Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.
-- In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
-- Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
-- Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
-- Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 9


Anticipated Course Schedule
Assigned chapters are from the text noted above. Chapters initially listed below are from the 2nd
edition, while chapters noted parenthetically thereafter are from the 1st edition. Various other
readings will supplement the text and be added to Canvas modules from time to time.
Please note the concentration of readings following the Midterm Exam and plan accordingly. I
strongly suggest using the time between the July 3 and 8 classes to read ahead and
begin preparations for the Final Exam.
IMPORTANT: Please complete each day's assigned reading before class. The readings provide
     background that is necessary for understanding classroom discussion.
 Date                    Topic                                                  Reading Assignment
 June     10             Course overview                                        Syllabus
                         Introduction to fraud examination                      Chs. 1, 29 (1, 27)
                         Comparison of audits and fraud investigations          Chs. 3, 5 (2, 12)
           11            Comparison of practices, continued
                         Auditor responsibilities regarding fraud               Ch. 4 (5)
                         Independence considerations for the auditor            Ch. 11 (6)
                         and fraud examiner
           12            Independence, continued
           17            No class (compensation for evening exam
                         and forensic software session)
           18            Fraud psychology and characteristics                   Ch. 2 (3)
                         Additional readings:
                         Fraud red flags and detection techniques               Ch. 13 (8)
                         Financial reporting fraud and asset                    Chs. 21, 22, 23 (4,
                         misappropriation schemes                               10, 11)
           19            Bribery and corruption – U.S. FCPA and                 Ch. 26 (no 1st ed.
                         U.K. Bribery Act                                       counterpart)
                         Case 1 due in class
           24            Guest speaker – public corruption
           25            Guest speakers – investigations
                         Midterm Exam (7:00-9:00 p.m.)
           26            Guest speaker                                          WC Complaint
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                               Page 10


 July      1        Guest speaker in class and (tentative)
                    evening session (6:00-9:00) with forensic
                    training software*
                    Case 2 due in class
           2        Commencing an investigation: anonymous Chs. 8, 7, 14 (13, 9,
                    communications; working with investigators; 8)
                    early investigative matters
           3        Guest speaker – interviewing skills         Ch. 16 (18)
           8        Conducting the investigation:               Chs. 10, 19, 20, 18
                    Building a case with evidence; supporting a (17, 22, 24, 23)
                    criminal prosecution; working with legal
                    counsel; reporting on an investigation
                    Case 3 due in class
           9        Privacy issues and investigative challenges Chs. 9, 12 (17, 14)
          10        Ponzi schemes (video)                       Ch. 24 (no 1st ed.
                                                                counterpart)
          12        Final Exam – 7:00-9:00 p.m. (location
                    TBA)
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2019 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                       Page 11
