                                   ARH 301: Introduction to the Visual Arts, Fall 2019
                                        PLEASE NOTE: This is a partially online course!!!!
     See the class Canvas site for more information: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1227403
Professor Information:
Professor: Dr. Ann Johns (she/her/hers), Dept. of Art and Art History (https://art.utexas.edu/about/people/ann-johns)
email: acjohns@austin.utexas.edu (best way to reach me), office phone 471-1936 (worst way to reach me)
In-person Office Hours: DFA 2.520, MWF 11:30-1:00 and by appointment (I have candy! Come see me!)
Teaching Assistant Information:
Lead TA: CZ
         TAs (by unique number/ Museum section time):
         DL: 19375 (T 11-12), 19395 (T 12-1), 19410 (T 1-2), 19425 (T 2-3)
         DA: 19440 (T 3-4), 19455 (T 4-5), 19445 (W 3-4), 19460 (W 4-5)
         OW: 19380 (W 11-12), 19400 (W 12-1), 19415 (W 1-2), 19430 (W 2-3)
         CM: 19385 (Th 11-12), 19405 (Th 12-1), 19420 (Th 1-2), 19435 (Th 2-3)
         MSB: 19450 (Th 3-4), 19465 (Th 4-5), 19370 (F 10-11), 19390 (F 11-12)
To contact the Teaching Assistants, please direct your inquiries to one or more of the following:
1. Email: onlineArh301ta@austin.utexas.edu
2. TA office hours: All In-person TA office hours will be held in DFA (Doty Fine Arts Building) 2.522
3. Piazza: See the Canvas course site for details (menu on left side of screen). This is a more informal site that will be
monitored by the TAs and Dr. Johns, and we highly encourage you to use it!
➔DO NOT CONTACT US VIA CANVAS EMAIL!!! This is a dead zone!
Piazza should be your first choice for communication, followed by the TA email and office hours!
Technical Support:
To contact technical support outside of class, please email: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu
Visual and Performing Arts Credit (VAPA):
This course may be used to fulfill the visual and performing arts component of the university core curriculum and
addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board:
communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and social responsibility.
Global Cultures flag:
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with
cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Course Objectives:
         “I don’t say everything, but I paint everything”             --Pablo Picasso, 1881-1973
         “I prefer drawing to talking. Drawing is faster, and leaves less room for lies”
                                                                                           --Le Corbusier, 1887-1965
         “I found I could say things with color and shapes that I couldn't say any other way…things
                     I had no words for”                                        --Georgia O’Keeffe, 1887-1986
Art is a language: how do we decode its meaning, its intent, and its extraordinary effect on us, the viewers? In this
course, we explore an astonishing array of art and architecture, in both a thematic and chronologic fashion. While we
will concentrate on painting, sculpture, and architecture, we will also be looking at manuscripts, textiles, prints,
photography, the decorative arts, garden planning, ceramics, earthworks, and installation art.
                                                                                1


This vast amount of material is organized, in our online textbook, into both chronological and geographical groupings.
In class, however, we will explore art and architecture thematically. What we aim to do is teach each of you how to
look at art. What should you look for? What kind of questions should you ask? What differences and commonalities
can we see from region to region, era to era? How have art, artists, and viewers dealt with some of humanity’s greatest
joys and challenges, from religion to statecraft to war to our environment? Is the production of art, after all, one of the
things that makes us human?
One of the important advantages of studying art history at the University of Texas is the outstanding collection of art at
UT’s Blanton Museum of Art (http://www.blantonmuseum.org) and other collections across campus. Thus, in addition
to our lecture-based, streaming video classes (Monday and Wednesday, 10-11), you will have the opportunity to
familiarize yourselves with the Blanton’s important collections of art, through weekly visits, group analyses and
written assignments. We will also encourage you to visit other collections on campus, including the superb
photography and rare book collections at the Harry Ransom Center (HRC) (http://www.hrc.utexas.edu/), the Visual
Arts Center (VAC) in the ART building (http://utvac.org/), and UT’s Landmarks Program, with art work sited across
campus (http://landmarks.utexas.edu/).
It is important to note, from the onset, that while we will look at many images of outstandingly beautiful and
famous works of art, we will also be looking at images that you will not find “beautiful”; some of these images
may even offend you. Art confronts war, power, sex, murder, and social injustice, as well as beauty and the divine, so
open minds (and open eyes) are very important in this context. If you are bewildered about WHY we are studying a
particular object, it is often useful to ask yourself “so what?” In other words, why do we even bother, out of all the
objects in the world, to study this particular work? At ANY point, if you are confused about something we are
studying, PLEASE contact one of us via email or office hours. Don’t be disgruntled—get informed!
At all times, you should be considerate and respectful towards your classmates and their opinions, which may
differ from yours. This holds true for live and online discussions and for your group visits to the Blanton Museum of
Art. Much modern and contemporary work is deliberately provocative and/or confrontational. Artists have long known
that it can take something quite shocking to get our attention! At all times in this class, we treat each other with the
utmost courtesy and respect! Also, remember that your online comments through Canvas are NOT anonymous!!!
We also need to consider and borrow from many different disciplines as we analyze these objects; art history is among
the most interdisciplinary fields that you’ll encounter at UT. Throughout this course, our art historical inquiry will take
us into a number of related disciplines, including history, religion, science, engineering, politics, anthropology,
philosophy, and psychology, to name a few.
There are no prerequisites for this course.
Lectures (twice weekly): Live Online Streaming
Students will log onto the course through Canvas for the twice-weekly lectures, which are broadcast live from Mezes
Hall (MEZ) on Monday and Wednesday, 10-10:50 (students may log on to view each pre-class video between 9:45
and 10:00 on Monday and Wednesday). This means that students can log on wherever they’d like (home, the library, a
coffee shop), as long as there is a strong internet connection (http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html [links to an
external site]). However, students must log in and participate at the specific times listed above, as the videos are live
and streaming.
During each class, we will have lectures, announcements, and there will be a quiz or test for most every class.
Students will also have the opportunity to ask questions via Canvas, so it is mandatory that each student log on
during each class and participate.
For each lecture class, we will present three “key” images that will form the basis of our discussion. You will also be
responsible for 1 additional image (“reading” images) per class. We will NOT discuss the reading images in class;
instead, you will be responsible for learning the material about these works from your textbook. We will go over this in
                                                               2


class, and we also discuss this in the first study guide. You will be tested on the Key images in the quizzes, while you
will be tested on BOTH the key AND reading images during the tests (3 tests, one at the end of each section).
The class lectures will be available 12-48 hours later as VOD (video on demand), but students will have missed the
opportunity to participate in the class quizzes and will thus not be able to gain credit for that quiz or test. There are NO
make-up quizzes or tests.
We want you to visit the studio where we’re broadcasting live lectures! The studio is in Mezes (MEZ) 2.200; there
is limited space and access is restricted. We will be scheduling studio visits by section/unique number; look for a
Piazza notification for your section’s studio day. You will receive ONE EXTRA CREDIT POINT (added to your
total) if you visit the studio ON THE DAY ASSIGNED TO YOU BY UNIQUE NUMBER!!! (See the calendar at
the end of the syllabus for details).
➔Students requiring special in-room accommodations should contact their instructor and TA ASAP (with the
appropriate paperwork), and if needed, Services for Students with Disabilities.
Course Canvas Format:
          1. CLASS CANVAS WEBSITE: to get everything associated with the class, go to:
          https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1264633. You will need your UT eid and password.
          2. Class Homepage. The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the technical requirements and the
          stream webpage, the live video stream of the lecture, information regarding technical questions, as well as
          contact information for the professor and teaching assistants. On the left-hand side of each page of the Canvas
          course site are navigation tabs to all parts of the website, including the syllabus.
          3. Video Stream. The Video Stream is the page on which you will find the live streaming video for the course.
          The Video Stream will also display the outline for the current lecture, links to live quizzes and tests, and other
          participation activities.
          4. Modules. The Modules page includes information about the Reading Assignments and links to the Lecture
          video archives, related websites and other course documents. We will also include the powerpoint for each
          video, as many students prefer to take notes in the space below each powerpoint slide.
          5. Pre-class video. We have created videos for the 15-minute, pre-class log-on period. These are a mix of
          serious topics (images of related art with period music) along with pop culture references to art (the Simpsons,
          Monte Python, etc.) These are entirely optional, but we hope you will enjoy them!
          6. Other pages. On the homepage, you will find a listing of other important course pages, including the FAQ
          page.
Blanton Museum of Art meetings (9 times during the semester):
Many weeks, students will be responsible for visiting the Blanton Museum of Art (Speedway at MLK,
http://www.blantonmuseum.org/) on a Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, or Friday (according to your unique number;
check your course schedule). At this time, students and their TA will apply the material and concepts learned from
online lectures and the readings to various activities. Students will be asked to address questions and issues that will
challenge them to look carefully at art objects and build their visual literacy. This is a critical component of the class,
as students gain the experience of viewing actual collections and works of art. Also, all VAPA classes must contain
group work, so you will get a chance to meet and work with your colleagues during your time at the Blanton.
Students must visit the Blanton during the time allotted to them by the registrar (by unique number); students
cannot just show up whenever they’d like. Check your unique number on your course schedule from the registrar: it
will list the twice-a-week lecture times AND an additional hour at BMA B2.102 (the Blanton). We will give you
much more information on this process at the beginning of the semester. TAs will take attendance and group work will
be a key component of these visits. In the week before each in-class test, students will not meet at the Blanton; instead,
we will create VOD or video on demand review sessions on the Fridays before the three tests. Students are also highly
encouraged to visit Dr. Johns and the TAs in real office hours.
                                                                3


These visits to the Blanton (and other collections) are mandatory. There are 9 visits scheduled. Students will be
graded on attendance, participation, preparation, and attitude. Your TA will more thoroughly review the grading
specifics when you meet in September, in person, at the Blanton.
Please note that you will lose partial credit of your attendance/participation grade if you are substantially late.
What do you need for the museum visits?
You will need to bring your UT ID to scan in at the Blanton front desk, and possibly a small notebook and a pencil
(pens are not allowed in the galleries).
You CANNOT substitute sessions. You MUST attend during your allotted time!
Required Internet-enabled device, lectures:
All students must be connected to the class via Canvas every day during class using an Internet-connected computer or
laptop. Most recent desktop and laptop computers are supported, but tablets and phones may not be. Be sure to test
your device using the following link: http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html .
Students living on campus and using UT-proved Internet service (restricted.utexas.edu wireless network) should be
aware of their bandwidth package. We recommend Tier 2 of bandwidth for this course. It is your responsibility to
ensure that you have adequate network bandwidth for this course.
View bandwidth tiers here: https://management.pna.utexas.edu/faqs/tiered.html.
Outside of class work, required Textbooks and Readings:
As with any class, there will be additional out-of-class assignments, such as reading the textbook, studying, and
writing short responses and a few longer response papers. See below for information about textbooks.
We will be using Marilyn Stokstad and Michael W. Cothren’s Art: A Brief History, 7th edition, the online version. You
can order this through the Coop; your purchase will give you a Revel code and access to the textbook. You will be
responsible for all reading material on quizzes and tests, even if we haven’t covered it in class (although, clearly, the
more important issues WILL be covered in class). Please read with a critical eye and ask lots of questions!! Feel free to
bring up textbook questions in class or in office hours. No textbook is infallible (although this one is good enough).
Please note that there is a useful glossary and bibliography at the end of your textbook. Also, you have almost
unlimited electronic resources through UT’s Libraries and you pay for these resources through your fees and tuition! A
particularly reliable resource is Oxford Art Online, which you need to access through UT Direct
(https://login.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/login?qurl=http%3a%2f%2fwww.oxfordartonline.com%2f).
Do not rely on Wikipedia or Google for information! Students can get themselves into deep trouble (= bad grade)
by relying on inaccurate or outdated information on the internet! Use your textbook and class notes!
If you are an art history major, art history minor, or interested in improving your art historical writing, you may find it
useful to consult Sylvan Barnet’s A Short Guide to Writing about Art (at the Coop or other bookstores, or in the Fine
Arts Library Reference section, N 7476 B37 1993) or Henry Sayre’s Writing about Art.
Class Communication and Etiquette:
          Announcements: Outside of the video lectures, any class communication initiated by your professor and
          teaching assistants will be conducted via the Announcements page on our course website, so please make sure
          to check the Announcements page on a daily basis. Please note that we will NOT check Canvas email; please
          use: onlineArh301ta@austin.utexas.edu or Piazza.
          Outside of Class Discussion: This course uses a discussion board tool called Piazza that’s built directly into
          your Canvas course. Here, students can submit questions related to the content of the course that other students
          might benefit from seeing. Students are encouraged to answer each other’s questions and your professor and
          TAs will regularly “endorse” good submissions.
                                                               4


         Private Communication: Students who wish to contact Dr. Johns are encouraged to visit during office hours
         in person rather than by email. If students wish to contact teaching assistants, they may do so either in person
         during office hours or via the email address onlineArh301ta@austin.utexas.edu; please state the name of
         your TA in the subject line of the email.
         In-class Questions: Students will have the opportunity to ask questions during lecture through the “Ask a
         Professor” Button on the Dashboard.
         Class Etiquette:
         1. ***Treat ALL TAs with the courtesy and respect that you would use with a professor.
         2. Be polite and considerate at all times on Canvas and Piazza—your postings are NOT anonymous (to us;
         they can be to your classmates)!
         3. ***When you send an email to me or to a TA, please use a salutation (Dear Dr. Johns, Hi Prof. Johns, or
         just Dr. Johns, but NEVER Mrs./Ms Johns. Also, use something similarly polite for the TAs) and a closing
         with your name. This is probably the most important thing you’ll learn in this class, because the work world
         uses email! For more information, see: http://www.inc.com/guides/2010/06/email-etiquette.html. I will not
         answer improperly formatted emails! And I encourage the TAs to follow my example!
         4. Check your Canvas Announcements regularly for messages from your professor and TAs. If you miss some
         important piece of news that was conveyed via Canvas Announcements, you will be sorry! We will also make
         announcements at both the beginning and end of the televised lectures.
Class resources:
Many resources will be posted on Canvas, including study guides for each portion of the class (3 in total) and other
resources. The study guides will include things like key images, key vocabulary, etc. In addition, the powerpoints for
each lecture will be posted shortly before each class on Canvas. In addition, we will post other useful websites and
resources.
 All of the images for which you will be responsible can be found on UT’s DASe database:
https://dase.laits.utexas.edu. The images are divided into 3collections, one for each test. Detailed instructions about
DASe are posted on the course Canvas site. You can download these images and use them for studying. Please note
that the data on DASe, the data in the book, and the data on your study guides may not always be the same; in that
case, please use the information on your study guides.
Studying strategies:
It is VERY important that you keep up with both the reading and lecture classes. To help you organize your reading
and studying, we have posted study guides on Canvas. You must begin organizing your notes (class and reading), of
course, like any other class and not wait until the day before each test. But more importantly, YOU need to create your
own “image banks” of the Key and Reading images. Experience has proven that you CANNOT absorb all of these
images in 1 (or 2 or 3) night. ALL of us need some time to accumulate our “image banks”, so start early. Make flash
cards. Make powerpoints. Look at your book. Consult your notes. Look at the images on DASE. Form study groups.
Ask US questions! Learning to look at art and architecture is a skill, just like learning a language or mastering calculus.
For some of you, this material will all come easily; for others, it will be a struggle. Start your studies early on.
If you use Quizlet, use your OWN notes. This is the most frequent way in which students fail an exam and get
reported to Student Judicial Services (see below), and it’s also the most frequent way that students just plain-old get a
bad grade, because they’re copying someone else’s highly flawed analysis of a work of art. We can tell if you’re using
someone else’s Quizlet notes! It isn’t hard to figure this out! Sometimes one person will get the cards started, with just
the information on the study guide. That is fine, but there is nothing as useful as making your own cards and ordering
the information on these works of art in your own way.
Also, we’ve recorded interviews with some art history majors, and they have many useful suggestions. These
interviews are posted on Canvas. If you don’t believe us about study tips, hopefully you’ll believe your peers!
Remember that there will be material in the book that we will not have time to cover in class for which you are
nonetheless responsible, so it is important to keep up with the reading. Students will be responsible for the “reading”
images for each of the 3 tests, at the end of each section. Again, consult the study guides.
                                                              5


Please feel free to email us if you have any questions, but students should also plan on visiting us in office hours.
Please see page 1 for faculty and TA office hours. I urge all of you to avail yourselves of our time and advice.
There is a very high correlation between following these study strategies and receiving a good grade. We will review
studying strategies on Sept. 4.
Grading Breakdown:
        Tests (55%): There will be THREE in class, non-cumulative tests in this course: Test 1 = 15%; Tests 2 and
        3 = 20% each. This progression allows students to gain familiarity with the format and not be penalized. You
        will have the entire class period (50 minutes) for each test. We will administer these essay and short answer
        tests through Canvas, and students will be tested on both key images AND reading images. We will review this
        testing format, along with studying strategies, during our lecture-based class on Wednesday, Sept. 11th.
           Blanton visits (30%): You have 9 museum visits; there are no makeups. Your grade for each visit will
           include attendance, participation, discussion, attitude, and group work. Your TA will go over this with
           more specificity in September when you meet at the Blanton.
            In-class quizzes (15%): We have 23 in-class quizzes at 1% each; we will drop the lowest 8 grades
            for 15 % of your total grade. These will be short, 4-5-minute multiple-choice quizzes, and we will
            administer them at various points during the scheduled class times.
          You may use your notes to “fact-check”, but you may NOT use the internet, the textbook, or take the
         tests or quizzes in groups. You may, of course, study in groups. Please see the section, below, on cheating
         and academic honesty.
                                              IMPORTANT: PLEASE READ
1. There will be no final, comprehensive exam, and therefore WE DO NOT MEET DURING THE WEEKS OF
FINAL EXAMS.
2. THERE WILL BE NO MAKE-UP TESTS unless you have an EXTREMELY SERIOUS, DOCUMENTED
EXCUSE, in which case you will write a makeup paper.
3. THERE WILL BE NO MAKE-UP QUIZZES and no MAKE-UP MUSEUM ASSIGNMENTS.
4. ….AND NO INCOMPLETES WILL BE GIVEN IN THIS COURSE.
Any grading issues need to be resolved by the student and the professor and/or TA NO LATER THAN
Monday, Dec. 2nd (and preferably MUCH earlier). This means YOU are responsible for checking your grades on
Canvas. If we have inadvertently left out a grade or entered an incorrect grade, please notify us early on.
         We will use the +/- system of grading, which is as follows:
A (4.00) = 93-100; A- (3.67) = 90-93; B+ (3.33) = 87-89; B (3.00) = 84-86; B- (2.67) = 80-83;
C+ (2.33) = 77-79; C (2.00) = 74-76; C- (1.67) = 70-73; D+ (1.33) = 67-69; D (1.00) = 64-66;
D- (0.67) = 60-63; F (0.00) = 0-59
                                                      IMPORTANT:
         Please note that Canvas adds up your grades mathematically. We, however, look at other issues—has
your work improved dramatically over the course of the semester, were you a stellar online and/or Blanton
                                                               6


contributor, etc. Also, we reserve the right to round up or down, depending on your attendance, attitude,
improvement, etc. Remember, grades are not “negotiable”. They are earned.
Attendance:
We do not take attendance per se; instead, your attendance will be checked on the basis of daily class quizzes and
assignments finished at the Blanton Museum of Art, as well as periodic questionnaires. Remember: if you are not
“attending” class by viewing it live (MW 10-11), you will not be able to complete the assignment or quiz.
Serious illness (colds and allergies, for example, are not serious, especially when you can watch the class in bed!), or
true family crises are, of course, perfectly valid reasons for missing a class or Blanton visit, but they must be
documented.
Bad attendance is one of the easiest ways to get a bad grade or review, in any class or job. Log on, listen, do the work,
and don’t waste your (or your parents’) tuition dollars!!!
Religious Holy Days:
It is university policy that you must notify us of a pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of
a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, assignment, examination or in-class project in order to observe, we will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Academic Honesty:
By taking this class, you agree to abide by the University of Texas regulations concerning cheating. During the weekly
quizzes, you cannot receive help from any unauthorized source. For your written assignments, all submitted materials
must be original and done by you. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact the TAs or professor.
Fact checking versus cheating during quizzes and tests: The quizzes and tests are not open-book exams, but you
can check your notes. However, you are not allowed to consult other people or the internet during a quiz or test.
Caution: we have devised ***VERY*** sophisticated computer methods to catch cheaters; you will receive an F for
the entire course if we catch you cheating. Please note the following:
         Though this class is taking place online, the professor reserves the right to require a student to complete
         any assessment in person or through a proctoring service in order to ensure the academic integrity of this
         class.
Cheating and plagiarism, both deliberate and inadvertent, has become an even greater problem in the age of the
Internet (you might be interested in this recent New York Times article about plagiarism:
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/08/02/education/02cheat.html?_r=1). It is a particular problem for new students, who
may be unclear on citations for academic writing. You will not be required to do research for this class, but if you
decide to use someone else’s information and/or thoughts, you MUST cite it, whether the information is from print
media or the Internet. Please remember that the ease with which you can find sources on the Internet is equaled by the
ease with which we, too, can find those specific sources; in other words, we can find Wikipedia, too! So CITE YOUR
REFERENCES AND WRITE YOUR OWN THOUGHTS!!! We will review this policy prior to any written
assignments.
Any type of cheating, plagiarism, collusion, etc., is grounds for an immediate “F” in the course; a second
cheating offense often means expulsion from the University. Besides being, ultimately, harmful to the student who
cheats, it is extremely unfair to fellow students, and it is time-consuming and disheartening for the professor and TAs.
I attempt to create courses in which students neither want to nor can cheat. For more on the UT Honor Code (or
statement of ethics) and an explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism,
see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php.
Information and data security:
All tests, quizzes, writing assignments, and online interactions over the TOWER system will be saved and stored. All
information will be kept for educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with other
                                                                7


researchers will involve de-identifying the date, including the removal of names, UT eids, email addresses, or other
information. To further ensure that your information is secure, please do not include identifying information in your
online interactions with others.
Documented Student Disability:
The University provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities.
Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-232-2937 (video phone).
➔IMPORTANT: please inform me privately, several weeks in advance of any exam, if you have the official
University paperwork, and we will accommodate your special needs.
We cannot give you ANY special accommodations without the OFFICIAL UT Paperwork!!!!
Other Resources Available:
The University has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning:
     • The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
     • Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     • Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     • Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
     • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Emergency Evacuation Policy: (when you visit our studios and the Blanton)
Occupants of buildings on campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door
         may not be the one you used when you entered the building
     • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors
     • Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the University
         Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
Behavior Concerns Advice Line:
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center, the Employee Assistance
Program, and The University of Texas Police Department. Call 512-232-5050 or visit https://www.utexas.edu/campus-
life/safety-and-security.
Illegal Use of Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments are
copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may
result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the
specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of
academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading
class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
GRADING RECAP:
         1. Three in-class, non-cumulative tests: 15% (Test 1), 20% (Tests 2 and 3) for 55%
         2. Group and Individual work during the Blanton visits = 30%
         3. In-class quizzes: 1 x 15 = 15% (Top 15 grades out of 23 quizzes)
         4. There are no make-up exams, quizzes, or assignments!
                                                             8


               CALENDAR OF READINGS, ASSIGNMENTS, AND EXAMS 
              (Subject to Change!!! It is YOUR responsibility to check Piazza for updates!)
             (NOTE: The readings should be completed by the date under which they are listed)
Aug. 28 W:  CLASS 1: Syllabus and Class structure review and What is Art?
            Reading: this syllabus
        NO Museum Visits This Week!
Sept. 4 W:  PART I: Introduction to the Language of Art: The Ancient and Medieval World
            CLASS 2: The Language of Art and Architecture (Ancient Egypt) and How to Read your
                       Textbook Efficiently and Effectively
            Practice Quiz (Syllabus questions)
            Reading: Starter Kit (under “Welcome”), Introduction, Chap. 3 (Ancient Egypt)
            ALSO: Watch video on plagiarism 101
        NO Museum Visits This Week (week of Sept. 2 [Labor Day Holiday])!
 9 M:       CLASS 3: How to look at Sculpture: Subtractive Methods of Sculpting and Blanton assignments
            Quiz #1
            Reading: Sumer and Babylon (Chap. 2), Rise of Buddhism (Chap. 4), The Archaic Period (Chap. 5)
11 W:       CLASS 4: How to look at Sculpture: Additive Methods of Sculpting and the Test Format
            Quiz #2
            Reading: Early Classical Period (Chap. 5), Intro to Chap. 4, Etruscan Tombs (Chap. 6), Royal
                     Tombs/Ur (Chap. 2)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #1: Unique number 19370 (MSB)
                                Blanton Museum Visit One (week of Sept. 9-13):
             Visit the Blanton during the time assigned to you by the registrar/unique number
                  on your registration—no substitutions allowed; meet your TA and group
16 M:       CLASS 5: How to look at Architecture: Religious Architecture in the Ancient World
            Quiz #3
            Reading: Rise of Buddhism, Japan (Chap. 4), “High” Classical Period (Chap. 5), Pantheon (Chap. 6)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #2: Unique number 19375 (DL)
18 W:       CLASS 6: How to look at Architecture: State Architecture in the Ancient World
            Quiz #4
                                                      9


            Reading: Neo-Babylonians (Chap. 2), Hellenistic Art (Chap. 5), The Late Empire (Chap. 6),
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #3: Unique number 19380 (OW)
                               Blanton Museum Visit Two (week of Sept. 16-20)
23 M:       CLASS 7: How to look at Mosaics and glass in the Medieval world
            Quiz #5
            Reading: Intro, San Vitale (Chap. 7), Early Islamic Art (Chap. 8), Gothic Art in France (Chap. 11)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #4: Unique number 19385 (CM)
25 W:       CLASS 8: How to look at Manuscripts and Illustrated Books
            Quiz #6
            Reading: Early Islamic Art (Chap. 8), Intro, Tenth-Century Art of Spain (Chap. 10), India and
                     Southeast Asia (Chap. 9)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #5: Unique number 19390 (MSB)
      Test #1 review: available as VOD by Friday (Sept. 27) afternoon (no museum visits)
30 M:       CLASS 9: Test #1
2 W:        PART II: Materiality and Viewership in the Medieval and Early Modern World
            CLASS 10: How to look at small-scale works in metal, ivory, and porcelain
            Quiz #7
            Reading: The British Isles and Scandinavia (Chap. 10), China and Korea (Chap. 9), Luxury Arts
                     (Chap. 8), Art in Context: The Burden of Colonialism (Chap. 16)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #6: Unique number 19395 (DL)
                            Blanton Museum Visit Three (week of Sept. 30-Oct. 4)
7 M:        CLASS 11: How to look at textiles: embroidery, tapestries, and other woven materials
            Quiz #8
            Reading: Manuscripts, Textiles (Chap. 10), Northern Renaissance (Chap. 12), Luxury Arts (Chap. 8),
                     South America: The Central Andres (Chap. 15)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #7: Unique number 19400 (OW)
9 W:        CLASS 12: How to look at painting: wall and ceiling painting
            Quiz #9
            Reading: Italian Renaissance Art in Florence (Chap. 12), Italian Art of the High Renaissance
                     (Chap. 13), Japan (Chap. 9), Rome (Chap. 14)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #8: Unique number 19405 (CM)
                             Blanton Museum Visit Four (week of Oct. 7-11)
14 M:       CLASS 13: How to look at painting: paintings on panel and canvas
            Quiz #10
            Reading: Late Medieval Art in Italy (Chap. 11), Netherlandish Art, Mannerism (Chap. 13), Rome
                     (Chap. 14)
            MEZES 2.20 studio visit #9: Unique number 19410 (DL)
16 W:       CLASS 14: How to look at prints: woodcuts, engravings, and etchings
                                                      10


             Quiz #11
             Reading: German Art (Chap.13), The Dutch Republic (Chap. 14), Japan (Chap. 9), The Graphic Arts
                      (Chap. 12)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #10: Unique number 19415 (OW)
                               Blanton Museum Visit Five (week of Oct. 14-18)
21 M:        CLASS 15: Art and Landscape
             Quiz #12
             Reading: Venice (Chap. 12), Romantic Landscape Painting (Chap. 17), North America (Chap. 15),
                      Netherlandish and Spanish Art (Chap. 13)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #11: Unique number 19420 (CM)
 23 W:       CLASS 16: Art and Portraiture
             Quiz #13
             Reading: High Renaissance Intro (Chap. 13), Nigeria (Chap. 16), The Dutch Republic (Chap. 14),
                      Early Renaissance Art Intro (Chap. 12)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #12: Unique number 19425 (DL)
                             Blanton Museum Visit Six (week of Oct. 21-25)
28 M:        CLASS 17: Art and Ritual
             Quiz #14
             Reading: Republic of the Congo, Democratic Republic of the Congo, and Angola (Chap. 16), The
                      Aztecs, Hamatsa Masks (Chap. 15) Rome (Chap. 14),
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #13: Unique number 19430 (OW)
30 W:        CLASS 18: Art and War
             Quiz #15
             Reading: Italian Renaissance Art in Florence (Chap. 12), Romantic Painting in France and Spain
                      (Chap. 17), Early Photography (Chap 18), The Eastern Woodlands/Great Plains (Chap. 15)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #14: Unique number 19435 (CM)
       Test #2 review: available as VOD by Friday (Nov. 1) afternoon (no museum visits)
Nov. 4 M:    CLASS 19: Test #2
6 W:         PART IV: Themes in Global Modern and Postmodern Art
             CLASS 20: Art, the psyche, and interiority
             Quiz #16
             Reading: Post-Impressionism (Chap. 18). Surrealism and Early Modernism in Europe (Chap. 19),
                      Romanticism (Chap. 17)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #15: Unique number 19440 (DA)
                           Blanton Museum Visit Seven (week of Nov. 4-8)
11 M:        CLASS 21: Art and Science
             Quiz #17
             Reading: Realism (Chap. 18), Intro and European Art Between the Wars (Chap. 19), Moralizing
                      Narratives and Portraits (Chap. 17)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #16: Unique number 19445 (DA)
                                                       11


13 W:        CLASS 22: Art and Popular Culture
             Quiz #18
             Reading: Impressionism and Post-Impressionism (Chap. 18), After Abstract Expressionism, Pop Art,
                      and Postmodernism (Chap. 20)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #17: Unique number 19450 (MSB)
                           Blanton Museum Visit Eight (week of Nov. 11-15)
18 M:        CLASS 23: Art and Gender
             Quiz #19
             Reading: Impressionism (Chap. 18), Surrealism (Chap. 19), Feminist Art (Chap. 20)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #18: Unique number 19455 (DA)
20 W:        CLASS 24: Art, Colonialism, and “Primitivism”
             Quiz #20
             Reading: Orientalism, Post-Impressionism (Chap. 18), Neoclassical Painting in France (Chap. 17)
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #19: Unique number 19460 (DA)
                             Blanton Museum Visit Nine (week of Nov. 18-22
25 M:         CLASS 25: Art and Race
             Reading: Mexico (Chap. 19), Late Modernism and Postmodernism (Chap. 20)
             Quiz #21
             MEZES 2.20 studio visit #20: Unique number 19465 (MSB)
27 W:        Thanksgiving Holidays
Dec. 2 M:    CLASS 26: Art, Humanity, and the Environment
             Quiz #22
             Reading: Romantic Landscape Painting (Chap. 17), Architecture (Chap. 19), Earthwork and Site-
                      Specific Art and the New Formalism (Chap. 20)
4 W:         CLASS 27: Art, Censorship, and the Public; Class Evaluations
             Quiz #23
             Reading: Dada (Chap. 19), Intro, Public Funding of the Arts, Postwar Architecture (Chap. 20)
       Test #3 review: available as VOD by Friday (Nov. 1) afternoon (no museum visits)
9 M:         CLASS 28: Test #3
                                                      12
