                                   ANS 361 / AAS 325
          Political Economy of Development in Postwar Korea
Spring 2019, ANS 361, AAS 325
Instructor: Professor Youjeong Oh, youjeong@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesdays 12-2pm
Course Website: Canvas ANS 361
Course Description
This course will explore the political economy of South Korean development during the
postwar period. The purpose of this course is to develop critical understanding of history,
society, and culture of South Korea. By reading texts about compressed modernity,
developmental state, social movements, gender politics, financial crisis and its aftermath,
this course will address the tensions between industrialization, nationalism,
authoritarianism, and democracy in South Korea. At the same time, we will contemplate
contemporary South Korea in the global context by exploring such topics as Cold War
geopolitics, transnational migration, transnational adoption, the globalization of Korean
popular culture, and K-pop tourism. It is a reading- and discussion-extensive course.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Requirements
    1. Class attendance (10%). Class attendance is mandatory and will be checked
       regularly including the add/drop period. Students are allowed one absence. For
       each unexcused absence after that, your final grade will be lowered by 2 points, up
       to maximum 10 points. The only exception to this policy is your health condition. In
       order to be excused from absence due to health problem, you must bring in a note
       from your doctor. Except the health problem, any prior-notices of your absence
       cannot make it excused. If you come to class 10 minutes late or leave the classroom
       earlier, it will be considered as tardiness; three occasions will be regarded as a full
       absence.
    2. Reading and Class participation (10%). Students are required to come to class
       having already done the reading for the day. All readings are posted on Canvas
       under Files. This is the minimum required of you to be in the class. All students are
       expected to contribute to class discussion in a positive, relevant and respectful way.
    3. Discussion questions (15%). Students pick three readings and post discussion
       questions about the selected readings by 8am on each class day on Canvas under
       Discussions. Posting should have a paragraph-length writing consisting of some
                                                                                                1


          brief summarizations of author’s argument (or other critical points) and your
          question(s) about the author’s points. Please sign-up for three preferred readings on
          Canvas under Discussions. Each posting counts for 5%.
    4. Review Paper (10%). Read Lewis, Linda S. (2002). Laying Claim to the Memory of
          May: A Look Back at the 1980 Kwangju Uprising. University of Hawaii Press. pp.3-71.
          Students are expected to write a review of this book. The discussion questions will
          be provided. A hardcopy of typed review paper (2-3 single-space pages) should
          be submitted no later than February 19th (Tuesday) 9:30 am.
    5. Group Project (25%). Students (in a group) are required to complete a qualitative
          and analytical project on any topics about Korea; your project should contain critical
          analyses of the selected topics.
          1) Each group needs to submit two (single-space) page prospectus to describe
              what topic(s) you will explore, what types of research method you will employ,
              what sorts of data you need to collect, and the preliminary and expected
              findings, by Feb. 26th.
          2) Each group should meet with the instructor at least once before the final
              presentation to discuss the research topics and analytical frameworks.
          3) Students will make class presentation in Week 12 and Week 13 about the final
              findings of their projects. Presentations should include research question(s),
              analytical frameworks, key findings, argument(s), and implication(s).
          4) Each group needs to submit the final project materials by May 9th.
    6. Take-home final exam (30%). Essay questions based on the assigned readings and
          class discussions. A hardcopy of typed final paper should be submitted no later
          than May 9th (Thursday) 9:30am. The final exam questions will be given three
          weeks before the due date. Late or emailed papers will be accepted, but it will lower
          your grade by 10 points respectively.
Grading Policy
In order to pass this class, students should fulfill and submit all requirements.
Grades are assigned as follows: 93-100 = A; 90-92.5 = A-; 86-89.5 = B+; 82-85.5 = B; 79-
81.5= B-; 76-78.5= C+; 72-75.5 = C; 69-71.5 = C-; 65-68.5 = D+; 60-64.5 = D; below 60 = F.
Not curved, no round up.
Academic Dishonesty
Cheating and plagiarism are serious offences and will not be tolerated. Plagiarism is
representing someone else’s work as your own. This includes handing in another student’s
paper, and it includes using the words and/or ideas from a publication, the web or other
source without citation. Always cite your sources (in whatever format). Please refer to this
site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php.
University Notices and Policies
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
                                                                                                                    2


email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your
disability from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester
(within first two weeks), so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before
an exam, you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order
to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may
not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Weekly Topics and Readings
(subject to change at the discretion of the instructor).
Week 1 Introduction
     Jan. 22. Introduction to class themes and requirements.
     Jan. 24. Korean Developmental State
Readings:
Castells, Manuel. (1992). “Four Tigers with a dragon head: A comparative analysis of the
   state, economy, and society.” Pp.33-70 in the Asian Pacific Rim, in Henderson, Jeffrey and
   Richard Appelbaum eds., States and Development in the Pacific Rim. Sage Publication.
Week 2 Vietnam War and South Korean Industrialization
     Jan. 29. The Growth of Chaebol
Readings:
Glassman, Jim and Young-Jin Choi. (2014). “The chaebol and the US military–industrial
complex: Cold War geopolitical economy and South Korean industrialization.” Environment
and Planning A 46: 1160-1180.
     Jan. 31. Military Conscription and the Economic Growth
                                                                                                                        3


Readings:
Lee, Jin-Kyung. (2010). Service Economies: Militarism, Sex Work, and Migrant Labor in South
Korea. Minnesota University Press. (Chapter 1. p. 37-48, 64-67, 70-77.)
Week 3 Korean Workers
    Feb. 5. Film: Ch’ǒn Tae-il: A Single Spark (1995)
    Feb. 7. Korean Workers
Readings:
Koo, Hagen. (2001). Korean Workers: The Culture and Politics of Class Formation. Ithaca, NY:
  Cornell University Press. (Read Chapter 3).
Week 4     Gendered Modernity I
   Feb. 12. Developmentalism and Gendered Citizenship
Readings:
Moon, Seungsook. (2005). Militarized Modernity and Gendered Citizenship in South Korea,
  Durham: Duke University Press. (Read Chapter 1).
   Feb. 14. Gendered Consumption Discourses in Korea
Readings:
Nelson, Laura. (2000). Measured Excess: Status, Gender, and Consumer Nationalism in South
  Korea. Columbia University Press. (Read Chapter 1 and 4 selected pages).
Week 5 Social Movements
    Feb. 19. The Gwangju Democratic Uprising
* Review Paper Due
Readings:
Lewis, Linda S. (2002). Laying Claim to the Memory of May: A Look Back at the 1980
Kwangju Uprising. University of Hawaii Press. pp.3-71.
    Feb. 21. Minjung Movement
Readings:
Koo, Hagen. (1993). “The State, Minjung and the Working Class in South Korea.” In Hagen
  Koo eds., State and Society in Contemporary Korea. Cornell University Press.
Week 6      IMF Crisis I: Financial Speculation
    Feb. 26. Globalization and Financial Speculation
* Research Prospectus Due
Film: The Crash (Originally presented on the PBS series Frontline, June 29, 1999.)
   Feb. 28. Korean Financial Crisis
Readings:
                                                                                           4


Chang, Ha-Joon. (1998). “Korea: The misunderstood crisis.” World Development, Vol. 26.
Issue. 8. pp. 1555-1561.
“Who sank, or swam, in choppy currents of a world cash ocean,” and three other articles by
  N. Kristof, E. Wyatt, D. Sanger, and S. WuDunn, The New York Times, Feb. 15,16,17,18,
  1999.
Week 7 IMF Crisis II: Post-IMF Korean Society
   Mar. 5. Flexible Labor
Readings:
Song, Jesook. (2007). “‘Venture Companies,’ ‘Flexible Labor,’ and the ‘New Intellectual’: The
Neoliberal Construction of Underemployed Youth in South Korea.” Journal of Youth Studies
10 (3): 331-351.
    Mar. 7. Living on Your Own
Readings:
Song, Jesook. (2010). “‘A room of one's own’: the meaning of spatial autonomy
for unmarried women in neoliberal South Korea.” Gender, Place & Culture 17 (2): 131-149.
Week 8 The Internet and Youth Activism
    Mar. 12. The Birth of the Internet Youth Protest
Kang, Jiyeon. (2018). Igniting the Internet: Youth and Activism in Postauthoritarian South
Korea. University of Hawaii Press. (Read Chapter 1 and 2.)
    Mar. 14. The 2008 “Mad Cow”
Readings:
Kang, Jiyeon. (2018). Igniting the Internet: Youth and Activism in Postauthoritarian South
Korea. University of Hawaii Press. (Read Chapter 5.)
Week 9 Spring Break
Week 10 Transnational Adoption
    Mar. 26. Industrial Adoption Complex.
Readings:
McKee, Kimberly. (2016). “Monetary Flows and the Movements of Children: The
Transnational Adoption Industrial Complex.” Journal of Korean Studies 21(1): 137-178.
    Mar. 28. Korean Adoptees
Readings:
Kim, Eleana. (2012). Human Capital: Transnational Korean Adoptees and the Neoliberal
Logic of Return. The Journal of Korean Studies 17(2): 299-328.
                                                                                            5


Week 11 Migration and Global Flows
    Apr. 2. Migration and the Politics of Difference
Film: Documentary “Lost Baggage (2008)”
    Apr. 4. Migration and Contested Citizenship
Readings:
Freeman, Caren. (2011). Making and Faking Kinship: Marriage and Labor Migration between
  China and South Korea. Cornell University Press. (Mandatory: Chapter 1 Optional: Chapter
  4 and 5).
Week 12 Research Development
    Apr. 9. Group Presentations
    Apr. 11. Group Presentations
Week 13 Research Development
    Apr. 16. Group Presentations
    Apr. 18. Group Presentations
Week 14 Global Aspirations
    Apr. 23. Making Chinatowns in Korea
Readings:
Eom, Sujin. (forthcoming). “The Idea of Chinatown: Rethinking Cities from the Periphery.”
    Apr. 25. Pyeongtaek Rising
Readings:
Martin, Bridget. (2018). “FROM CAMP TOWN TO INTERNATIONAL CITY: US Military Base
Expansion and Local Development in Pyeongtaek, South Korea.” International Journal of
Urban and Regional Research.
Week 15 K-Pop and K-Beauty
    Apr. 30. K-Pop Tourism to Gangnam
Readings:
Oh, Youjeong. (2018). Pop City: Korean Popular Culture and the Selling of Place. Cornell
University Press. (Read Chapter 4.)
    May. 2. K-Beauty Tourism to Myeong-dong
Readings:
Oh, Youjeong. (2018). Pop City: Korean Popular Culture and the Selling of Place. Cornell
University Press. (Read Chapter 5.)
                                                                                          6


Week 16 Compressed Modernity
    May. 7. Compressed Modernity of Korea
Readings:
Chang, Kyung-sup. (1999). “Compressed modernity and its discontents: South Korean
society in transition.” Economy and Society 28 (1): 30-55.
    May. 9. Wrap-up Discussions and Final Review
* Final Exam Due
                                                                                  7
