                                 The University of Texas at Austin
           Department of Civil, Architectural, and Environmental Engineering
            ARE s358 – Cost Estimating in Building Construction – Summer
                                           2019 SYLLABUS
                            Unique No. 75775 TWTh – 4:00-7:00 ECJ 1.322
INSTRUCTOR:               Dr. Kirby A. Kuntz
                          Office Hours: TTh 3:00 – 4:00 or by appointment
                          kkuntz@henselphelps.com
GRADER:                   Euijin (EJ) Yang
                          Office Hours: ________ or by appointment
                          Yangej77@utexas.edu
WEB PAGE:                 You will find the online materials for this course at the Canvas web site at:
                          canvas.utexas.edu
COURSE CATALOG DESCRIPTION: Building construction quantity surveying from plans and
specifications, unit prices, lump sum estimates, job sites, overhead, general overhead, and bidding
procedures.
PREREQUISITE: Architectural Engineering 335 or Instructor’s Consent. Experience reading
construction blueprints is recommended.
COURSE OVERVIEW: Overall project success and contractor profitability begins with accurate
estimates. The estimator is therefore one of the most important people in a contractor’s organization. In this
course students will become acquainted with the principles and practices of Building Construction Cost
Estimating.
Estimating requires a detailed understanding of the project construction plans, specifications, site
conditions, and the economic environment. Estimating consists of building the job on paper, including
evaluation of construction methods, analysis of work sequences, selection of construction equipment,
evaluating labor productivity, and assigning prices to all elements: materials, labor, equipment, and general
expenses.
This class will give students hands-on experience in preparing an estimate. Lectures will cover the material
in the textbook. Periodic quizzes may be given and will factor into the attendance / participation grade.
The bulk of the course work will be the preparation of a detailed estimate for a building project. Students
are expected to complete each homework independently, but interaction and discussion with classmates is
encouraged. Plans for the project are posted on Blackboard.


 ACADEMIC/LEARNING GOALS:
 There are three major academic learning goals for this course:
         1) Understand cost drivers in each major CSI section;
         2) Understand the overall estimating / work procurement process;
         3) Understand how indirect costs, reserves, and profit are determined.
 HOW ACADEMIC LEARNING OBJECTIVES ARE ACHIEVED:
 Class lectures will follow CSI breakdown. The intent of each lecture is to expose the student to a detailed understanding of
 each specification section and specifically discuss key cost divers in each section. In addition, there are several lectures
 specifically focused on indirect costs, profit, and reserves. The homework is then intended to reinforce concepts discussed in
 class. There is a group assignment where students will work with industry members to understand how a specific company
 approaches work procurement and processes estimates.
 SUGGESTED TEXTBOOK: (Optional)
 Estimating Building Costs, ISBN 0-8247-4086-6, Popescu, Phaobunjong, and Ovararin, Marcel Dekker, Inc., New York,
 NY, 2003.
 COURSE SCHEDULE:
 A course schedule is included. In order to maximize learning, students are expected to read the assigned material before
 the lecture. Although this schedule may be revised, any changes will be announced in advance. Otherwise, students may
 assume that the topic listed will be covered on the assigned date.
   Week     Class     Date                               Topic                                        Homework
               1          7/9                                                                              -
     1         2         7/10
                               Introduction & Types of Estimates / Delivery
               3         7/11
                               Methods
                               Estimating the Cost of Materials, Labor, Equipment
               4         7/23                                                                     Information Sheet
                               and the Bidding Process
                               Estimating the Cost of Materials, Labor, Equipment
     3         5         7/24                                                              Team Project Selection Sheet
                               and the Bidding Process Part 2
               6         7/25  Oops Game                                                            Oops Package
               7         7/30  Concrete                                                             ROM HW (00)
     4         8         7/31  Masonry, Metals, and Wood & Plastics                                  Concrete (1)
               9          8/1  Thermal and Moisture Protection                          Masonry (2), Metals (3), & Wood (4)
              10          8/6  Doors & Windows, and Finishes                             Thermal & Moisture Protection (5)
     5        11          8/7  Site Work                                                 Doors & Windows (6), Finishes (7)
                               Mechanical, Electrical, Plumbing, Elevators, Fire
              12          8/8  Alarm, Fire Protection, Security, and                                 Site Work (8)
                               Communications
                               Jobsite Overhead; Surety Bonds, Insurance, and
              13         8/13                                                                       MEP (9 & 10)
                               Taxes; General Overhead, Contingencies, and Profit
     6        14         8/14  Group Project Presentations                               Overhead, Bonds, Insurance (11)
              15         8/15  Review / Group Presentations
Final: Per University Schedule on August 16 or 17


GRADING:
The final course grade will be calculated based on the following components:
                  Team Project                                     30%
                  Homework                                         30%
                  Class Participation                              10%
                  Final Exam                                       30%
                            Final Exam per University schedule, see link below
                              https://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/196/finals
Letter grades will be assigned as follows:
                  A: grade ≥ 90
                  B:     80 ≤ grade < 90
                  C:     70 ≤ grade < 80
                  D: 60 ≤ grade < 70 F:             grade <
                  60
Plusses and minuses may be assigned for students who are on the border of a grade. By its very nature participation grades
are subjective. It is the intent of this portion of the grading procedure to either help or not help a student whose grade is on
the border between two grades. For example, if a student is on the border between an A and a B and the student has, in
the instructor’s opinion, been an asset to the
class discussion, then the class participation grade will be used to help the student achieve the higher grade. The converse
is also true.
ARE 358 Semester Project
Objective
The objective of this assignment is for students to gain familiarity and exposure to the work procurement and cost
estimating processes used by contractors or subcontractors in today’s design and construction environment.
Company Selection
Select a contractor or subcontractor that is willing to commit at least an hour of their time to describe the process they go
through to identify projects to pursue and how they prepare and submit their bid / proposal. You do NOT need access to
their estimating database or proprietary files or information.
Deliverables
     1)       A detailed flow chart with boxes and arrows that models the process described above.
     2)       A 3 – 5 page written report describing the flow chart referenced in item 1.
     3)       A 10 – 12 minute power point presentation describing your findings.
GRADING
25% Flow chart – “does it make sense”, organization, neatness, professional appearance 25% Written
report – content, organization, structure, style, grammar, and spelling
25% Presentation – content, structure, delivery, time 25%
          Participation grade given by teammates
          (see “Team Project participation” form on Blackboard.)
COURSE/INSTRUCTOR EVALUATION PLAN:
Each student will be given the opportunity to evaluate the course using the standard Course/Instructor Survey form during
the last week of classes. Feedback from students will also be requested throughout the semester.


POLICIES:
Homework:
1. Homework is due at the beginning of the class period on the due date assigned.
2. Homework will NOT be accepted for credit or graded if late.
3. Homework must be legible and well-organized to receive full credit.
Exams/Quizzes:
No make-up exams or quizzes will be given, unless extremely unusual circumstances prevail and can be documented and
justified to the satisfaction of the instructor. An example would be hospitalization.
Class Attendance and Participation:
Regular attendance and participation is expected and encouraged. Each student is responsible for all material and
administrative instructions given during the lecture period. Instructions will not be repeated outside of class.
Office Hours:
Students are encouraged to make use of office hours as needed. I encourage students to come see me to address any
questions or concerns about the course material or other issues. I have an open door policy –
if my office door is open, I will see students without an appointment. If I am busy, we will schedule a convenient time for
both of us. If you are unable to come to my office, feel free to email or call me. Please keep these two general principles in
mind: (1) make sure you have read the material and attempted the work prior to seeking assistance, and (2) it is better to ask
for help earlier than later.
School of Engineering drop policy:
Undergraduate Students- drop policy for summer sessions:
From the 1st through the 4th class day, an undergraduate student can drop a course via the web and receive a refund, if
eligible. From the 5th through the university’s academic drop deadline, a student may Q drop a course with approval from
the Dean, and departmental advisor.
Graduate Students:
From the 1st through the 2nd class day of each session, graduate students can drop a course via the web and receive a
refund. During the 3rd through 4th class day, graduate students must initiate drops in the department that offers the
course and receive a refund. After the 4th class day, no refund is given. No class can be added after the 4th class day.
From the 5th through the 10th class day, an automatic Q is assigned with approval from the Graduate Advisor and the
Graduate Dean. From the 11th class day through the last class day, graduate students can drop a class with permission
from the instructor, Graduate Advisor, and the Graduate Dean. Students with 20-hr/week GRA/TA appointment or a
fellowship may not drop below 3 hours.
Scholastic Dishonesty Policy:
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and
the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, visit the
Academic Accommodations:
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. For more information, contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities, 471-6259 (voice) or 410-6644 (video phone) or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Class Web sites and student privacy:
Web-based, password-protected class sites will be associated with all academic courses taught at the University. Syllabi,
handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available within these sites. Site activities
could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, electronic class
rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must
restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building Room 1. For information on restricting
directory information, see the Undergraduate Catalog or go to: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/ug04-


06/index.html.
Emergency Preparedness Plan
Emergency Preparedness means being ready. It takes an effort by all of us to create and sustain an effective emergency
preparedness system. You are your own best first responder. Please use https://preparedness.utexas.edu/welcome-emergency-
preparedness as a resource to better understand emergency preparedness at the university, and how you can become part of
and contribute to the preparedness community. To monitor emergency communications for specific instructions go to
utexas.edu/emergency. To report an issue (none emergency) call 512-471-4441. In case of emergency, call 911.
