        ANS 302D: Introduction to Korean Culture and History
Fall 2019, ANS 302D
Instructor: Youjeong Oh
Course Website: Canvas ANS 302D
Course Description
This course is designed as an introductory overview of Korean history, culture, and society
from the early modern era to the present. It aims to encourage students to locate their
knowledge about Korea in relation to perspectives from other disciplines, while thinking
critically about how history, culture, and society are understood. Class lectures will be
supplemented with films, slides, and other audio-visual materials. This class has no
prerequisites.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Requirements
    1. Class attendance and Participation (20%). Class attendance is mandatory and will
        be checked regularly including the add/drop period. Students are allowed one
        absence. For each unexcused absence after that, your final grade will be lowered by
        2 points, up to a maximum of 20 points. The only exception to this policy is a health
        condition. In order to be excused from absence due to any health problem, students
        must bring a note from your doctor or student emergency center. If you come to
        class 10 minutes late or leave the classroom early, it will be considered as tardiness;
        three such occasions will be regarded as a full absence.
    2. In-class midterm exam (20%).
    3. Reaction papers (30%). Students are expected to write TWO essays (3 single-space
        pages) about a given topic (15% each). Reaction paper should cover all lectures,
        films, and readings about the assigned topic and exhibit your critical analyses of
        those materials. A hardcopy of typed papers should be submitted before the class
        on due dates. (Late papers will be accepted, but it will lower your grade by 5 points.)
    4. Take-home final exam (30%). Essay questions based on class lectures, readings and
        films. A hardcopy of typed final exam should be submitted on December 5th, in
        class. (Late papers and emailed papers will be accepted, but it will lower your grade
        by 15 and 10 points respectively.)
** In any cases where you cannot make the deadlines of assignments and papers, you
should give me reasonable notice at least one week prior to the deadlines.
                                                                                                1


Grading Policy
In order to pass this class, students should fulfill and submit all requirements.
Grades are assigned as follows: 95-100 = A; 90-94.5 = A-; 86-89.5 = B+; 82-85.5 = B; 79-
81.5= B-; 76-78.5= C+; 72-75.5 = C; 69-71.5 = C-; 65-68.5 = D+; 60-64.5 = D; below 60 = F.
Not curved, no round up.
Academic Dishonesty
Cheating and plagiarism are serious offences and will not be tolerated. Plagiarism is
representing someone else’s work as your own. This includes handing in another student’s
paper, and it includes using the words and/or ideas from a publication, the web or other
source without citation. Always cite your sources (in whatever format). Please refer to this
site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php.
University Notices and Policies
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your
disability from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester (within
first two weeks), so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam,
you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order
to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may
not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Readings
Required text: Two Copies are Reserved at PCL Library for 2-hr loan
Cumings, Bruce. (1997, 2005). Korea’s Place in the Sun: A Modern History. Norton &
   Company, Inc. (Required).
All other readings are available on Canvas under Files.
                                                                                                                          2


Weekly Topics and Readings
(subject to change at the discretion of the instructor).
Week 1
   August 29. Introduction to class themes and requirements.
Week 2
   September 3. Pre-modern Korea with a focus on Confucianism
Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 1. (Read p. 46-57 (the Chosŏn period and
transformation from Koryŏ) and p. 76-85 (the decline of Chosŏn).
    September 5. The Nineteenth Century
Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 2.
Week 3
   September 10. The Tonghak Movement and the Uprisings of 1894
Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 2. (p.115-)
   September 12. Japanese Colonial Rule
Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 3.
Week 4
   September 17. Korean Women and Colonialism I
Film: 63 Years On (2008)
   September 19. Korean Women and Colonialism I
Readings:
Yang, Hyunah. (1998). “Re-membering the Korean Military Comfort Women: Nationalism,
Sexuality, and Silencing.” in Elaine Kim and Chungmoo Choi eds. Dangerous Women: Gender
& Korean Nationalism. Routledge.
(Optional) Varga, Aniko. (2009). “National Bodies: The ‘Comfort Women’ Discourse and its
Controversies in South Korea.” Studies of Ethnicity and Nationalism 9(2): 287-303.
Week 5
   September 24. The Post-Liberation Cauldron and the Origins of Korean Division (1945-
            50)
                                                                                         3


Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 4.
    September 26. Jeju April 3 Incident
    ** Reaction Paper I will be assigned.
Readings:
Cumings, Bruce. “The Question of American Responsibility for the Suppression of the
Chejudo Uprising.” Korea International War Crimes Tribunal, June 23, 2001, New York
Report on US Crimes in Korea 1945-2001
Week 6
    October 1. Jeju April 3 Incident
Film: The Ghosts of Jeju (2013)
    October 3. The Korean War
** Reaction Paper I Due
Film: Korea: The Never-Ending War (PBS Documentary, 2019)
Week 7
    October 8. The Korean War
Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 5.
    October 10. In-Class Mid-term
Week 8
    October 15. The Vietnam War and Anti-Communism in Korea
Readings:
Lee, Jin-Kyung. (2010). Service Economies: Militarism, Sex Work, and Migrant Labor in South
Korea. Minnesota University Press. (Chapter 1. p. 37-48, 64-67, 70-77.)
    October 17. Military Prostitution
Film: “The Women Outside: Korean Comfort Women and the U.S. Military” (1995)
** Reaction Paper II will be assigned.
Week 9
    October 22. Military Prostitution
** Reaction Paper II Due
Readings:
Moon, Katharine H.S. (1998). “Prostitute Bodies and Gendered States in US-Korea
Relations.” in Elaine Kim and Chungmoo Choi eds. Dangerous Women: Gender & Korean
Nationalism. Routledge.
                                                                                          4


    October 24. Postwar Industrialization
Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 6.
Week 10
    October 29. South Korean Authoritarianism and the Democratic Movement
Readings:
Cumings, Korea’s Place in the Sun, Chapter 7.
   October 31. Seworl Ferry Disaster
Film: The Truth Shall Not Sink with Sewol (2014)
Readings:
Heo, Mansup and Park, Jaeyung. (2017). “Shame and Vicarious Shame in the News: A Case
Study of the Sewol Ferry Disaster.” Journalism.
Week 11
   November 5. Hanok Tourism
Readings:
Moon, Okpyo. (2011). “Guests of Lineage Houses: Tourist Commoditization of Confucian
Cultural Heritage in Korea.” In Consuming Korean Tradition in Early and Late Modernity:
Commodification, Tourism, and Performance, edited by Laurel Kendall, 88–104. Honolulu:
University of Hawaii Press.
    November 7. BTS Tourism to South Korea
Week 12
    November 12. New Village Movement
Readings:
Kim, Sungjo. (2015). The Countryside and the City: A Spatial Economy of the New Village
Movement in 1970s South Korea. Ph.D. Dissertation. University of Toronto. (Read
Introduction).
    November 14. Cheonggye-cheon Restoration
Week 13
    November 19. Adoption and Identity
Film: First Person Plural (2010)
    November 21. Koreans at Home and Abroad
Readings:
                                                                                        5


Kim, Elaine. (1993) “Home is Where the Han Is: A Korean-American Perspective on the Los
Angeles Riots.” Social Justice 20(1/2): 1-21.
Week 14
    November 26. Korean Wave: K-Pop Idols
Readings:
Oh, Youjeong. (2018). Pop City: Korean Popular Culture and the Selling of Place. (Read
Chapter 3 p.106-124.)
    November 28. Thanksgiving Holiday
Week 15
   December 3. Korean Wave: K-Beauty
Readings:
TBA.
   December 5. Wrap-Up Discussions
* Final Exam Due
                                                                                       6
