                                                                                                  1
GER W330C: Advanced Composition and Conversation
Summer 2019, Würzburg
Instructor:              Marc Pierce
Meeting times:           MTW, 10:15-11: 45
Office hours:            MTW 2-3 and by appointment.
Email:                   mpierc@austin.utexas.edu (NB: I do not have e-mail access at home.
                         Please plan accordingly.)
Phone:                   0160 92362190
Course Goal
The goal of this course is straightforward: to improve your knowledge of German (speaking,
reading, writing, and comprehension). This means that you will expand your active vocabulary,
aim for a consistently high level of grammatical accuracy with basic structures, continually add
more advanced grammatical structures to your active repertoire, and increase the linguistic
register at which you can produce German. You will be expected to use grammatical structures
appropriately and thoughtfully and to add increasingly sophisticated and complex elements to
your written and spoken German.
At the same time, the course will introduce you to several core issues in contemporary Germany
to familiarize you with important elements of German culture and society and the ways in which
these topics are discussed in Germany. This aspect of the course is meant to prepare you to
engage in conversations with Germans on a variety of current and controversial topics. To this
end, we will read and listen to a wide range of online material (news reports, articles, internet
sites, music) that relate to post-wall German society, politics, and culture. These materials are
organized according to thematic units. Your job is to read and listen carefully, think about the
ideas presented in these materials, reflect on the differences between German and American
society and culture, and formulate views regarding those issues in spoken and written German.
The course will be conducted in German. If you find yourself in a linguistic bind, or swamped
by German syntax, or at a loss for a German word, feel free to make a temporary switch to
English, but go back to German as soon as possible.
Course Outcomes
By the end of this course, successful students will be able to:
• write essays in German with a high degree of grammatical accuracy, a varied vocabulary, and
in a formal register;
• participate in verbal interactions in German with ease and advanced fluency using both
colloquial phrasing in conversation as well as formal elements in debates and presentations;
• understand and comment in German on primary German sources about a number of topics.


                                                                                                   2
Course Commitment
As your instructor I will strive to make this course as interesting and engaging as I can with as
many opportunities as possible for you to practice and improve your written and spoken German.
In order to create an organic learning environment that responds to the desires and needs of the
students, minor changes to the course content, requirements, and calendar may occur and will be
communicated to participants in a timely manner. You (as the student) agree to complete all of
the work for the course and to participate actively; a good rule of thumb is that you will need to
spend about nine (9) hours each week doing work outside of class for this course (see below).
Course Requirements
Preparation
All daily assignments will be communicated in class. Required readings and viewing material
will be distributed via email and/or uploaded to Canvas. Recommendation: Print out each
assigned text in order to take notes on it as you work. Read each text the first time without
looking up any words. Then summarize what you understood briefly in writing. Then read it
again, this time looking up words selectively. The third time you read it you may look up more
words if you chose to do so. Bring your annotated copy to class with ten of the most important
words circled. Be prepared to use those correctly in meaningful sentences. Watch the short
videos multiple times and create a short written summary of them in German. You are also
responsible for learning and using, in relevant contexts, the collocations (Redewendungen)
assigned for each class period. A German-English dictionary will be indispensable. You should
also use a grammar book or the following internet resources to review grammatical concepts:
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~german/Grammatik/Grammatik.html
http://www.nthuleen.com/teach/grammar.html
Since spoken and written language are intended for communication, I encourage you to work and
study and prepare together with others from our class. Practice together, share ideas about the
readings and videos, engage with each other as part of your preparation. However, all graded
work must be a reflection of what you have learned and what you can produce on your own.
This also means that translation programs, having your essays proofread by another speaker of
German, etc., are not allowed.
Participation
Because a central goal of this course is to help you to improve your spoken command of German
and articulate complex arguments coherently, each class period is structured to give you
numerous opportunities to practice speaking. We will often begin with informal conversations
and will use pair/small group discussions as preparation for our large group discussions. Use that
time effectively to practice formulating answers, comments, and questions using relevant new
terms, collocations, and grammatical structures. Attendance is a prerequisite for participation and
both are crucial to your success. Be an active participant each day. You can learn a lot from
listening carefully to other students in class. And you can learn a lot from helping others learn:
“Wer lehrt, lernt!”


                                                                                                  3
Participation grade profiles:
A       volunteers frequently and is always well-prepared
B       volunteers sometimes and is often prepared
C       does not usually volunteer but is moderately prepared
D       does not volunteer and is generally poorly prepared
F       is consistently unprepared (or absent)
Assignments and Essays
1) Daily assignments will be announced in class and/or distributed via email. Bring written
responses to questions and activities with you to class each day. I will spot check these and may
collect them on some days.
2) You will compose short writing assignments (roughly a half-page in length) to practice using
specific grammatical structures, vocabulary, and collocations.
3) You will write two 500-word (2-page) essays that critically addresses the social and cultural
themes in that unit. The essays can include material from your short writing assignments, but you
are expected to learn from previous mistakes and improve your style. You will present and
discuss a segment of each essay in class on the due date; it will contribute to your essay grade.
The short writing assignments and essays must be formatted according to the instructions in the
document “Rechtschreibung und Formatierung” and proofread by yourself. They must all be
submitted in hard copy and emailed to the instructor (as a Word document only, please)
Oral presentation
You will participate in one group oral presentation (Gruppenreferat). This task will provide you
with an opportunity to synthesize the material from the preceding weeks and to solidify your use
of relevant vocabulary items and collocations. No outside research is required; this activity
should instead be a thoughtful reflection on and reaction to materials and in-class discussions.
Quizzes
There will occasionally be short quizzes that test your knowledge of relevant new vocabulary
items, important grammatical structures, and/or collocations. They may also include questions
from the daily assignments or program events, such as excursions. So do your homework
diligently each day and participate actively in scheduled program events!
Grading
Preparation, class and program participation, short writing assignments, quizzes     50%
Oral presentation (part of Gruppenreferat)                                           20%
Two 500-word essays (15% each)                                                       30%
Grading scale
                        A+: 98+        A: 93-97       A-: 90-92
                        B+: 88-89      B: 83-87       B-: 80-82
                        C+: 78-79      C: 73-77       C-: 70-72
                        D+: 68-69      D: 63-67       D-: 60-62
                        F: 59 or less


                                                                                                     4
Syllabus and Assignments
You have received a detailed description of all requirements for this course in writing. It is your
responsibility to read it and follow all instructions. Work that is submitted late will be subject to
penalties at my discretion, normally three points per day late (e.g. a 100 will become a 97 if it is
one day late). No makeup quizzes/ extensions will be given, except in cases of documented
emergency.
Attendance policy
Attendance is crucial. Unexcused absences will result in poor grades for participation!
Absences will be unexcused except in cases of documented emergency (normally medical or
family). You will need to sign in at the beginning of each class. Please notify me as soon as
possible by e-mail or phone if it is necessary for you to be absent from class. In accordance with
University of Texas policy, you may be excused from class to participate in religious
observances and official obligations. In such cases, written documentation must be presented to
the instructor at least one week before the absence takes place.
A word to the wise
A good rule of thumb at UT is that you should spend two hours outside of class doing homework
and preparing for the next class session for every hour of instructional time. You may find that
you need more or less than two hours. However much time you need, please prepare well so that
class time can be used with maximum efficiency.
Classroom Etiquette
Cell phones must be turned off in class; computers are only for viewing/reading course-
related material. No food. Students who use electronic devices for non-class related activities
and create a disturbance will be asked to leave for the remainder of that class. We must all do
our best to make class a pleasant and valuable experience for everyone. Please conduct
yourselves accordingly.
Study Groups
If possible, find one or two other students in the class who are willing to get together to go over
things and help each other. This can be very valuable, as your classmates may understand some
material better than you do, and vice versa.
Students with disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations for students
with disabilities upon request. Students with a documented disability who require academic
accommodations should contact the Service for Students with Disabilities as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. These letters must be given to
the instructor at the beginning of the semester. For details, see
<http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/index.php>.


                                                                                                     5
The University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
A final note:
The instructor takes issues of academic honesty very seriously. All work in this course must be
your own. Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated and will be dealt with according to
standard university procedures. Discussion of assignments between students in the course is
always acceptable, but all students must write out their own work unless a specific group
assignment, to which all members have clearly contributed, is made. Please consult the
instructor if you have concerns or questions.
Language learning is a long-term process and necessarily involves making mistakes. I am here to
help you along the way and I encourage you to work together when learning new material.
However, using help from others (including German native speakers or other advanced speakers
of German) on graded assignments is not allowed and will be treated as academic dishonesty.
Using online translation software (such as Google Translator) is also not permitted.
Students who do not comply with University rules on scholastic integrity are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information,
visit the Student Judicial Services website at: deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Questions?
Please come and talk to me if you have questions about these items, concerns about the course,
or need academic advice. I am here to help and I want you to succeed!


                                                                                             6
                                Semesterplan for GER W330C
                                      (subject to revision)
EINFÜHRUNG: Gesellschaft, Medien, Politik
TEIL 1: Das geteilte Deutschland und Wiedervereinigung
Woche 1
Di. 28. Mai          Einführung in den Kurs
Mi. 29. Mai          Gesellschaft: die Arbeit und der Sozialstaat; Tag der Arbeit
Woche 2
Mo. 3. Juni          Politik: Parteien, Koalitionen, Institutionen, usw.
Di. 4. Juni          Kultur und die Medien; Die BRD im Vergleich zur DDR; Deutschland
                     nach dem Zweiten Weltkrieg
Mi. 5. Juni          Chronik der Wende 1989-1990: Fall der Mauer und Weg zur Einheit;
                     Schriftliche Aufgabe: der Osten und der Westen; Stasi, MfS, IM, und ihre
                     Aufarbeitung
Woche 3
Mo. 10. Juni         Pfingstmontag, no class
Di. 11. Juni         University Holiday, no class
Mi. 12. Juni         Instructor will be out of town at a conference; no class
Woche 4
Mo. 17. Juni                 Stasi, MfS, IM, und ihre Aufarbeitung
Di. 18. Juni                 Wiedervereinigung – 25 Jahre später: Freiheit oder Gleichheit?
Mi. 19. Juni                 Handlungen und Konsequenzen der deutschen Wiedervereinigung
                             heute; schriftliche Aufgabe
Woche 5
Mo. 24. Juni                 Schreibwerkstatt; Gruppenreferat und Diskussion:
                             “Wiedervereinigung”
TEIL 2: Multikulturalismus: von Leitkultur bis Interkultur
Di. 25. Juni                 Deutschland, ein Einwanderungsland? Gastarbeiter, Migrant,
                             Flüchtling, Einwohner…
Mi. 26. Juni                 Religion und der Staat: Muslime in Deutschland; erster Essay
                             fällig: Probleme der Wiedervereinigung? (Persönlicher Bericht)
Woche 6
Mo. 1. Juli                  Schriftliche Aufgabe: Migration und Religion: Wie wohnt man
                             zusammen?
Di. 2. Juli                  Instructor will be out of town at a conference; no class
Mi. 3. Juli                  Instructor will be out of town at a conference; no class


                                                                                           7
Woche 7
Mo. 8. Juli               Kopftuchdebatte
Di. 9. Juli               Leitkultur vs. Interkultur: Pegida, AfD und/oder ein weltoffenes
                          Deutschland?
Mi. 10. Juli              Schriftliche Aufgabe: Was und wer gehört zu Deutschland?
TEIL 3: Vergangenheit in der Gegenwart: Verdrängung, Fetischismus, oder Nostalgie?
Woche 8
Mo. 15 Juli               Vergangenheitsbewältigung
Di. 16. Juli              Wir sind wir
Mi. 17. Juli              Schriftliche Aufgabe: dt. und am. Vergangenheitsbewältigung?
Woche 9
Mo. 22. Juli              Holocaust-Mahnmal(e) in Berlin; Gedenken des deutschen
                  Widerstands
Di. 23. Juli              Wiederaufbau der Geschichte: die Dresdener Frauenkirche,
                  East Side Gallery
Mi. 24. Juli              FAZIT: Was Amerikaner unbedingt über Deutschland wissen
                          sollten; Zweiter Essay fällig
