History 350R (38785); AMS 370 (31210)
US Core Course, Independent Inquiry, and Writing Flags
Prof. Neil Kamil / GAR 2.146 / kamil@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: TTH 4-5 (and by appointment)
Spring 2020 / CAL 221 / TTH 2-3:30
Coastal Communities: Life along the Water in Early America
Many of America’s earliest settlements were coastal communities. Indeed, in human
terms, bodies of water: oceans, lakes, rivers, bays, sounds, tidal pools, ponds, and streams
helped define both the extent and limits of local, regional, and ultimately global history
and culture. Water simultaneously connected and separated through the movements of
highly mobile populations, which communicated through exploration, war, commerce,
migration, and travel along routes sometimes millennia old during a time when travel by
boat was easier and more economical than overland travel, which was hindered by lack of
roads. Hence, while not overlooking inland zones (river valleys in particular), American
history can also be understood within the broad, transoceanic web of human geography
called Atlantic history and culture. The purpose of this course is to explore the social and
cultural history of American coastal communities from an interactive perspective.
Ultimately, then, we are concerned with understanding ways to think, read and write
about water and water-mediated culture as fundamental modes of contact and
communication in the pre-industrial and early post-industrial world.
This course meets substantial writing requirements. Students will read widely from a
multidisciplinary list. Attendance is mandatory. Students must contribute regularly to
class discussion and turn in brief (2-page maximum) weekly writing assignments each
Thursday analyzing all the reading for that week. These readings should not be
considered standard book reviews; rather, they take the form of focused essays about
problems, issues, and especially questions that the student wants to ask in the seminar, so
they are intended to help facilitate discussion. A 5-7-page final paper will propose an
article to be included in a (fictitious) collection of essays about the major themes to
emerge from this course. Please don’t hesitate to come talk with me as soon as possible
about your final project. We will meet individually in my office towards the middle of
the semester to exchange ideas about the final project. Grades: weekly papers (50%);
discussion (30%); final essay (20%). Please be aware that the assignment of grades—
which will be plus and minus—has always been, and remains, up to the discretion of the
instructor. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 471-6259.
History 350R is on the US Core Course List and may be used to fulfill three hours of the
U.S. history component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following
four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board:
communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal responsibility, and social
responsibility. This course carries both Independent Inquiry and Writing Flags. Please
take a moment to review the flag criteria, available
at http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/teaching/flags.
                                                                                           1


Required Weekly Readings (at COOP or shop around online / on reserve at PCL):
H. Magnusson and H. Palsson, Vinland Sagas; M. Kurlansky, Cod: A Biography of the
Fish that Changed the World; N. Philbrick, In the Heart of the Sea: The Tragedy of the
Whale Ship Essex; A. Roland et al, Way of the Ship; Ernest Hemingway, Old Man and
the Sea; Joseph Conrad, Twixt Land and Sea.
Jan 21: Organizational Day—Syllabus, Introductions, Big Themes and Questions.
Oceanic History
Jan 23
Daniel Vickers, “Beyond Jack Tar” https://www.jstor.org/stable/2947085?pq-
origsite=summon&seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents ;
Jeffrey Bolster, “Putting the Ocean in Atlantic History”
https://www.jstor.org/stable/40007296?pq-
origsite=summon&seq=1#page_scan_tab_contents
The Viking Sagas and what the tell us about Atlantic Exploration before Columbus
Jan 28 Intro and 1st half of H. Magnusson and H. Palsson, Vinland Sagas
Jan 30 Complete reading H. Magnusson and H. Palsson, Vinland Sagas
Paper due
The Lure of Atlantic Fishing and the origins of New World Exploration
Feb 4 1st half of M. Kurlansky, Cod
Feb 6 Complete M. Kurlansky, Cod
Paper due
Shipping in Early America
Feb 11 Roland, et al, The Way of the Ship, Part 1, chapters 1-5
Feb 13 Roland, et al, The Way of the Ship, Part 1, chapters 6-10
Paper due
Human Geography, or, Social Interactions and Oceanic Mediation
Feb 18 Benjamin Breen and Jorge Canizares-Esquerra, “Hybrid Atlantics: Future
Directions for the History of the Atlantic World”
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/hic3.12051
                                                                                       2


Feb 20 Holly Snyder, “A Tree with Two Different Fruits: The Jewish Encounter with
German Pietists in the Eighteenth-Century Atlantic World.” The William and Mary
Quarterly, vol. 58, no. 4 (Oct 2001), pp. 855-882. Available online on UTCAT.
Paper due
Technological Change, Early Industrialization, and Inland Shipping in America
Feb 25 The Way of the Ship, Part 2, chapters 11-15
Feb 27 The Way of the Ship, part 2, chapters 16-19
Paper due
The Pre-History of Moby Dick
Mar 3 First half of N. Philbrick, In the Heart of the Sea: The Tragedy of the Whale Ship
Essex
Mar 5 Complete N. Philbrick, In the Heart of the Sea: The Tragedy of the Whale Ship
Essex
Paper due
March 10th and 12th, Individual Meetings with Instructor on Final Projects (GAR 2.146)
March 17th and March 19th, Spring Break, No Classes!
Coastal Crime
Mar 24 Cal Winslow, “Sussex Smugglers” and John G. Rule, “Wrecking and Coastal
Plunder,” in D. Hay, et al, Albion’s Fatal Tree: Crime and Society in Eighteenth-Century
England. Copies of both articles will be posted on Canvas.
Mar 26 Primary Documents: Each student will search <oldbaileyonline.org> (The Court
Proceedings of the Old Bailey Court—London’s central criminal court) for 17th or 18th
century smuggling cases and report on the case they have chosen for their paper due this
week.
Paper due
Fiction and the Sea
Mar 31 Ernest Hemingway, Old Man and the Sea
April 2 Ernest Hemingway, Old Man and the Sea (film version)
Paper due
                                                                                         3


April 7 Joseph Conrad, Twixt Land and Sea (first half)
April 9 Joseph Conrad, Twixt Land and Sea (complete)
Paper due
Maritime America in the Civil War and Beyond
April 14th The Way of the Ship, Part 3, chapters 20-25
April 16th The Way of the Ship, Part 3, chapters 26-30
Oceanic War in the 20th Century
April 21 The Way of the Ship, Part 4, chapters 31-34
April 23 The Way of the Ship, Part 4, chapters 35-38
Global Warming: The Ultimate Threat to Coastal Communities
April 28 Venice and The Netherlands, readings / videos tba
April 30 New Orleans and New York, readings / videos tba
May 5th and May 7th Student Oral Presentations in Alphabetical Order
Final papers due May 14th
                                                                     4
