AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                                       Fall 2019
                                                    Fall 2019
                           AET 348C: Live Event Engineering – Unique # 20595
                      Tuesday / Thursday, 12:30pm – 2:00pm PAC 3.204 / Payne Theatre
Instructor:      Matthew R. Smith
Office Hours: by appointment
Email:           matt.smith@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course examines a variety of design elements controlled over live entertainment networks. More
specifically we will be exploring hardware and software components and how they communicate with one
another to execute a variety of designs. The Hog4 lighting console will serve as a key component for both
input and output device throughout the course. Students will learn how to utilize the Hog4 console in both
the traditional and nontraditional workflow. Students will have hands-on training with lighting fixtures from
High End Systems, as well as a variety of projection playback software and hardware. This course will
combine programming techniques, technical research, and design process. By placing system components in
conversation with design practices, students will be able to design and adapt for a variety of performances.
LEARNING OUTCOMES:
By the end of the semester, students should be able to:
• Recognize and analyze system components;
• critically examine communication protocols;
• apply designs and configure networks utilized for live performance;
• effectively participate in a collaborative design process; and
• create and implement an inclusive design
COURSE MATERIALS:
•   8GB maximum USB drive
•   Pencil
•   1 – notebook (small or medium in size, easily accessible for notetaking and may be used during
    quizzes)
SUGGESTED TEXTS:
•   Show Networks and Control Systems, by John Huntington
    ISBN: 978-0615655901
•   Electricity for the Entertainment Electrician & Technician 2nd Edition, by Richard Cadena
    ISBN: 978-0415714839


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                                        Fall 2019
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
• Quizzes (10%): A total of 5 quizzes will be administered throughout the semester.
•   Project 1 (25%): “Press Play” – Design a short performance utilizing both lighting and projection that
    can be controlled by a single press of a “Play” button. A list of necessary elements to this assignment will
    be distributed in class.
•   Project 2 (25%): “disguise media server” – A list of all necessary elements to this assignment will be
    distributed in class.
•   Project 3 (20%): “AET Event Prefix” – Preparatory work to support a live event in the B. Iden Payne
    Theatre. A list of all necessary elements to this assignment will be distributed in class.
•   Project 4 (20%): “AET Event” – Design and operate the lighting rig for “AET Event”. Live public
    performance. Evenings will be required for technical rehearsals and performance.
GRADING:
Quizzes                                                                                              10%
Project 1                                                                                            25%
Project 2                                                                                            25%
Project 3                                                                                            20%
Project 4                                                                                            20%
                                                                                                    100%
If you submit your assignment late it will not be reviewed in class.
All work is due as specified in the assignment listed in canvas. Work not completed prior to the
canvas deadline will be considered late.
Any work turned in on the due date but after the due time, regardless of the excuse, will result in a
grade reduction of 5 points.
Any work turned in late, regardless of the excuse, will result in a grade reduction of one full letter for
each calendar date it is late (an A would become a B and so on).
In summary:
Every assignment has a due date and time.
I do accept work after the due date, however, assignments automatically lose one full letter
grade for every calendar date submitted late and they will not be reviewed in class.
Additionally, if you submit your assignment on the correct due date but after the assigned
time, you will automatically lose 5 points.
Any work turned in more than 4 calendar days late will receive an automatic F. If you are having difficulty
completing your work on time, please speak to me privately prior to the deadline, so we may discuss a
possible arrangement.
                     All assignments will be graded within 7 days of submission date.
                                            Page 2


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                                         Fall 2019
Grading Scheme
A- Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work must be completed
on time and with a very high quality of demonstrated skill and technique. There is an evidence of
significant development across all dimensions of learning. The result at this level demonstrates activity
that goes significantly beyond the required course work in one or more areas.
B- Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work must be completed on
time with consistently high quality in course work. There is an evidence of marked development
across all dimensions of learning.
C- Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed, with generally
good quality in course work. There is evidence of some development across all dimensions of
learning.
D- Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work completed,
with inconsistent quality in course work. The evidence of development across all dimensions of
learning is unclear.
F- Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned work completed,
or very low quality in course work. Development evidence is not available.
Please Note: If you are concerned about your grade – check in with us regularly so that we can
determine where you’re at, and what might need to be done to correct any problems. Do not wait
until the end of the semester!
ATTENDANCE:
ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Being a professional requires a habit of discipline and rigor.
Professionals in the arts achieve at the highest level when they work with determination and
dedication to detail. Your attention to attendance and lecture information gathering is an important
element of establishing professional standards and practices. The course lectures and discussions will
involve a significant amount of information that will not be available in any other form (textbook,
handouts); therefore, regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of the class.
If you need to miss class for legitimate reasons it is your responsibility to contact me directly with this
information. Sending a message by way of another student of an impending absence does not
constitute a legitimate notification.
For each unexcused absence after your first three, your final grade will be lowered by one letter
grade. Seven unexcused absences constitute an automatic F in the class.
Please be on time for class. If you are more than 5 minutes late for class you will be counted as
tardy. Every two instances you are tardy will be counted as one time absent.
Privacy
What we say about each other’s work during this class should remain constructive and in the
classroom. It will not be published on a personal website or posted on social networks. Please
respect each other’s work.
Resources
PLAI Lab Hours:
Monday – Friday: 5:00pm – 10:00pm
Saturday:             8:00am – 12:00pm
                                              Page 3


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                            Fall 2019
reference online:
www.figure53.com
www.highend.com
www.disguise.one
UTIM Wiki
CLASS CALENDAR
Instructor reserves the right to adjust the calendar to fit the needs of the class.
Week 1:
 Thursday: August 29th
 -Introduction
 -Syllabus overview
 -Tour of PLAI Lab and B. Iden Payne Theatre
Week 2:
 Tuesday: September 3rd
 -Hog 4 overview
 -HogNet
 -QLab 4 overview
 -Closed network, IP
Week 2:
 Thursday: September 5th
 -Q & A (Hog 4 and QLab 4)
 -Lighting Hardware
 -Data flow, DMX, ArtNet, power (W=VA)
 -Lighting specific hardware
 -Payne lighting system in detail
Week 3:
 Tuesday: September 10th
 -Connectivity
 -MIDI
 -OSC
Week 3:
 Thursday: September 12th
 -Media Servers
 -Payne projection system in detail
                                          Page 4


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                            Fall 2019
Week 4:
 Tuesday: September 17th
 -in-class work day
 -Q & A (1 on 1 with Matt on a per project basis)
Week 4:
 Thursday: September 19th
 -in-class work day
 -Q & A (1 on 1 with Matt on a per project basis)
Week 5:
 Tuesday: September 24th
 -*DUE – Project 1* - in-class presentations
Week 5:
 Thursday: September 26th
 -Project 1 - in-class presentations continued
Week 6:
 Tuesday: October 1st
 -disguise overview (interface, timeline, menus, feedmap)
Week 6:
 Thursday: October 3rd
 -disguise continued (cues, play variations, projector calibration)
Week 7:
 Tuesday: October 8th
 -disguise continued (sock puppet)
Week 7:
 Thursday: October 10th
 -Q & A (disguise)
 -in-class work day
Week 8:
 Tuesday: October 15th
 -FLEX day (disguise specific topic)
Week 8:
 Thursday: October 17th
 -FLEX day (disguise specific topic)
                                             Page 5


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                        Fall 2019
Week 9:
 Tuesday: October 22nd
 -in-class work day
 -Q & A (1 on 1 with Matt on a per project basis)
Week 9:
 Thursday: October 24th
 -in-class work day
 -Q & A (1 on 1 with Matt on a per project basis)
Week 10:
 Tuesday: October 29th
 -*DUE – Project 2*, Presentation Day
Week 10:
 Thursday: October 31st
 -Project 2 - in-class presentations continued
Week 11:
 Tuesday: November 5th
 -AET Event Prefix: event details
 -AET Event: event details
 -AET Event: Lighting and Projection Plot / Section / System Diagram discussion
Week 11:
 Thursday: November 7th
 -AET Event Prefix: Pre-visualization
 -Lightconverse overview
Week 12:
 Tuesday: November 12th
 -FLEX day
 -AET Event Prefix: Pre-visualization
Week 12:
 Thursday: November 14th
 -*DUE – Project 3*, Schedule determined
Week 13:
 Tuesday: November 19th
 -FLEX day
 -AET Event
Week 13:
 Thursday: November 21st
 -FLEX day
 -AET Event
                                            Page 6


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                                       Fall 2019
Week 14:
 Tuesday: November 26th
 -FLEX day
 -AET Event
Week 14:
 Thursday: November 28th
 -THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS
Week 15:
 Tuesday: December 3rd
 -Rehearsal: AET Event (during class & evening)
Week 15:
 Thursday: December 5th
 -*DUE – Project 4*, Presentation Day (if not attending AET Event)
 -Rehearsal: AET Event (during class & evening)
                POLICIES OF THIS COURSE AND THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
     • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
                                             Page 7


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                                       Fall 2019
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
     “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
     of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student,
by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their
writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation,
and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal
growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
                                             Page 8


AET 348C: Live Event Engineering / Smith                                                       Fall 2019
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
          first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                             Page 9
