Advertising & Public Relations
       Law & Ethics
          ADV/PR353


Course Summary:
The course is designed to foster a critical understanding of advertising and PR as promotional
institutions, and their role in communication, society, culture, and our economy. Students develop
a framework in which to understand the continuing dialogue between supporters and critics, and
confront issues related to the institutions’ ethical conduct, regulatory issues, and social
responsibility. The course is set up for interaction and dialogue. You are provided with an
opportunity to try out and develop your ideas. Your job is to read, think, read some more, and
write critically about the role of advertising in society. My job is to help you in the process of
thinking through the material and developing your ideas.
Course Objectives:
 Understanding the larger role of advertising and public relations will make you a much more
 thoughtful and productive professional and consumer. The main objective of the course is to place
 advertising and PR within: a social context, a consumer culture, different economies, a changing
 commercial media system and a global environment.
 You will encounter a number of contemporary issues in advertising and PR, examine controversial
 aspects of content and practice in advertising and PR, and develop a critical perspective that you
 can use to approach the subject. Many views of advertising we will encounter in class will be
 uncomplimentary; others will vigorously affirm contemporary advertising & PR philosophy and
 practice.
 The course is designed to accomplish the following learning objectives:
 •     to read, think and write critically about the role of advertising and PR in society.
 •     to enhance knowledge and understanding of the conflicting arguments surrounding the roles
       and influences of advertising and PR in society.
 •     to provide a macro-perspective of advertising and PR as economic and social institutions.
 •     to introduce contemporary social, economic, regulatory, and ethical issues surrounding the
       practices of advertising and PR.
Prerequisites:
   Students must be Advertising or Public Relations majors, and they must have upper division
   standing.
Course Website:
   The course website is on Canvas. Tutorials for students who are unfamiliar with Canvas are
   available at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/welcome-to-canvas
         Syllabus subject to change to accommodate speakers, weather, class needs, etc.


Course Format:
  The professor will use an interactive lecture/discussion approach. Legal and ethical analysis lends itself
 to a dialog between the professor and student and among students, so class participation is important.
 Cases and team exercises will be used as a basis for class discussion. Team exercises will give students
 opportunities to develop and exercise the skills needed to work successfully with others. Students
 must come to class prepared and participate. It is also in students’ long-term interest to prepare
 thoroughly for each class because the material is cumulative. It is each student’s responsibility to
 attend class. Exams will include material raised during in-class discussion and/or examples from the
 professor, students, guest speakers, and films during class.
Topics:
 The course has four major themes, which will be intertwined throughout the course:
 The Legal Environment of Advertising and Public Relations
 Topics include an examination of commercial speech and the First Amendment, deception, libel,
 copyright, trademark, publicity rights, and industry self-regulation.
 Advertising/Public Relations & Society
 Topics focus on the aggregate effects of advertising and public relations and their social consequences
 such as potentially contributing to the obesity crisis, creating or reinforcing problematic stereotypes, or
 encouraging excessive materialism.
 Organizational Integrity and Corporate Social Responsibility
 Topics include organizational culture, corporate social responsibility, organizational diversity, and
 emerging topics in ethics and law.
 Personal Professionalism and Ethical Decision Making by Individuals
 Topics include an examination of professionalism, personal values, moral myopia and moral muteness,
 theories of moral conduct, ways of putting one’s personal values into action, lying, and whistleblowing.
 Reading Materials:
    Controversies in Contemporary Advertising, 2nd edition, 2013, by Kim Sheehan, ISBN-13: 978-
    1452261072
Reading Assignments:
 It is difficult to anticipate the pace of the class’ progress and the exact dates upon which guest speakers
 will be available. As such, reading assignments for individual class sessions will be posted on Canvas,
 and students must check Canvas prior to each class to find out the reading assignment. Readings that
 are available in electronic form will be posted on Canvas as will PowerPoint presentations used in class.
 If students miss a class session, it is their responsibility to find out what they missed by contacting
 another student and checking Canvas. Do not contact the professor or the teaching assistant for the
 assignment. Use Canvas and get to know fellow students.
          Syllabus subject to change to accommodate speakers, weather, class needs, etc.


                                     Class Policies
 Attendance
  Reliable and punctual attendance is critical in the workplace. As such, this course is designed as an
  opportunity to begin to practice good workplace habits. In addition, attendance and participation
  are important to learning. The expectation is that students will attend class for the entire session
  and participate in discussions and team activities. Leaving class before the session ends is
  disruptive to other students. As such, students should leave class only for bathroom emergencies
  or sickness. If students know in advance that they will need to leave class before the end, they
  should place a note with an explanation on the professor’s lectern before class starts.
  Attendance will be taken at each session with UT Instapoll, which can be downloaded here:
  https://concrete.la.utexas.edu/appstore
  Since students may have up to two absences with no penalty, absences due to illness,
  internships, interviews, weddings, etc., will not be excused. Students may review their
  attendance records on Canvas.. Students who contest the recording of an absence must do so
  within one week of the class session in question by e-mailing the TA.
Participation
  Outstanding participation in discussions (frequent and thoughtful participation) and on the Canvas
  Discussion Board can help a student’s final course grade, especially in close situations (i.e.,
  borderline grades).
Email
 Keep your emails formal; write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss at work, not to
 your friend. The TA is your first point of contact for your queries about grades. I am your first
 contact about the course material. The TA and I will try to return your e-mail within 24 hours of
 receiving it on Monday through Friday, or by Monday evening if we receive it on the weekend. E-
 mail is an excellent way to communicate if done appropriately.
Office Hours
 We, the professor and the teaching assistants, encourage students to come by our offices during
 office hours. Please feel free to come by simply to chat. Students should not use e-mail as a way of
 having a conversation with us about substantive issues; that is what class discussions and office
 hours are for. We do not mind being contacted by e-mail for administrative purposes.


Evaluation                                                                           Grades
  What                  How        When                                    To earn an:     You must earn:
                        Much                                               A               93-100 pts
                                                                           A-              90-92.9 pts
  Class                 10%        Daily                                   B+              87-.89.9 pts
  attendance                                                               B               83-86.9 pts
                                                                           B-              80-82.9 pts
  Exam 1                30%        M arch 4                                C+              77-79.9 pts
                                                                           C               73-76.9 pts
  Exam 2                30%        April 29                                C-              70-72.9 pts
                                                                           D+              66-69.9 pts
  Creative Project      30%        M ay 4                                  D               63-66.9 pts
                                                                           D-              60-62.9 pts
          Deliverable       10%                                            D-              0-59.9 pts
          Infographic       10%
         Presentation       10%
  Grading
v    I will not “round up” grades. So, if you earn an 89.6% that translates into a B+ and will not be
     rounded up to 90% (an A-). Note that Canvas often rounds up so your grade on Canvas might
     not be accurate. Always add up your total points to determine your grade.
v    Any questions or concerns about a grade must be presented in writing (i.e. via email) within
       two days (i.e., 48 hours) after the grade is announced or posted. Grades will not be discussed
       after this two-day period.
v    When we grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality
       of the work and the accuracy, appropriateness, and detail of your answers. You do not start
       with 100 points and then lose them based on mistakes you might make. Your final points
       represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away”
       for errors or omissions.
v    Grades will be posted to the Canvas grade book continually throughout class. I will attempt to
     upload grades within a reasonable time after their submission. Assignment feedback (where
     appropriate) will be returned via Canvas.
Exams
  No make-up exams will be given unless the absence is excused by the university (e.g., observance of
  religious holidays, participation in varsity sports). Please check the dates of the exams for all of your
  courses. If you are unwilling to take all of the exams for your courses as scheduled, then you should
  rearrange your courses.
  Exams will be multiple-choice questions. Exams will encompass classroom lectures and discussions,
  presentations by guest speakers, reading materials, and films or videos.


Other Important Notes
 • The instructor reserves the right to make changes, if necessary, to the grading system,
   schedule, or other matters pertaining to the class.
 • The instructor may also be reached via e-mail, but please be aware that the professor will
   not be able to respond immediately to your communication. As a rule, allow up to 24 hours
   for a response. Therefore, barring an emergency situation, it is advisable to contact the
   instructor well in advance of an exam or a deadline in order to give the professor adequate
   time to respond you.
 • Students are not to use laptop computers for other than to take class notes or follow
   PowerPoint presentations. Mobile telephones or other electronic devices are not allowed to
   use during class.
 • Students are not permitted to bring guests to class unless special arrangements have been
   made with the instructor prior to class.
 • If you notice yourself having trouble in the course, it is crucial that you see the instructor
   immediately.
 • Please feel free to approach the instructor about any concerns or comments you might have
   about this class. I will be happy to meet with you during my office hours, or by appointment.
 • You are expected to arrive promptly for class, fully prepared to discuss the assigned readings.
   While I understand the problems created by a large campus, it is your responsibility to arrive
   in class in a timely manner. Therefore, my good nature extends only 10 minutes. Anyone
   arriving more than 10 minutes late for class will be noted as absent, and his or her class
   participation grade will suffer as a result.
 • Attendance policy: Attendance is mandatory. Absences count from the first class meeting.
   After due warning, I may prohibit further attendance and subsequently assign a lower or
   failing grade for excessive absences; more than one unexcused absences during the
   semester will be considered “excessive absences.” Please see the university handbook on
   what qualifies as an excused absence.
 • Any evidence of plagiarism or cheating will result in an “E” for the course and possible
   disciplinary action.
 • Do not submit the same work to more than one class without prior written permission from
   both instructors. Do not adapt work from another class for this class without my prior
   written permission. Do not adapt someone else's work and submit it as your own. This
   course requires original work, created at this time, for this purpose.
 • Spelling counts. So does grammar, punctuation and professional presentation techniques.
 • An assignment turned in passed the deadline will not be accepted. This is a business where
   deadlines count. You can’t make excuses to your boss or a client if your work is late.
 • In addition to the required and recommended readings, you are expected to maintain
   comprehensive class notes because class lectures often contain information that is not
   contained in the readings.


                                Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any
work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student's own work.
I encourage you to collaborate with your fellow students by studying together and discussing
information and concepts covered in lecture, but all tests, quizzes and assignments must be
done independently.
Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student
who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment.
Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and
University disciplinary action.
During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during
the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way.
Any collaborative behavior during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may
lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
Understand that the online course format allows for multiple methods of identity verification,
collusion, collaboration and plagiarism monitoring and detection. A violation of the course
policy may include (but is not limited to) the following:
* Providing your UT EID to any other person
* Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the material on any
activity, assessment or assignment, before, during and/or after any activity, assessment or
assignment
* Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format
* The public (such that it can be viewed by more than one person) posting of any form of a test
bank or group of questions from any assignment


                          Other University Policies
1. Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your
email
address are available at: http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
2. Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official
accommodation letter from SSD.
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable
for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
(video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information.
3. Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day.
4. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
5. Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any
course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless
the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”


                              Policies Continued.
6. Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
 Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the
building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter
a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department,
or the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions to do so.
7. Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free
from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can: 1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating. 2.Provide support and
remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX
investigation. 3.Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If
you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.eduFor more information about reporting options and
resources, visit titleix.utexas.eduor contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The University of Texas is committed to providing a safe learning environment for all students that is
free of all forms of discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, domestic violence,
dating violence, and stalking. If you (or someone you know) has experienced or experiences any of
these incidents, know that you are not alone. The university has staff members trained to support you
in navigating campus life, accessing health and counseling services, providing academic and housing
accommodations, helping with legal protective orders, and more.
Please be aware all UT faculty members are “responsible employees,” which means that if you tell me
about a situation involving sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, domestic violence, or
stalking, I must share that information with the Title IX Coordinator. Although I have to make that
notification, you will control how your case will be handled, including whether or not you wish to
pursue a formal complaint. Our goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available to
you and have access to the resources you need.


                            Policies Continued.
8. Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student.
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning
how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.If you or anyone you
know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we
strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
For immediate support:
Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |
cmhc.utexas.edu CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication
Abby Simpson, LCSW | M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is
unavailable) FREE Services at CMHC; Mental health & wellness articles -
 cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html Classes, workshops, & groups -
 cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
