                                          Syllabus
                                        ALD 328
            Introduction to Teaching: Applied Learning and Development
                          AKA “Practicing Activist Teaching”
                                         Fall, 2018
Professor:     Jim Hoffman
               Office: SZB 334; phone 471-4041
               jhoffman@austin.utexas.edu
Class Sessions: Tuesdays 1:00-4:00
Field Supervisors:     Vickie Godfrey
                       Annie Daley
                       Erica Steinitz
Schedule:      School Placement/Observations
               Concentrated (First Weeks of School)
               Regular Routine in Field-Placement:
                       Wednesday               7:30-3:30
                       Thursday                7:30-3:30
                       Friday Mornings         (as arranged – a minimum of 6)
               Last Day in Classrooms: Friday, November 16th
               Mentoring: 1:00-1:45 (followed by debriefing and break)
               Mondays and Tuesdays
               Regular ALD Class Sessions: Monday, 2:00-4:00
       This course is designed as the “capstone” course in your ALD course sequence.
Through this course, the understandings you have developed through your earlier ALD
work (e.g, individual differences; cultural influences; cognition, learning and motivation;
language acquisition) will be applied to classroom teaching and learning to teach. It is a
course directed toward your understanding your emerging identity as a teacher. Your
personal “narrative” of becoming a teacher and your vision statement will be a constant
reference point for our work. Our work in this course will rely heavily on the
observations, interactions and reflections that are part of your field experiences this
semester. We will explore notions of Practicing Activist Teaching. This course will


interact (in requirements and work) around the other courses you are taking this semester
in Classroom Management and Reading Methods.


Course Requirements
Field Experiences:
Successful completion of your field-experience responsibilities is essential to this course.
You must be present at your assignment as required and fulfill all of your responsibilities
in your placement site. If you fall short in these responsibilities you may be required to
spend additional time at your placement site; or dropped from the course and asked to
repeat in a subsequent semester; and/or dropped from the program entirely (i.e., not
allowed to enter the student teaching semester in your professional development
sequence without additional work). Your performance will be assessed by your course
instructor with input from your cooperating teacher and your UT Facilitator. If there is a
problem regarding the quality of your performance you will be notified in writing, given
specific feedback and recommendations, and given an opportunity to adjust your level
work. If performance does not improved, one of the options listed above will be enforced.
Your Research Journal, and the Observations by your UT Supervisor and
Cooperating Teacher are the primary sources of evidence for the content and quality of
your teaching experiences during the semester.
You (not your friend or your roommate) must notify your UT facilitator and your
classroom teacher (not one, or the other, but both) in advance of any absences. Call
BOTH your supervisor and your teacher.
Narrative
This is an essay that describes your journey into teaching. No doubt your description of
this journey will become part of your vision statement. This narrative is a little more
descriptive that philosophical. This narrative will be shared with your classroom teacher.
The narrative is not long . . . less than 5 pages for sure. It will be due early in the
semester to be shared with your teacher as part of relationship building. If you can have
this ready to share when you start in the classroom, that would be an added bonus.
Your Professional Website
This website is your professional portfolio. We want create as much space as possible for
you to represent to others (your colleages, potential employers, parents of the children
you teach). You will be describing your envisioned self (identity) as a teacher of children
in a rapidly changing, shrinking and (not always) just world. You can expand this notion
of essay to include other modes of expression (photos, art work, posters, etc). This report
should reflect your philosophy of teaching that relates to how you foresee your life as a
professional -- your classroom, your students (as they live outside of school, and in our
society). We will build toward the representation of the content of your
philosophy/vision statement in each class session. The portion of your website that
focuses on your Vision statement will be part of a Class Presentation. The website will be
something of a shell by the end of this semester. We will be using Google Sites for this
purpose. You will continue to work on your website as part of Language Arts methods.


We will shift then to “linked-in” to connect to your website and your broader professional
community.
Readings and Class Discussion
Read and respond on our class blog to all assignments. Participate in class discussions.
We will establish a schedule for you to be the lead responder to readings. When you are
the responder you will not need to post a response to the reading. You will offer a five-
ten-minute summary of the responses in class. Postings must be made by 8:00 pm on
Sunday night before class. On the weeks that you are the responder, you will be leading
the class discussion of the readings. You will be asked to sign up to lead the discussions.
Practice Based Research
We will continue to develop our expertise in research. You will keep a research notebook
with entries from the first day you are in your classroom. Think of this work as
continuing through the entire year concluding with a presentation of your research in
March of next year. Your field supervisor and your cooperating teacher will be your
primary mentors in this work. We will continue to focus on developing a research stance
and research tools as we move through the semester. You may or may not work
collaboratively with your classroom teacher on this project. There will be several
activities related to this research work that will require extra work (e.g., completion of
human subjects research training).
Mentoring
Tutoring is transforming into Mentoring. We will discuss our thoughts on this in class.
The mentoring requirement bridges your work in several classes (COM, Reading
Methods, and ALD). The credit for your work will fall within this course. Teaching
Plans must be posted to the Custom site before teaching and reflections must be added
within two days. There is an additional emphasis this semester on co-teaching and peer
coaching within the cohort that will extend into our work in the field.
Texts
The reading demands of this course are substantial. There will be two books we are
drawing from and additional readings that will be posted. You will need to buy the
following books. All of the books focus on activism in teaching.
         William Ayers: To Teach
         Paulo Freire: Pedagogy of the Oppressed
         http://www.users.humboldt.edu/jwpowell/edreformFriere_pedagogy.pdf
         (selected Chapters)
You will need to order these books online in time for the start of the semester.


Models of Teaching: Co-Teach, Direct Teach, Indirect Teach with Critical
Reflection
Plan for and engage in co-teaching with your classroom teacher from the very start of
your teaching experience. This co-teaching is something you will arrange with your
teacher and your facilitator. Engage in shadowing and other forms of co-teaching that
will be described in class. Record and reflect on these in your research notebook.
Conduct a purposeful observation and submit a report.
Plan for and teach a direct instruction lesson in your classroom. There are specific
criteria for this lesson in terms of elements to be included. The direct teach lesson will be
observed. It may be part of literacy instruction or any another curriculum area. This
lesson will be observed by your UT facilitator.
Plan and teach in a more indirect instructional environment. Video-tape at least part of
this lesson. Transcribe a portion. Reflect on your teaching experience -- two pages. (We
will encourage you to use your Literature Unit you are working on in Reading Method
what as the context for your Indirect Teach. This unit will be observed by your UT
supervisor.
Learning to Teach through Experience: Coaching (peer, self, and mentor)
We will be working to develop our understandings of experience in learning to teach and
the place of coaching in our experience. There are two dimensions to this work in this
course. You will be keeping a log of your experiences in the field. You will engage as a
peer coach in your mentoring experience. The documentation for your coaching work
will be on your teaching plans.
Your log will be an extension of your first weeks of school journal with a focus on
reflecting in your observations, your co-teaching and your teaching in the classroom. For
your peer coaching experience, you will video-record an observation and a coaching
session. You will present an analysis of the strategies you are developing as a coach.
Due Dates and Deadlines
The due dates will be set for each of the assignments in the course. Points will be
deducted for work that is turned in late (minus 20% of the points for missing the
deadlines). Deadlines and evaluation criteria will be distributed in class as the
assignments are introduced.
Scholastic Dishonesty:
Scholastic dishonesty includes any action that gives unfair advantage to one student over
another. It includes cheating, plagiarism, and altering grades and is taken seriously in
this course and across campus. Students are advised that any instance of scholastic
dishonesty will be reported to the Dean of Students for disposition.


University Policy on Students with Disabilities:
"The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY."


Work Products/Requirements/Grades
Attend classes and participate                         100pts
        (Reading Responses and Quick Writes and Discussion Leader)
Entries in your Research Notebook.                     200pts
        You will be given a mid-semester report on each of the areas above. You can
        assume that you are getting full credit in these areas. If you are not up to the full
        level, you will be give written and oral feedback and the opportunity to adjust.
Direct Teach Lesson Plan and Teaching                                  75pts
Teaching Plans (indirect) and Analysis Classroom (Indirect Teach) 175 pts
Web site with: Teaching Narrative Vision/Philosophy Statement 150 pts
Mentoring (Materials, Planning, Instruction and Report)                200 pts
Peer Coaching and Video Analysis                                       100 pts
You will be given your grade within a week after the work is completed. You will be
given an opportunity to revise. If you would like feedback on drafts these can be
submitted early.
Grading Scale (adjusted based on points possible in an area):
        900-1000 pts (A)               Outstanding work, beyond the requirements
        800-899 pts (B)                Excellent work, meets high standards
        700-799 pts (C)                Satisfactory work - adequate
        Below 700 pts (F)              Unacceptable work (Failing)


                                 Class Session TOPICS
Class 1       August 16th (at Houston ES). 4-6
       Orientation and planning for field experiences and the first weeks of school.
       Sharing of the syllabus for ALD.
Class 2       September 4th
       Sharing of narratives into teaching (Bring this to class to post)
       Topic(s): Professional Identity: It’s the VISION thing: Teachers, Teaching,
       Narratives, You and Our Society. Historical, Contemporary and Futuristic
       Views of Teaching.
Class 3       September 11th
       Quick Write: Feedback
       Learning to Teach
              The role of experience, reflection and coaching support
\


Class 4       September 17th
       Quick Write: What do you see as the greatest challenges you will face as a
       teacher? (both as a beginning teacher and a career teacher)
       Topic: Research on Effective Teaching
Classes 5     September 18th
       Quick Write: Describe a student in your class who you see as a model
       student. Describe a student in your class who you think is the greatest
       challenge.


       Topic: Models of Teaching
Class 6       October 2nd
       Quick Write: Describe the learning environment in your classroom
       (physical, psychological, social spaces)?
       Topic: Models of Teaching
              Information Processing Models and Direct Instruction (Part I)
Classe 7      October 9th
First Draft Vision Statement Posted
       Readings and Postings:
       Quick Write: Describe a teacher who influenced you in your life as a
       student? What was it about this teacher that stood out to you as most
       important?
       Topic: Models of Teaching
              Information Processing Models and Direct Instruction (Part 2)
Classes 8     October 16th
Plan for Direct Teach Posted
       Readings and Postings:
       Quick Write: Who gets to talk in your classroom? About what? When? To
       what end?
       Topic: Social Models of Teaching
Class 9       October 23rd


       Readings and Postings:
Quick Write: Do you regard teaching an Art, a Science or a Craft? In what ways?
       Topic: Social Models of Teaching (Continued)
Class 10      Oct. 30th
       Readings and Postings:
       Quick Write: What is your envisioned relationship with your students, with
       their parents and with their community?
       Topic: Personal Models
The Commonplaces of Teaching (and controversial topics in teaching)
Class 11      November 6th
       Readings and Postings:
       Quick Write: Where will you find your curriculum? (the “what you teach”)
       Topic: Curriculum
Class 12      November 13th
       Readings and Postings:
       Quick Write: How will students be grouped in your classroom? For what
       purposes?
       Topic: Grouping


Class 13       November 20th
Indirect Teaching Analysis Completed and Uploaded
        Readings and Postings:
Quick Write: How will assessments (including state assessments) shape your
teaching?
        Topic: Accountability for All: High Stakes Testing
Critical Pedagogy: Becoming, Problem Posing . . . .


Post an invitation to respond. Prepare to Co-lead a class discussion that builds on the
responses.
    Class        Readings                                 Discussion Co-Leaders
2. Sept. 4       Duffy. “Balancing Round                          Faculty
                 Stones”
                 Activism in Teaching                             Faculty
3. Sept 11       Ayers, Chapter 1: Beginning:                    Students
                 The challenge of Teaching
4. Sept 17       Ayers Chapter 2: Seeing the                     Students
                 Student
5. Sept 18       Ayers                                           Students
                 Chapter 3: Creating an
                 Environment for Learning
6. Oct. 2        Ayers Chapter 4: Building                       Students
                 Bridges
7. Oct. 9        Ayers, Chapter 5: Liberating the                Students
                 Curriculum
8. Oct. 16       Ayers, Chapter 6: Keeping                       Students
                 Track
9. Oct. 23       Ayers, Chapter 7: The Mystery                   Students
                 of Teaching
                 Ayers, Chapter 8: Beginning
                 Again: The Current Challenge
                 to Teach
10. Oct. 30      Freire Introduction & Chapter 1                 Students
11. Nov. 6       Freire Chapter 2                                Students
12. Nov. 13      Freire Chapter 3                                Students
13. Nov. 20      Freire Chapters 4                               Students




