His 350R 27 (38305) / AMS 370 59 (30629): “Arts/Artifacts in the Americas”
Fall 2019, TTH 2-3:30 / BEN 1.108
Neil Kamil, Associate Professor
Department of History
Office Hours TTH 3:45-4:45 (& by appt) in GAR 2.146
kamil@austin.utexas.edu, 512-232-6110
Material culture is a term borrowed by a vast number of academic disciplines from
the study of archaeology, anthropology and folklore. It refers to all categories of
historical artifacts—things that range in status from artistic masterpieces to the
lowly stool, from architectural monuments to hedgerows, from religious rituals to
factories and industrial products. All this and much more are now studied avidly by
a growing number of historians in the hope of revealing overlooked evidence of past
lives that both compliment and reach beyond the historian’s traditional “comfort
zone” with the written text.
This course will survey the changing material culture of the western hemisphere
from pre-Columbian times to the beginning of the industrial revolution, with
occasional forays into later periods where appropriate. We will view artifacts from
an Atlantic perspective on all levels of society while sampling a cross-section of
written work from a number of disciplines and geographies in the Americas. We
will keep a keen eye on our central problem of telling the connected stories of
artisans, consumers and their societies within specific historical contexts that are
simultaneously local, regional and global. We will also think about the history of
beauty.
        Requirements: We will meet for discussions twice each week for 75 minutes.
Enthusiastic participation in discussion counts for a high percentage of your final
grade (30%), therefore absences will prove detrimental in this course. Readings
will not usually exceed three essays or chapters from the books below per session.
This is a writing course so requirements include a weekly 2 pp paper from all
students due every Thursday on what you perceive to be the main problems and
questions posed by all the readings discussed that week (50%). There will be a final
project on an artifact or subject related to the course of each student’s choice in the
form of a 7-page prospectus about which we will talk much more as the semester
goes on. Each student will be expected to give a class presentation on their project
(20%). Please be aware that the assignment of grades will be made on a plus or
minus basis and is completely up to the discretion of the instructor. Students with
disabilities may request academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
This course carries both Independent Inquiry and Writing Flags. Please review the
flag criteria at http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/teaching/flags.
Required Readings (UTCAT e-book; UT Coop; the usual online sources, and/or on
reserve at PCL):
                                                                                        1


UTCAT e-book: Arjun Appadurai, ed., The Social Life of Things: Commodities in
Cultural Perspective
UTCAT e-book: Samuel Y. Edgerton, Theaters of Conversion: Religious Architecture
and Indian Artisans in Colonial Mexico
Jules David Prown and Kenneth Haltman, ed., American Artifacts: Essays in Material
Culture (incorrectly listed as an e-book on UTCAT)
Robert Blair St. George, ed., Material Life in America, 1600-1860 (out of print but
readily available used on amazon.com and reserve)
UTCAT e-book: Sherry Turkle, Evocative Objects: Things We Think With
Week one: Getting Started
TH. Aug. 29. Organizational day
Week two: Evocative objects in our lives
T. Sept. 3. Discussion: Turkle, Evocative Objects, 3-61, 78-91, 101-17, 153-61, 184-
92, and 217-43.
TH. Sept. 5. Oral presentations of students’ personal histories
Paper due
Week three: Material Culture, Brief Introduction to Theory and Practice
T. Sept. 10. Discussion: Foreward and Introduction, and JD Prown, “The Truth of
Material Culture, History or Fiction?” in Prown and Haltman, American Artifacts, ix-
27, Rhys Isaac, “Ethnographic Method in History: An Action Approach,” in St. George,
Material Life in America, 39-61.
TH. Sept 12. Discussion: Arjun Appadurai, “Introduction: Commodities and the
Politics of Value,” in The Social Life of Things, 3-63.
Paper due
Week four: Short films on ARTBABBLE document a class of undergraduates from
the University of Wisconsin, Madison, as they engage problems in object analysis
with artifacts from the Chipstone Foundation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin.
Go to: http://www.artbabble.org/partner/chipstone
TTH. Sept 17th & 19th. Discussion: Students will choose one short film from this site
to write about and discuss in class.
Paper due
Week five: Mesoamerican Artisans and “mixed” cultures
T. Sept. 24. Discussion: Theaters of Conversion, Introduction, chapters 1-4
TH. Sept. 26. Discussion: (scan) Holly Snyder, “English Markets, Jewish Merchants,
and Atlantic Endeavors: Jews and the Making of British Transatlantic Commercial
                                                                                     2


Culture, 1650-1800,” in RL Kagan and PD Morgan, ed., Atlantic Diasporas: Jews,
Conversos, and Crypto-Jews in the Age of Mercantilism, 1500-1800, 50-74.
Paper due
Week six: European Contexts and Colonial Beginnings in early North America
T. Oct. 1. Discussion: Alfred Gell, “Newcomers to the World of Goods: Consumption
Among the Muria Gonds,” and Patrick Geary, “Sacred Commodities: The Circulation
of Medieval Relics,” in The Social Life of Things, 110-40, 169-94
TH. Oct. 3. Discussion: James H. Merrell, “The Indians’ New World: The Catawba
Experience,” in Material Life in America, 95-112.
Paper due
Week seven: Race and Slavery
T. Oct. 8. Discussion: Philip D. Morgan, “Work and Culture: The Task System and the
World of Lowcountry Blacks, 1700-1880,” and Dell Upton, “White and Black
Landscapes in Eighteenth-Century Virginia,” in Material Life in America, 203-32,
357-70.
TH. Oct. 10. Discussion: Melvin Wade, “’Shining in Borrowed Plumage’: Affirmation
of Community in the Black Coronation Festivals of New England, ca. 1750-1850,” in
Material Life in America, 171-82; Daisann McLane, “Unwrapping the bwat sekre:
The Secrets of a Haitian Money Box,” in American Artifacts, 109-28.
Paper due
Week eight: Women and Gender
T. Oct. 15. Discussion: Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, “Furniture as Social History: Gender,
Property, and Memory in the Decorative Arts,” in Luke Beckerdite and William N.
Hosley, ed., American Furniture 1995 (Hanover and London: University Press of
New England, 1995): 39-67 (reserve), Marylynn Salmon, “Women and Property in
South Carolina: The Evidence from Marriage Settlements, 1730-1830,” in Material
Life in America, 291-309.
TH. Oct. 17. Discussion: Robyn Asleson, “Seduced by an Old Flame: Paradox and
Illusion in a Late-Twentieth-Century Lucite Lighter,” Leslie Shannon Miller, “The
Many Figures of Eve: Styles of Womanhood Embodied in a Late-Nineteenth-Century
Corset,” and Joel Pfister, “A garden in the Machine: Reading a Mid-Nineteenth-
Century, Two-Cylinder Parlor Stove as Cultural Text,” in American Artifacts, 29-46,
129-66.
Paper due
Week nine: TTH. Oct 22 & 24. Meetings during class time with students about final
projects.
Week ten: Space and Landscape
                                                                                    3


T. Oct. 29. Discussion: A.G. Roeber, “Authority, Law, and Custom: The Rituals of
Court Day in Tidewater Virginia, 1720-50,” Rodris Roth, Tea-Drinking in Eighteenth-
Century America: Its Etiquette and Equipage,” in Material Life in America, 419-62.
TH. Oct. 31. Discussion: Betsy Blackmar, “Rewalking the ‘Walking City’: Housing and
Property Relations in New York City, 1780-1840,” in Material Life in America, 371-
84.
Paper due
Week eleven: Cloth
T. Nov. 5. Discussion: Brian Spooner, “Weavers and Dealers: The Authenticity of An
Oriental Carpet,” in The Social Life of Things, 195-235.
Th. Nov. 7. Discussion: William M. Reddy, “The Structure of a Cultural Crisis:
Thinking about Cloth in France Before and After the Revolution,” in The Social Life
of Things, 195-236.
“The Minds of the Makers: Kate Smith”
http://www.artbabble.org/video/chipstone/minds-makers-kate-smith
Week twelve: Clay
T. Nov. 12. Discussion:
        “Michelle Erickson and London’s Indigenous Clays”
http://www.artbabble.org/video/chipstone/michelle-erickson-and-londons-
indigenous-clays and,
TH. Nov. 14. Discussion: Salomon Kroonenberg, Why Hell Stinks of Sulfur:
Mythology and Geology of the Underworld chapters one (scan): “The Gobstopper”
and five (scan): “The Vestibule.”
Week thirteen: Wood and Stone
T. Nov. 19. Discussion:
Robert Blair St. George, “Artifacts of Regional Consciousness in the Connecticut
River Valley, 1700-1780,” in Material Life in America, 261-90, 335-56
TH. Nov. 21. Discussion: John L. Brooke, “’For Honour and Civil Worship to Any
Worthy Person’: Burial, Baptism, and Community on the Massachusetts Near
Frontier, 1730-1790,” in Material Life in America, 463-86.
Paper due
Week fourteen: Thanksgiving week
T. Nov. 26. Field Trip to the Harry Ransom Center
TH. Nov 28. Thanksgiving—No Class!
Week Fifteen: Student Presentations
                                                                                    4


TTH. Dec 3 & 5. Individual presentations in class of students’ final projects.
Final Papers Due: Monday, Dec. 9th—Last day of classes for the semester.
Template for Final Project
Due: Final Class Day
How to compose a prospectus for a chapter for a (fictional)
collection of essays to be published under the title Arts and
Artifacts in the Americas. Professor Kamil, as editor, will
consider your chapter; that is to say, whether it will be
accepted for publication. The chapter will analyze a topic or a
specific object and its historical context. The chapter’s subject
matter may be derived from any of the categories outlined on
the syllabus or may also explore a similar category not on the
syllabus.
What is a prospectus? The dictionary definition:
noun: prospectus; plural noun: prospectuses
   1. a printed document that advertises or describes a school,
       commercial enterprise, forthcoming book, etc., in order to
       attract or inform clients, members, buyers, or investors.
Therefore, your prospectus will be a 5-7-page document that
describes the essence of what Professor Kamil can expect in
the final iteration of your forthcoming chapter, which should
be about 30 pages in length.
I      Title
II     Abstract
A brief summary (or abstract) of your chapter, single-spaced,
limited to 50 words in length.
                                                                               5


III    Hypothesis
noun: hypothesis; plural noun: hypotheses
    1. a supposition or proposed explanation made on the basis
       of limited evidence as a starting point for further
       investigation.
       Your hypothesis can run about a page in length.
IV     Sources / Evidence
This includes bibliography, specific artifacts (including
locations), museum collections, open-air materials (street art,
etc.), oral history, and / or media (for example, films). Your
bibliography of published or archival materials (books, articles,
primary sources) should constitute the largest contribution to
this category.
Your source section should run from 2-3 pages in length. This
listing should be headed by a paragraph telling Professor Kamil
the history of what has been said about your topic in the past
and what questions this older historiography inspires you to
ask of your subject now.
V      Possible Interpretive Strategy
How do you imagine your hypothesis may play out in your
chapter? In other words, considering your source materials
and your hypothesis together, what do you think will be the
likely outcome of your research?
The interpretation should run 4 pages in length.
                                                                6


VI   The “so what” question.
Conclude your prospectus by briefly telling Professor Kamil
why, in the light of everything we’ve learned in this course
about the problems and opportunities inherent in the study of
material culture, this proposed chapter will be an important
contribution to the new literature of arts and artifacts in
America.
                                                              7
