ARC 327G/386M: REGNERATIVE ARCHITECTURE
Fall 2019
Instructor: Michael Garrison
OBJECTIVE
The intent of this course is to learn to integrate sustainable building and
planning principles into the form making process of architectural design. This
course is intended to be one of a series of design enrichment seminars that
explore in depth the principles of qualitative and quantitative design.
CONTENT
The course content will: survey the principles of environmentally sensitive
design and planning, review case studies of "green building" applications and
explore various concepts for integrating sustainable planning and building
principles into the form making process of architectural design. The process
includes: an analysis of bioclimatic comfort and building metabolism; design
with climate; integration of passive heating and cooling systems; water
conservation planning; waste systems; and the basis for specifying sustainable
building materials. The focus of the course investigation for the fall semester
of 2019 will be to develop the design and the sustainable architecture principles
for the AIA COTE Student Design Competition 2019-2020.
FORMAT
The course will have six components, including: 1) regularly scheduled
lectures; 2) a series of reading assignments; 3) class presentations; 4) class
discussions; 5) two research papers; and a 6) final exit paper. Note the six
components complement each other. The lectures and readings are offered to
provide the basic "information" of the course. The class discussions should


explore the implications of the topics considered in the lectures and readings.
Finally, the paper assignments are meant to encourage student synthesis of
the course material and the final report is to challenge the student to pursue
further research and implementation of sustainable strategies in design and
planning.
EVALUATION
There will be two papers or written documentation and evaluations of proposed
designs or case study examples of Regenerative Architecture set forth in the
course lectures and readings. The first paper is a team project (five to six) that
should explore the context for sustainable architecture in the design and
development of the Race to Zero ten contests as outlined in our first lecture.
Each team member will be required to present a paper on one of the ten
contests topics. The research paper should be approximately, 2500 words in
length and include both: GOOD quality graphic examples of your research
topic, and thoroughly documented case studies of your research topic. The
paper is due Nov. 6, 2019 and should also include precedent studies. The
second paper is a group project for the entire team members that should
explore the integration of all 10 contest topics and include concepts of
sustainable communities. The research paper should be 1800 words in length
and include both: GOOD quality graphic examples of your research topic, and
thoroughly documented case studies of your research topic. Your paper will be
due Dec. 3, 2019. A one-page final summation paper is due for the class on
the day that the University of Texas at Austin schedules for your final exam.
The two papers will be worth: 35 points for paper one, 10 points for your team
presentation of paper one, 25 points for paper two, and 10 points for your
presentation of paper two. Your final summation paper is worth 15 points.
Consideration of up to 5 additional points for participation in the class
discussions and for attendance will be considered. All papers should be left in
the instructor’s faculty mailbox no later than 5 PM on the day that they are
due. Papers more than one class period late will be lowered one letter grade
for each class that the paper continues to be late. Class attendance in this
course is mandatory and absences from the class unrelated to course work will
generally have an adverse effect on the student's final grade in the course.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259.If you have a conflict
during these hours you may make an appointment with the instructor at 512
632-1972 or via e-mail mgarrison@utexas


READINGS ON RESERVE IN BATTLE HALL READING ROOM
 Juhani Pallasmaa, The Eyes of the Skin: Architecture and the Senses, 3 rd
      Edition, John Wiley & Sons, United Kingdom, 2012.
 Stephen Kellert, Judith Heerwagen and Martin Mador, Biophilic Design, The
      Theory, Science and Practice of Bringing Building to Life, 1 st Edition,
      John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken NJ, 2008.
 Kiel Moe, Thermally Active Surfaces in Architecture, Princeton Architectural
      Press, New York NY, 2010
 Kiel Moe, Convergence: An Architectural Agenda for Energy, Routledge
      Press, New York NY, 2013
 Kiel Moe, Integrated Design in Contemporary Architecture, Princeton
      Architectural Press, New York NY 2008
 Paul Hawken, Natural Capitalism: Creating The Next Industrial Revolution,
      Little Brown and Company, Boston, 1999.
 David W. Orr, Earth In Mind: Environment, and the Human Prospect, Island
      Press, Washington, D.C., 1994.
 William McDonough and Michael Braungart , Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the
      Way We Make Things, North Point Press, 2002.
 Alison Kwok, The Green Studio Handbook, Architectural Press, Elsevier, UK,
      2011.
 Paul Hawken , The Ecology of Commerce: A Declaration of Sustainability,
      Harper Collins Publishers, New York, 1993.
 Edward Allen, How Buildings Work: The Natural Order of Architecture, New
      York: John Wiley & Sons, 1996.
 John Tillman Lyle, Regenerative Design for Sustainable Development, New
      York: John Wiley & Sons, 1994.
 Klaus Daniels, The Technology of Ecological Building; Basic Principles and
      Measures, Examples, and Ideas, Basel, Switzerland: Birkhauser, 1995.
 Ken Yeang, Designing With Nature: The Ecological Basis for Architectural
      Design, New York: McGraw Hill, 1995.
 Sim Van de Ryn & Stuart Cowan, Ecological Design, Washington, D.C.: Island
      Press, 1996.
 Andrea Compagno, Intelligent Glass Facades, Boston: Birkhauser, 1997
 Lance Hosey, The Shape of Green Aesthetics, Ecology and Design,
      Island Press, 2012.
 Jim Wasley and David Rousseau, Healthy by Design, Harley & Marks, 1997.
