                                 Development and Its Critics
                                  ANS 361 – Unique 31690
                          University of Texas at Austin – Fall 2019
                                           RLP 0.118
                                Tuesday and Thursday 5-6:30
                                 Professor Heather Hindman
                  Office: WCH (Will C. Hogg) 4.104C – Phone: 471-1667
                   E-mail: h.hindman@mail.utexas.edu (preferred contact)
     Office Hours: Tues. 3:30 - 4:30, Thurs. 12:30-1:30 -- Other times by appointment
Course Description
        This class approaches aspects of the contemporary condition of international aid
and development. While people have been seeking better methods of ‘doing good’ in
hopes of improving their own lives and those of their community for a long time, this
isn’t development, at least as we will discuss it in this class. In the post-colonial era (thus
after about 1950), nation-states have created new methods and logics behind their support
of/by other nation-states. While governments were long central to the operation of
international aid, businesses and NGOs (non-governmental organizations) have gained
prominence in recent years. Now, it can often be difficult to disentangle public/private or
governmental/non-governmental dimensions. Increasingly (and perhaps especially
because of the critique of colonialism), individuals and groups wonder if development is
even a good idea. Instead, many actors are promoting ideas of social entrepreneurship or
other forms of revenue-generating “aid programs.” The result is an extremely complex
landscape behind even the most basic goal of aid - “fewer people starving, suffering and
dying.” Beyond this goal, there is little agreement. Rather than approaching the
unreasonable goal of deciding what good aid and bad aid is (read this twice - we will not
be solving the problem of the right way to do development), we will be looking at two
particular aspects of aid: the imbrication of aid into nation-state goals and development as
a distinctive type of industry. At the conclusion of the class, students will have a better
idea about the decision making that takes place within the development industry and the
scope of aid as a economic and social force in the contemporary world.
Texts and Readings
Two books have been ordered as required reading for this class:
Alexander, Jessica. 2013. Chasing Chaos: My Decade in and out of Humanitarian Aid. New
        York: Broadway Books.
Bornstein, Erica. 2012. Disquieting Gifts: Humanitarianism in New Delhi. Stanford: Stanford
        University Press.
These books are available at the UT Co-op bookstore, but also via on-line booksellers.
Our other readings are from assorted journals, books and edited collections will be available on
Canvas.
                                                                                                 1


Please check Canvas regularly – syllabus updates and additional information will often be posted
there. You should bring the relevant text to class each day as we will be discussing the texts in
class and that will be facilitated by you having something to remember the ideas.
Readings listed for a given class day should be completed BEFORE coming to class to enable
your active participation in discussion. If you are not able to do the readings, come to class
anyway – but I anticipate this will only happen once or twice during the semester. (If student
preparation becomes a problem, I reserve the right to introduce in-class quizzes as an
enforcement mechanism.)
Assignments
There are five components to how your performance in this class will be evaluated. NOTE: On
the syllabus all assignments are listed in Bold.
(#1) Class participation in this course is highly valued. (Perhaps needless to say, but attendance
is an element of this – participating in class is difficult if you are not in class. Attendance is thus
also a significant part of your participation grade.) Participation is more than ‘talking a lot’ –
instead it is being an enthusiastic, prepared and considerate member of a learning community. To
this end, coming to class prepared with notes and questions is often useful. Given that not
everyone feels comfortable speaking in class, there are other ways you can participate. If you
wish to contribute, but feel more comfortable writing, please feel free to send me an email with
your thoughts on recent reading or to post a note on Canvas. I also encourage you to discuss in
readings you encounter about development outside the class or issues raised by the course
material that relates to other classes. Also remember: Discussion is a situation where more is not
better – quality over quantity.
In this class we will be talking about divisive, controversial and important issues – sex, religion,
race, etc. – I expect students to show respect to themselves and other members of the learning
community in these discussions. Please be considerate of one another. All opinions are welcome
in this course if presented with civility and scholarly rigor.
(#2) There are six (6) response assignments that are designed to get you organizing your thoughts,
to get in good writing habits and to generate conversation in class. These responses are due on
Canvas 8 AM the day of the class where we will discuss them. The submissions to Canvas are
necessary to formulate the discussion for class the next day. I may call on individual students to
share their responses. I might offer some comments on the papers, especially at the beginning of
the semester, to be sure you are on track with the readings. A good response will connect the
reading to news events or other assignments, ask probing questions of the text or offer comments
on the nature of the argument. Responses should get beyond “I liked/didn’t like” it and should
offer open ended questions, rather than fact-based queries. You will be given a handout on
responses that will go into more detail - responses should be about 300-500 words. Importantly,
these are texts to be used, thus cannot be turned in late.
(#3) Each student will look at one NGO or government aid organization in depth, examining the
funding structure, employment practices and projects engaged by the organization. There will be
a set of data that every report will need to include, but students are encouraged to go beyond this
requirement. An assignment sheet with further details will be required. This assignment will
require substantial research, but likely not a substantial number of pages (1,000 words).
                                                                                                        2


(#4&5) There is a midterm and a cumulative final for the course. The midterm will be more fact-
oriented as the initial section of the course seeks to place us all on the same page and introduce
terms. The final will cover some of the concepts that have proven challenging but also ask for
more creative and analytical responses.
The numbers…
         Participation/Attendance 15%
         Reading Responses          30%
         NGO Analysis               10%
         Midterm                    15%
         Final                      30%
An insight into the mind of your professor: I dislike the grading aspect of teaching and am far
more enthusiastic about talking about how you are doing in the course than arguing over letters
and numbers. Having a conversation before an assignment is due about the learning process and
how each individual can improve is more useful than looking at “A”, “B” or “C” at the top of
your paper.
My Policies
         ABSENCES
         I expect students to come to class regularly, on time and prepared. If you do not do this,
not only will your grade be negatively affected, but it disrupts the learning process of your fellow
students as well as showing a lack of respect for the course. This is admittedly one of my pet
peeves. If you must miss a class, make arrangements with your fellow students to make up the
material. There are no ‘free absences’ in the class outside of legitimate and documented needs.
Attending class means showing up on time, prepared and ready to learn. If you are not prepared –
which I don’t anticipate will ever happen – come to class anyway. I do not require
documentation of medical absences, but please keep me informed, preferably in advance. Many
problems can be solved if you keep in contact with your professors.
         ACADEMIC HONESTY
         I expect students to conduct their research and writing honestly and to reference any
sources consulted. Plagiarism is theft and a particular heinous crime to those whose life is
writing and research. Any dishonest academic practice will be referred to the administration for
investigation. I encourage collaboration among students, which is different from copying or
paper trading. One can never be accused of academic dishonesty if you acknowledge where your
ideas came from. Learning how to master a combination of direct citation, paraphrase and idea
acknowledgement takes time and practice. In the meantime, CITE EVERYTHING. If in doubt
about the ethics of a situation, contact me – do not guess.
         COMMUNICATION
         I enjoy meeting with students in office hours and exchanging email with students. YET,
I do not check email every 10 minutes. I am very eager to answer student questions by email,
discuss points of the reading or relevant outside materials, but please think before you write.
Show respect in your communication with me and with one another. I rarely use my office
phone, you are more likely to get a response from me by email.
         MISCELLANEOUS
- Turn off your cell phone when you get to class.
- I DO NOT ALLOW LAPTOPS IN CLASS. It has just become too much of a problem. If
you have a documented need to use a laptop, please provide it. Recent studies suggest that
students remember things better if written down the old-fashioned way, with paper and pen.
- You may eat and drink in class, if it is subtle and not distracting to you or other students. A cup
of coffee – great – a roast chicken dinner – wait until after class.
                                                                                                     3


University Notices and Policies
Global Cultures Flag
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion
of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-
U.S. cultural group, past or present.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e- mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your disability
from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss
the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing
accommodations you will need. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss
by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
               Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
                exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
               If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
               In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
SYLLABUS POLICY SUMMARY – If in doubt - ask! I am much happier
discussing potential problems and concerns than dealing with events in the past or
problems that have been allowed to grow over time.
                                                                                                                         4


                                            SCHEDULE
(This reading list is subject to change. I promise to give advanced notice, but you must
check Canvas and your UT email regularly.)
An insight into this class: I have been writing about and researching development for nearly 20
years and continue to find the topic challenging and troubling. Poverty, environmental
degradation, poor infrastructure and human rights violations are rampant and disturbing. And yet,
most (maybe the majority) of development projects do a poor job of addressing these very real
and troubling issues. It will be a challenge for all of us to avoid cynicism. These problems are
real and the work we are doing in this class is meaningful - potentially world-changing.
August 29 - Introducing topic, students, professor
September 3 - Introduction to the Class
        “The Development Game” - Leonard Frank
Part One - Setting the Stage: This section of the class is working to put forward a few key
ideas and history of development. While at times dull, these are shared assumptions that are
necessary to future readings. Often, I will be lecturing about topics beyond the reading, but
assume you are keeping up with the assignments before the class. Any questions you have about
the material is welcomed.
September 5 - Development’s History
        “Introduction: The Anthropology of Development and Globalization” - pp 1- 21.
        10       “The Rise and Fall of Development Theory” - Leys
        “The History and Politics of Development Knowledge” Cooper & Packard
September 12 Culture as a Barrier
        “An Intellectual Heritage of Development” - Crewe
        (Reading Response due at 8AM!!!)
September 17 - Give and Take
        “Muddy Labor” - Watanabe
        19 - Aid Work as Work
        “Introduction” - Hindman & Fetcher
Part Two - Scales and Styles of Gaze: This section of the class looks from the point of view
from a humanitarian aid worker, Jessica Alexander, at the same time students will begin
exploring the scholarly and policy approach to development and humanitarian aid.
        24 - Chasing Chaos - pages 1- 68
        26 - Chasing Chaos - pages 68 - 141
                                                                                                 5


October 1- Chasing Chaos - pages 141 - 219
        (Reading Response due at 8AM)
October 3 - Chasing Chaos - pages 220-304
        8 - Chasing Chaos - pages 305-377
Part Three - Doing Good, Better: Humanitarian and development work comes (nearly
always) from a intention to “do good” - but often falls short, whether in efficiency or
actually creating new problems. This section of the course explores some examples of
these challenges
October 8 - Cash Transfer Under Neoliberalism
        Ferguson - “Introduction. Cash Transfers and New Welfare States”
        10 - Social Entrepreneurship and BOP Development
        Schwittay - “The Marketization of Poverty”
        Dolan - “The New Face of Development”
                (Reading Response due at 8 AM)
        15 - Voluntourism
        Butcher and Smith - “Making a Difference”
        Sinervo - “Independent Industries and Ethical Dilemmas”
October 17-     Midterm
Part Four - The Poisoned Gift: This section looks at Indian practices of aid,
particularly for orphans, and connects pre-existing practices of dan, or gift, with new or
international ideas of how good development and aid can be and should be done. This
also looks at the important issue of transparency; how do donors know their money is
well-utilized.
October 22-     Start Bornstein
        24      Continue Bornstein
        29      Continue Bornstein
                (Reading Response due at 8AM)
        31 -    Continue Bornstein
November 5- Continue Bornstein
                NGO Review Due
                                                                                           6


Part Five - Topics: This section of the class examines some recent, and promoted an
innovative, approaches to development. These themes can be changed depending upon
the interests and experience of the students.
November 7 - Microfinance and Women-centered Development
                Karim -“Demystifying Micro-Credit”
        12      The Green Revolution and Agricultural “Best Practices”
                IFPRI - “Green Revolution”
                Shiva - Introduction to Violence of the Green Revolution
                (Reading Response due at 8AM)
        14      China in Africa
                Brautigam “China in Africa: Seven Myths”
                Niu - “China’s development and its aid presence in Africa”
        19      Disasters and Disastrous Aid
                Schuller - “Seeing Like a ‘Failed’ NGO”
                Tamang - “Dangers of Resilience” (online)
                Warner, Hindman and Snellinger - “Aftershocked” (online)
                (Reading Response due at 8 AM)
November 21 TBA
        26      Anthropologists on Development
                Escobar - “The Making and Unmaking of the Third World Through
                Development”
                Ferguson - “Global Disconnection”
        28 Thanksgiving
December 3      The Techno-fix
                Citrin and online assignments
December 5      Review for Exam
The final will occur on the day our final is assigned by the registrar.
                                                                                    7
