REE S325/CL S323/HIS S362G
“Rebels and Revolutionaries in Russian History and Literature”
Instructor Information: Marina Alexandrova, PhD
Class Meetings: MTWThF 10-11:30 AM via Zoom.
Office Hours: Mon, Tue 12 – 1pm, and by appointment via Zoom
Course Description: Spanning almost a century of Russian literature, this course highlights a
gallery of fictional and real rebels and revolutionaries. Were they heroes and martyrs who
sacrificed their lives to improve the lot of others? Or unscrupulous and manipulative
individuals who disguised their thirst for power behind an agenda of societal
betterment? From Pushkin’s portrayal of Emelian Pugachev’s rebellion in the 1770s to
Nechaev’s organized revolutionary group, which inspired Dostoevsky’s Demons, to Bakunin’s
writings and memoirs of notorious revolutionaries and intelligentsia’s responses to the
“revolutionary virus,” the array of representations of rebels and revolutionaries simultaneously
served as a reflection of their popular perception and formed the reading public’s opinion on
these issues. We will supplement textual analysis of prose and poetry with the study of
historical documents in order to understand the complex historical, moral, and cultural
dimensions of such enduring phenomena as revolution, rebellion, and terrorism.
Course Materials:
Pushkin, Aleksandr. The Captain’s Daughter (1836)
Pushkin, Aleksandr. “In the Depths of Siberian Mines” (1827)
Bakunin, Mikhail. The Revolutionary Catechism (1865)
Nechaev's Catechism of the Revolutionary (1869) (excerpts)
Turgenev, Ivan. Fathers and Children (1862)
Stepniak-Kravchinsky, Sergei. Underground Russia: Revolutionary Profiles and Sketches
from Life (1883) – Google Books
Vera Zasulich’s and Vera Figner’s memoirs (excerpts from Five Sisters: Women against the
Tsar)
Ropshin, V. (Savinkov, Boris) Pale Steed (1909) – Google Books
All materials are available on Canvas, except Turgenev’s Fathers and Children.


Class Attendance: Daily class attendance via ZOOM is required. You are expected to read all
assigned texts before the class and to participate actively in the discussion. According to
the General Information catalog, “[a] student who is absent from a class or examination for
the observance of a religious holy day may complete the work issued within a reasonable
time after the absence, if proper notice has been given” (page 71). The deadline for
notification of such an absence is four days prior to the class absence or the first class day for
religious holy days that fall within the first two weeks of the semester. Attendance will be
taken daily.
Special Accommodations: At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who
need special accommodations should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by
the Services for Students with Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most appropriate
accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or
471-4641 TTY.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. Refer to the Student Judicial Services website for official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
 Grade Evaluations:
    1. Two Response Papers (30%): Response papers should reflect your thinking on
        assigned reading. Format: 2-3 pages (at least 1,000 words), Times New Roman, 12
        pt. You will be evaluated on the depth and quality of your reflections, clarity of style,
        and cohesiveness of argumentation. After you receive your paper back, you will have
        a week to revise and resubmit it, if desired. Detailed instructions will be provided a
        week before the draft is due.
    2. Two Exams (50% total): Each exam will test your knowledge of material discussed in
        class and studied independently at home. Exams will include ID, multiple-choice, and
        essay questions.
        Midterm (40 min) – 20%
        Final exam (75 min) – 30%
    3. Presentation (10%): In pairs, you will prepare a 15-20-minute oral presentation on one
        of the topics offered at the beginning of the semester. You will discuss your
        presentation with your instructor no later than one week in advance.


     4. Participation (10%): Your instructor will determine this part of the grade based on your
        preparedness and participation in class. There are three components of success: regular
        attendance, advance reading/preparation of assigned materials, and insightful, well-
        formulated comments during discussions.
        Important: Bring your text and reading diary to each class! In the diary, you will record
        your thoughts, questions, and observations while reading the assigned pieces. It is
        tremendously helpful when you are generating ideas for your papers and prepare for
        exams.
Special Considerations for Online Delivery
*Please treat our daily Zoom sessions like regular, in-person class meetings. Professional and
respectful conduct and appearance are expected of all students. Please refrain from eating or
engaging in other distracting activities. Students are expected to have their cameras on during
class meetings.
*Our Zoom meetings are a safe space to voice your opinions, examine difficult issues, learn,
and grow as scholars and human beings. We will be discussing a number of potentially divisive
and controversial topics, and adherence to high standards of respectful discourse is paramount.
Do not hesitate to notify the instructor or TA if there are any concerns regarding freedom of
expression, civility, and collegiality.
*If you are experiencing technical difficulties with Zoom, please let us know and check out
UT IT services.
                           Tentative Daily Schedule for Summer 2020
 Date     In Class                           At Home
 6/4     Introductions. Terrorists,          Find examples of a revolution, uprising, or revolt,
         Rebels, Revolutionaries.            and post it on Canvas.
 6/5     Types of revolution (group          Read the article “Emancipation by the Axe?” in
         discussion). Intro to Russian       course pack (CP) on Canvas, and first seven
         history.                            chapters of The Captain’s Daughter (612-736).
 6/8     The Captain’s Daughter              Read chapters eight through fourteen (737-855).
         discussion (questions posted on     Be ready to discuss questions in class.
         Canvas).


6/9  The Captain’s Daughter             Read "Message to Siberia" and "Role of
     discussion (questions posted on    Literature" in your course packet (Canvas). Read
     Canvas).                           the Introduction to Novels, Tales, Journeys
                                        (Canvas).
6/10 Pushkin: Life and Works. The       Belinsky’s letter to Gogol. Sections I and II of
     Decembrists.                       “Russian Social Thought.”
6/11 Secret societies in the first half Sections III and IV of “Russian Social Thought.”
     of the 19 century. Petrashevtsy.
              th
     Belinsky’s Letter to Gogol.
6/12 Discussion Session                 Article “F & C: Turgenev and the Liberal
                                        Predicament.” Fathers and Children (pp. 1 – 52)
6/15 Nihilism. Fathers and Children     Fathers and Children (52 – 89) + “Turgenev and
                                        Revolution”
6/16 Fathers and Children               Fathers and Children (89 – 133)
6/17 Fathers and Children               Fathers and Children (133-163)
6/18  Fathers and Children              Section V of “Russian Social Thought.”
6/19   Discussion Session               "Revolutionary Catechism," "Catechism of the
                                        Revolutionist," and "Bakunin to Nechayev on the
                                        role of secret revolutionary societies" on Canvas.
6/22 First Response Paper               Bakunin and Nechaev, Bakunin’s “Confession”
     Due. Bakunin and Nechaev           (optional)
6/23 Midterm.                           Section VI of “Russian Social Thought.”


6/24 Stepniak-Kravchinsky’s        Underground Russia
     Underground Russia.
6/25 Underground Russia.           Underground Russia
6/26 Underground Russia.           Five Sisters. Introduction.
6/29 Five Sisters. Women Question  Five Sisters
6/30 Five Sisters.                 Five Sisters
7/1  Five Sisters. Other           Sections VII and VIII of “Russian Social
     Revolutionary Women           Thought.”
7/2  Populism. “Land and Will,”    Pale Horse
     “People’s Will,” and other
     radical organizations.
7/3  Discussion Session/Last Czars Pale Horse. Questions on Canvas.
7/6   Pale Horse                    Pale Horse. Questions on Canvas.
7/7  Pale Horse                    Pale Horse. Questions on Canvas.
7/8  State Councilor               Tolstoy “I Cannot Be Silent” and other articles.
7/9  Tolstoy’s Anarchism. Second    Preparation for the final.
     Response Paper Due.


