Sarah L. Lopez
Associate Professor
Graduate Course
ARC 388R/ CRP 388 /AMS 391
Fall 2019
Wednesday 9.30-12.30
Sutton 2.110
e. sll@utexas.edu
t. 512-471-0147
Office: Sutton 2.118
U.S. Cultural Landscapes and Ethnographic Methods
What is a cultural landscape and how can landscape and building elements narrate unique
histories of people and place? This class is organized around discrete methods used to
investigate the history of everyday places. This includes archival research (architectural
plans, town plats, aerial photographs, Sanborn maps, city directories, building permits),
and architectural analysis (walking a building plan, and analyzing buildings in situ using
Google Maps and on-site observation). A fundamental premise of this class is that spatial
research (of buildings, places, and cities) is inherently social research (of people as
envisioners and users of space). Thus, we fold ‘light ethnography’ (site observation,
informal conversations, and formal interviews) into our methodological toolkit. These
research methods will be used to address the form, style, and context of buildings types
and landscape elements at multiple scales—from the assembling of the American grid to
the building and inhabitation of individuals’ workers cottages—to examine 19th and 20th
century U.S. built environment history. The American landscape, i.e. bungalows,
shopping malls, libraries, courthouses, plazas, apartments, the grid, is a composite of
overlapping building types and landscape elements that embody social, political, and
cultural processes. Our micro exploration of one building type or landscape element
points toward the larger histories, identities, and cultural transformations of individuals
who are often excluded from canonical histories. Each student will conduct a research
project that examines one building or landscape element in Austin using the mixed
methods explored in class. We will workshop possible arguments related to this building
in class as a group and approach class projects in an experimental fashion that promotes
critical processes rather than finalized products.
Course Goals:
* reading buildings in their spatial context
* using archival sources (maps, deeds, wills, directories)
* critical engagement with city through observation, mapping, interviews
* social interpretations of architectural representations
*repeating methodological inquiry, “how would we research this?”
*spatial detective


                                                                         Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 2
Course Requirements:
1. Class Attendance and Readings: Students are expected to attend classes regularly and
to discuss the readings. Since we do not meet the final week of class, and there is no class
Oct. 23rd, students must attend every class unless students have an excused absence (a
medical issue, important conference, religious holiday or family emergency). One
unexcused absence will automatically tip your final grade toward its closest plus or
minus.
* See Canvas website for syllabus, handouts and readings. Potential course packet at the
Coop, TBD.
2. There are weekly course assignments that revolve around one building or a particular
landscape element. Throughout the class students research the history and meaning of
one building. Each week (see below) spells out the assignment. The reading load is light
on purpose to give students the opportunity to do research.
3. Quick Building History or/and Interview with local resident/shop owner for Tour 3:
city directories and Sanborns, analysis of the building itself, any relevant context, which
will culminate in a 2 to 3 minute presentation during the tour.
4. Context Workshop Presentation: During the last 3 weeks of class, students will present
their one building for 8-10 minutes. Students will use a template for presenting that I
provide in advance. We will brainstorm how to turn each site into a full fledge research
project, what arguments can be made? How would we structure the research? What is the
context at hand?
5. Urban Drift II and Reflection Piece: see last week for full explanation. This is a long,
smart, letter to me and/or to your future-self describing the content and take-aways of the
course, and the meaning of the built environment as you see it.
*there are THREE urban walking tours during class time.
*no required text but potential reader at the UT Coop on Guadalupe Street (Xeroxed
copies of the reading assignments bound in a packet)
Grading Structure
Attendance and Participation (reading discussion): 30%
Short Weekly Assignments (derive, quick building history, interview I and II, city
directories, Sanborns, etc): 30%
Final Summation of Site: 20%
Reflection Piece: 20%
Office Hours: By appt., Sutton 2.118, and Wednesday’s 3.30-4.30pm.


                                                                      Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 3
**I reserve the right to change the syllabus according to group discussion/needs. Please
look out for e-mails I send or canvas updates regarding any changes to the syllabus.


                                                                     Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 4
WEEK 1
August 28
Subject: Introduction to the History of the Built Environment (Cultural Landscapes
/ Vernacular Architecture / Ordinary Landscapes)
        Subject: Nuts and bolts of Cultural Landscape Studies and Why Methods.
        Reading:
            • Paul Groth, “Frameworks for Cultural Landscapes Studies,” in
               Understanding Ordinary Landscapes, eds. Groth and Bressi (Yale
               University Press, 1997): 1-23.
        Going Further:
            • Thomas Carter, Invitation to Vernacular Architecture (ch. 1)
            • Paul Groth and Chris Wilson, Everyday America (ch. 1)
            • Paul Groth, “New Connections in Vernacular Architecture”
            • Yi-Fu Tuan, Space and Place, and Topofilia
            • Denis Cosgrove, “New Directions in Cultural Geography”
            • Dell Upton, “Architecture and Everyday Life”
*In class exploration: Examples of “building types” in Austin.
WEEK 2
September 4
Marking the Land
        Subject: Initial Settlement, City and Nation Gridding
        Reading:
            • Hildegard Binder Johnson, “Gridding a national landscape,” Making the
               American Landscape (142-161)
            • Dell Upton, “The Grid and the Republican Spatial Imagination,” Another
               City (113-144).
            • Guy Debord, Theory of the Dérive, 1958 (read this BEFORE you do your
               assignment for the week)
*In class exploration: USGS digital and hard-copy maps (also note: Google, and satellite
imagery). How can we read maps for built environment histories, and how do digital
maps compare to paper maps? Demonstrate how to overlay historic maps with
contemporary maps to glean rate of change.
Assignment: Dérive (Wander through the city with no planned itinerary or expectations.
The mode of wandering is on foot. Do the best you can to drop your ordinary motivations
for urban navigation and open yourself to the atmospheric qualities of space and place.


                                                                            Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 5
You may want to take notes, photographs, or make drawings while in the ‘field’, or
reflect after the fact. There is no right way to do this. It is hot, plan to go early in the
morning or at night. Send me one slide of your representation of the experience the night
before our next class, Sept. 3th, by 11p.m.).
WEEK 3
September 11
National Infrastructure
         Subject: The Post Office and Post Roads: defining civic infrastructure, rural-
                 urban connections, national ideologies
         Reading:
             • Jesse Vogler, “Correct and Perfect,” unpublished, (1-16)
             • NYT, “A Fight for Post Offices and Town’s Souls” (4)
             • NYT, “Post Office Buildings with Character and Maybe a Sales Price” (3)
             • William Whyte, “How do Buildings Mean? Some Issues of Interpretation
                 in the History of Architecture,” History and Theory, 153-177.
         Going Further:
             • David Henkin, The Postal Age
             • Dell Upton, “Architectural History or Landscape History?”
*In class exploration: Sanborn Maps (how to), and USGS, where.
Assignment: Initial in situ and web observation of case study building. Choose a building
or specific place as your semester long case study (if the site you choose now changes,
that is okay but give it thought). Go to the building and observe how the place is used for
one hour. If you are not able to enter, observe the building skin, footprint, location,
details, and form. Next, “check out” your building on-line for reviews or websites. Write
a one paragraph summary of initial observation email it to me the night before class,
Sept. 10th, 11pm and be prepared to discuss.
WEEK 4
September 18
Victorian Landscapes and Streetcar Suburbs
TOUR: Meet at 3915 Ave. B Hyde Park Presbyterian Church, 9.40 a.m.
         Subject: Spatialization of housing by class, historical development of
         neighborhoods
         Reading:


                                                                         Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 6
            •    Sam Bass Warner, Streetcar Suburbs: The Process of Growth in Boston,
                 1870-1900 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978). Ch. 1, pgs. 1-14,
                 & Ch. 2, pgs. 15-34.
            •    Shoppell’s Modern Houses, ad from 1880s (3)
*In class exploration: Walking Tour of our Streetcar Suburb
Assignment: Find your building in Sanborn, check if there are multiple years, create a
file with your building and a few tiles from the surrounding streets. If Sanborn does not
record your area, use Google Maps and USGS to try and get a sense of the built and
environmental context of your site. Create a one-sheet document that shows your sight
(screen capture of the Sanborn or Google) and lists relevant features and patterns nearby
that you notice. Email to me the night before class, Sept. 17, 11pm, but we will not
discuss, this is for your files.
WEEK 5
September 25
Central Business District and Main Street
         Subject: Downtown and Main Street
         Reading:
            • Gabrielle Esperdy, Modernizing Main Street (Intro, Ch. 1 and 4)
In class exploration: Austin History Center, a resource, City Directories and historic
Newspapers…How and why?
Assignment: Establishing research connections. Is there anybody you can talk to about
the history of your site, or are there specific people who use the site that may share their
perspective? If there are workers, owners, or clients, make informal introductions with
personnel. Explain the class, and your assignment of writing a history of the site and its
current use. If they are open, ask initial questions, and explore the possibility of a future
interview. When you are doing this, sketch a plan of the site noting how it is used (yes,
even if you are not an architecture student!). Try to do this for today, Sept. 25th. For your
files, do not turn in.
WEEK 6
October 2
Commercial and Civic Landscapes in Austin
TOUR: Meet at west entrance to Sutton Hall for tour of Guadalupe Street
         Reading:


                                                                       Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 7
              • Stewart Brand, How Buildings Learn: What Happens After They are Built,
              ch. 1, 2-23.
              • Texas: A Guide to the Lone Star State, Compiled by Workers of the
              Writer’s Program of the Works Projects Administration in the State of Texas,
              166-192. (book is for your reference)
In class exploration: City Directory Information about your building from Austin History
Center (AHC) and other materials.
Assignment: at the AHC record the history of ownership/occupancy of your building for
your files using City Directories. You can see if they have other materials on your site as
well. Note, this is a hinge week with very light reading, and the assignment is “in class,”
so use it to catch up on other previous or upcoming assignments.
WEEK 7
October 9
Ethnicity and the Built Environment
        Subject: Migration Spaces
        Reading:
             • James Rojas, “Enacted Environment: Examining the Streets and Yards of
                 East Los Angeles,” in Everyday America (2003): 275-292.
             • Arijit Sen, Transcultural Placemaking: Intertwined Spaces of Sacred and
                 Secular on Devon Avenue, Chicago (31-62)
             • Robert Weiss, Learning from Strangers: The Art and Method of
                 Qualitative Interview Studies (Intro. 1-14).
        Going Further:
             • "Transnational Performances in Chicago’s Independence Day Parade,"
                 Transnational Cities: Past into Present, Andrew K. Sandoval-Strausz and
                 Nancy H. Kwak (Eds.), (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
                 2017)
             • “Awe and Order: Ethno-Architecture in Everyday Life,” in Ethno-
                 Architecture and the Politics of Migration, Mirjana Lozanovska (editor),
                 (Abingdon, UK: Taylor & Francis/Routledge, 2015), p. 151-164.
In class exploration: Interviewing (Lopez does mock interview).
Assignment: Historic information (Austin History Center, House files, Statesmen Articles,
Building Permits for Construction Work, Deeds). Compile a one-sheet narrative about
the changes in ownership and/or historic findings, email to me by night before class, Oct.
8, 11pm. Will not discuss, for your files.


                                                                        Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 8
WEEK 8
October 16
Historic Chinatowns and East Asian Built Environments
            •   Becky Nicholaides and James Zasadiaz, “Design Assimilation in
                Suburbia: Asian Americans, Built Landscapes, and Suburban Advantage,”
                Journal of Urban History (332-371)
            •   Sen and Silverman, “Intro: Embodied Placemaking: An Important
                Category of Critical Analysis,” in Making Place (1-18)
            •   Bruce Berg, “A Dramaturgical Look at Interviewing,” in Qualitative
                Research Methods for Social Sciences. (skim 29-64)
        Going Further:
            • Low, Setha. Spatializing Culture: Ethnographies of Space and Place,
                (Intro, and ch. 5)
In class exploration: Interviewing II, discuss issues and strategies (cognitive mapping as
interview strategy) and practice. And, choose your site for Chicon Tour.
Assignment: Formal interview either this week or next (if their schedule permits). If you
don’t have a person to talk with, interview anybody about the site you choose. Practice
asking people questions and learning how to elicit answers. Be prepared to discuss in
class.
WEEK 9
October 23-
NO CLASS
This is time to prepare your Chicon site, and make progress on your main project site.
WEEK 10
October 30
Workers Housing, Urban Segregation and Spaces of Solidarity
TOUR: Meet at Chicon Street, time and place TBA.
        Subject: Workers Cottages and Speculative Housing
        Reading:
            • Sarah McTarnaghan, “Development and Displacement: Single Family
                Home Demolitions in Central East Austin,” Planning Forum (47-65).
        Going Further:


                                                                        Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 9
            •  Eliot Tretter. Restricted Austin, Texas: Progressivism, Zoning, Private
               Racial Covenants, and the Making of a Segregated City (70, many
               pictures)
In class exploration: Students give a tour, each responsible for one building along the
street.
Assignment: Prepare for the tour using Sanborns, City Directories, Google Maps,
Historic Newspapers, and/or formal analysis.
WEEK 11
November 6
Workers’ Landscapes
        Subject: Company town to Corporate Outposts—the architecture of capitalism
        Reading:
            • Herod, Andrew, “Social Engineering Through Spatial Engineering” in
               Company Towns in the Americas: Landscape, Power, and Working-Class
               Communities (ch. 1, 21-44)
            • Jesse Vogler, “Company Towns,” theamericanbottom.org (15)
            • Jesse LeCavilier, “Patrons and Prototypes: Walmart’s Catalytic Urbanism”
               (27-35)
        Going Further:
                   • Jesse LeCavilier, The Rule of Logistics: Walmart and the
                       Architecture of Fulfillment
In class exploration: Context 1 Workshop (Built Environment Argument, Austin Context)
Assignment: 6 or so students will present their site, they will end with inquietudes and
questions, and as a class we will brainstorm how to push the argument and context of the
exploration further.
WEEK 12
November 13
Suburbs
        Subject: Post War Suburbs
        Reading:
            • Dianne Harris, “Race, Class, and Privacy in the Ordinary Postwar House,
               1945-1960,” in Landscape and Race in the United States (Routledge,
               2006): 127-156.


                                                                       Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 10
            •   Margaret Ruth Little, “Getting the Dream for Themselves: Postwar
                Modern Subdivisions for African Americans in Raleigh, North Carolina,”
                Buildings & Landscapes (73-85)
        Going Further
            • Dolores Hayden, Building Suburbia
Exploration: Context 2 Workshop (Built Environment Argument, Austin Context)
Assignment: 6 or so students will present their site, they will end with inquietudes and
questions, and as a class we will brainstorm how to push the argument and context of the
exploration further. How can this group build upon the discuss we had last week?
WEEK 13
November 20
Summation
        Readings: NONE
Exploration: Context 3 Workshop (Built Environment Argument, Austin Context)
Assignment: 6 or so students will present their site, they will end with inquietudes and
questions, and as a class we will brainstorm how to push the argument and context of the
exploration further. How can this group build upon the previous two discussions?
Assignment for everybody due Nov.25th*: Derive II. After you finish the derive, take time
to reflect on how your experience of the surrounding landscape compared with the first
time you did an urban drift/derive. From this comparative place, reflect on your
experiences in this class. Write an INFORMAL (informal does not mean unedited, it
means loose and experimental, but still smart, tight, good writing) 5-page double-spaced
reflection piece on how you currently think about the built environment, on aspects of
doing built environment research that you like (and what is of value?), that you question
(and what seem problematic?), on what your current burning questions are. How did you
think about the built environment before this class started? You may write this up as an
op-ed style narrative, “Reflecting on the built environment as a Graduate Student of
_____” or as a letter to me, or your future self. Make it clear who this write-up is
intended for.
WEEK 14
November 27
THANKSGIVING
Week 15: December 4


                        Lopez / Fall 2019 / pg. 11
No class (will discuss)
