LA 320WB: LIBERAL ARTS INTERNSHIP COURSE
SUMMER 2019 SYLLABUS
Instructors
    Instructor:               Robert Vega • Liberal Arts Career Services, FAC 18
    Class Assistants:         Amira Sounny-Slitine • Liberal Arts Career Services, FAC 18 • amira@austin.utexas.edu
    Office Hours:             Please email or call to schedule an in-person or telephone appointment time.
Course Information
    The purpose of this undergraduate course is to establish the academic foundations of the Liberal Arts students’
    internship. Students will integrate knowledge derived from their academic studies with the experiences gained from
    real-world work settings. This class will support these work experiences by fostering personal reflection as well as
    professional growth and development.
Course Application Process
    Application Deadline: Thursday, June 6, 2019 at 12:00 PM.
    See the full details and access the application at: http://goo.gl/JC5EEd
Internship Completion Requirement
    In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the internship before
    the end date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week, you will
    automatically fail the internship course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you will not
    automatically fail this course; we will work with you in such cases.
Assignment Schedule
  Date    Assignment                     Details
   6/6    Course Material                No Assignment Due. Spend this time getting to know the course syllabus and your
                                         internship employer and colleagues.
  6/11    Journal 1                      Part I: Picture yourself on the last day of your internship. What do you hope to have
                                         learned from this experience? What new skills will you have gained? How will you
                                         have changed? Part II: Epiphany/Observation of the Week
  6/18    Research Paper                 Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
  6/25    Journal 2                      Part I: How do you introduce yourself at work? Write a description of who you are,
                                         where you’re from, what’s your background, what makes you unique, what you’re
                                         interested in and what your professional goals are. Use this description to create a
                                         15-second succinct elevator pitch (and include this pitch at the end of your journal).
                                         Learn about elevator pitches at: http://goo.gl/kxkeMZ Part II: Epiphany or
                                         Observation of the Week
   7/2    Midterm Evaluations            Evaluation links available in Canvas Assignments section.
   7/9    Resume                         Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
  7/16    Informational Interview        View details and download interview form in Canvas Assignments section.
  7/23    Academic Connection            Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
          Paper
    LA 320wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer 2019                            21-Feb-2019                        Page 1 of 3


                                                                                              Assignment Schedule, Continued
 Date     Assignment                    Details
 7/30     Journal 3                     Part I: Describe your internship organization’s mission and why that is important to
                                        you in a professional context. For example, the mission at a nonprofit might be
                                        serving a specific community; at a for-profit, it might be a value proposition; and at a
                                        government agency, it might be to provide a specific service to or representation of a
                                        population. Part II: Epiphany/Observation of the Week
  8/6     Journal 4                     Part I: A first-year student asks you why it’s important to do internships. Describe the
                                        value of complementing your academics with professional experience using examples
                                        of what you are learning, whom you are connecting with and how you are growing in
                                        your current internship. Part II: Epiphany/Observation of the Week
 8/13     Student & Supervisor          Evaluation links and Final Paper details in Canvas Assignments section.
          Final Evaluations Due;
          Submit Final Paper
Assignment Deadlines
   Assignments are due by 11:59 pm CST on the due date. All deliverables will be considered late if not properly
   submitted by 11:59 pm on the due date. Note: The deadline is 11:59 pm Texas time (Central Standard Time); if you are
   in a different time zone please make sure you submit your assignment by the deadline according to Texas time (CST).
   Late submissions may be accepted with point deductions if submitted within the late submission period. Assignments
   submitted after the deadline but before Wednesday at 5:00 pm will be accepted at 75% point value. Assignments
   received after Wednesday at 5pm but before Friday at 8:30 am will be accepted at 50% point value. Submissions
   received after 8:30 am on the week of the due date will not be accepted. For example: assignments submitted on
   Tuesday by 11:59 pm 100%; Wednesday by 5pm 75%; Friday by 8:30am 50%; and after Friday at 8:30am assignments
   are not accepted (0%).
Assignment Descriptions (All assignments are available in Canvas)
   Journals: Please include both parts in one document so that you are only uploading one document to Canvas.
         PART I: Write on the journal topics provided in the schedule above. Journals should be reflective, comprehensive,
         well thought out and well composed. Each journal’s Part I should be at least 1-page and no more than 1.5-pages
         in length (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced).
         PART II: Write a brief description of your epiphany or observation of the week and its current relevance. Your
         epiphany can be directly or indirectly related to your internship, personal/professional goals, career objective or
         daily schedule. There is no minimum length for Part II.
   Research Paper: Write a 2-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) on a specific issue of significance to
   your internship site. Explain the significance, what it means to your office, how it is being managed and what you think
   about this issue. This paper will provide an opportunity to research a particular topic of interest to you. Examples
   include the stock market drop in an investment bank, the ethics of reporting in media, a marketing campaign in
   advertising and a policy issue in political offices. Please use and cite at least 1 resource for this assignment.
   Evaluations: You will submit a midterm and final self-/site evaluation of the internship. Your supervisor will complete a
   midterm and final evaluation of your performance. Evaluations are the only assignments not uploaded to Canvas;
   instead evaluations will be completed as web forms online. Evaluation form links are available in Canvas.
   Resume: Create a resume or update your resume with your current internship details. You should target your resume
   to a job, company or industry of interest to you. For help creating your resume, visit: http://goo.gl/c0My80
   LA 320wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer 2019                           21-Feb-2019                          Page 2 of 3


   Informational Interview: Conduct an informational interview with a professional working in a position or industry of
   interest to you (this person may or may not work at your current internship site, either is acceptable). Transcribe your
   interview on the form available in Canvas in the Q&A format. Please include at least 10 questions and answers. For
   more information about info interviews, visit: http://goo.gl/R5ccaV
   Academic Connection Paper: Write a 2-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) demonstrating the
   connection between your academic studies and your internship. You can focus on your major and its connection to
   your internship, or you can focus on a connection between a particular class and your internship site. Your paper
   should take the form of your liberal arts story, designed to help communicate:
             •       why you study what you study and why you are interning where you are interning;
             •       what the connection is between the two;
             •       how your studies have helped you succeed at the internship and
             •       how your internship will help you succeed in future classes.
   Final Paper: The final paper has three parts; please include all parts in one document so that you are only uploading
   one document to Canvas.
       PART I: Write a one-page (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) description of your internship and your
       internship site to be shared with other liberal arts students. The goal of this assignment is to help other students
       learn about the company or organization as a potential internship site by describing your role and responsibilities.
       This should be a “Day in the Life” description with a summary of an intern’s typical day (time, responsibility, etc.).
       PART II: Write a one-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) reflecting on your experience: what
       have you learned about the work environment as well as yourself. Part II will remain confidential.
       PART III: Write a one-page (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) response to the following scenario. Part III
       will remain confidential.
           Scenario: In a future interview, a recruiter asks you why you would make an ideal hire. Using your internship as
           a foundation for the response, write a qualitative overview demonstrating your advantages over other
           candidates. Include in your overview the following:
              1. Your top two or three strengths – try not to use the strengths most commonly repeated in interviews
                 (communication, time management, organization, interpersonal).
              2. Concrete examples of how you developed these strengths during your internship. Consider using the PARL
                 method to develop your examples. Learn about the PARL method: http://goo.gl/tAS2cZ
Grading
   Journals ..............................................................35%
   Resume ..............................................................10%
   Informational Interview ......................................10%
   Research Paper ...................................................10%
   Academic Connection Paper ...............................10%
   Evaluations.......................................................... 5%
   Final Paper ..........................................................20%
     Grading Scale: A = 90-100; B+ = 87 – 89.99; B = 83 – 86.99; B- = 80 – 82.99; C+ = 77 – 79.99; C = 73 – 76.99; C- = 70 –
     72.99; D+ = 67 – 69.99; D = 63 – 66.99; D- = 60 – 62.99; F = 59.99 and Below
     Grade Note: In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the
     internship before the end date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week,
     you will automatically fail the internship course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you
     will not automatically fail this course; we will work with you in such cases.
Course Information & Downloads
     Course information and downloads are available in Canvas: https://courses.utexas.edu/
   LA 320wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer 2019                         21-Feb-2019                         Page 3 of 3
