

Fall 2019
Seminar Course: ‘Light and Sustainable Design’
ARC 327R (00760)
ARC 386M (01075)
Wednesdays 7:00pm - 10:00pm
Goldsmith Hall, Room 3.120
Instructor
Matt Fajkus, AIA, NCARB, LEED AP
Associate Professor, The University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
Director, Graduate Program in Sustainable Design
Email: matt.fajkus@austin.utexas.edu          Office Phone: 512-232-1961
Office Hours: GOL 4.128, Wednesdays 10:30am – 12:30pm, or by appointment.
Course Description
The seminar course on ‘Light and Sustainable Design’ aims to explore the full spectrum of light as it relates to architecture and design in
general, from physical properties such as its effect on the thermal performance of buildings (including their energy and demand) as well as the
resultant impact upon comfort, and ultimately the way we perceive space, color, and form. The seminar provides insight into the integrated
balance of natural daylighting and electric lighting in habitable spaces. This balance will be examined from the larger scale of full building
facades and urban environments to the micro scale of nanotechnology in smart materials, which allow for alterations in embedded light and
color properties.
The science and phenomenology of architecture is studied as integral media to channel daylight and electric light. Discussions will aim to draw
parallels between the sustainable use of light in engineering-based technology and the fine arts, in addition to the applied arts such as
architecture. Course content will also address the consideration of light as a preliminary factor in design processes, as well approaches to
retrofit existing spaces with applications which enhance its sustainable performance as well as its phenomenological aspects relating to spatial
perception.
Students from various programs are encouraged to work in groups to produce research or design projects, investigating the properties and
potential of light in sustainable design. The seminar ultimately strives to achieve collaboration and integration to the benefit of multi-faceted
research and design approaches and proposals.
Cross-Listed Programs and Disciplines
- Master of Science in Sustainable Design (MSSD)
- Master of Advanced Architectural Design (MAAD) - with or without a focus in Sustainable Design
- Master of Architecture, First Professional (M. Arch I) - with or without an “Emphasis” in Sustainable Design
- Bachelor of Architecture (B. Arch)
- Master of Interior Design (MID)
- Master of Community and Regional Planning (MSCRP)
- Dual Degree MSSD + MSCRP
- Architectural Engineering (Structure focus, MEP focus, or Construction Management focus)
- Fine Arts (MFA)
Student Work
Student work will be evaluated during the course of the semester on a series of smaller research design projects and a larger group research
project or design project, which will focus on light and sustainable design. Students will present their work to the class every few weeks, to
open discussion among the class to help enhance the overall class dialog and work.
Students will work individually on the first assignment, and likely in pairs on the second assignment, which will consist of research to be
presented graphically and orally. Students will work in interdisciplinary groups for the final two assignments, which will incorporate research
and design work.
STUDENTS ARE NOT REQUIRED TO HAVE A DESIGN BACKGROUND, BUT THOSE WITHOUT DESIGN EXPERIENCE MUST BE OPEN TO
COLLABORATE WITH DESIGNERS FOR THE FINAL PROJECT.
There will be no final exam nor comprehensive exam for the course, as the final project, to be presented in class, will be the final
student assignment.


COURSE SCHEDULE
*Lecture topic schedule is subject to change. Assignment due dates shall not change.
  Wk     Date               Lecture Topics                                                                  Student Deadlines
  1      Aug 28             Light Overview: Introduction, Overall Course Agenda
                                               Coursework Description
  2      Sep 4              Light + the Cosmos: Perspectives on Light, Light Properties
                                                    Philosophies, Applications, Dark Skies, Astronomy
  3      Sept 11            Light + Source: Daylight vs. Electric Light                                     Assignment 1 Due: Research Analysis
                                               Daylight Strategy Overview, Relative Light Relationships
  4      Sept 18            Light + the Urban Realm: Density, the Utopian + Dystopian City
                                                          Largescale Illuminance Standards, Right to Light
  5      Sept 25            Light + Big Boxes: Light, Culture, + Consumption
                                                 Spaces for Culture and/or Capitalism, Vernacular Means
  6      Oct 2              Light + Shadow / Color: Contrast + Experience - Art                             Assignment 2 Due: Analytic Response
                                                        Perception + Representation, Shading Strategies
  7      Oct 9              Group Work Sessions – Assignment 3
  8      Oct 16             Light + Structure / Material: Building Structure + Skin, Surface + Scale
                                                             Thermal Comfort, Composition, + Materiality
  9      Oct 23             Light + Health / Education: Light + the Psyche                                  Assignment 3 Due: Group Project Part 1
                                                       Circadian Rhythm, Night Shift, Performance Effects
  10     Oct 30             Light + Small Spaces: Light + the Room / Domesticity
                                                      Human Behavior, Controlling Light, Managing Light
  11     Nov 6              Group Work Sessions – Assignment 4
  12     Nov 13             Light + Micro Scale: Architectural Installations, Nanotechnology
                                                    Screens, Building Skins, Molecular Methods
  13     Nov 20             Light Summary + Systems: Full Circle: Universe of Light – Atomic Light          Assignment 4 Due: Final Group Project
                                                 Sustainability + System Complexity
  14     Nov 27             THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY – NO CLASS
Reading List
The required textbook is: “Architectural Science and the Sun: The Poetics and Pragmatics of Solar Design,” by Fajkus & Whitsett.
All other relevant texts are listed below. Please refer to the class website on Canvas for any documents and postings:
https://courses.utexas.edu/
Readings listed on Canvas are categorized in folders per week, and are to be completed before class that given week. For example, Week 4
Readings are meant to be read by each student in preparation for the Week 4 class.
Fajkus & Whitsett, Architectural Science and the Sun: The Poetics and Pragmatics of Solar Design, Routledge, 2018.
Bogard, Paul, The End of Night, Little, Brown & Co., 2013.
International Energy Agency (IEA), Daylight in Buildings, 2000.
Holl, Steven, “Idea and Phenomena,” Lars Muller, 2002.
Bowers, Brian, Lengthening the Day, Oxford University Press, 1998.
Kwok, Alison G., and Grondik, Walter T., The Green Studio Handbook, Architectural Press, 2007.
Koster, Helmut, Dynamic Daylighting, Birkhauser, 2004.
Guzowski, Mary, Daylighting for Sustainable Design, McGraw Hill Professional, 1999.
Wang, Wilfried, “Sustainability is a Cultural Problem,” Harvard Design Magazine, 2003.
Lechner, Norbert, Heating, Cooling, Lighting: Design Methods for Architects, Wiley, 2014.
Koolhaas, Rem, Delirious New York, The Monacelli Press, 1994.
Baxandall, Michael, Shadows and Enlightenment, Yale University Press, 1997.
Plummer, Henry, Poetics of Light, A&U, 1993.
International WELL Building Institute, WELL Building Standard Guide, New York, 2017.
Lentz, Linda; and Gonchar, Joann, “Lighting Controls,” Architectural Record, 2017.
Ashby, Schodek, and Ferreira; Nanomaterials, Nanotechnologies, and Design; Butterworth Heinemann, 2009.
Olgyay, Aladar and Victor, Solar Control and Shading Devices, Princeton University Press, 1957.
Brasier, Chris, and Vallero, Daniel A., Sustainable Design: The Science of Sustainability and Green Engineering, Wiley, 2008.
Rudofsky, Bernard, Architecture Without Architects: A Short Introduction to Non-Pedigreed Architecture, University of NM Press, 1987.
Feireiss, Kristen, Ed, Architecture of Change: Sustainability and Humanity in the Built Environment, Gestalten Verlag, 2008.


Grading
All students are expected to participate in all activities and comply with all the requirements for the whole program. The assignments will be
weighted in ascending order: Assignment 1 = 10%, Assignment 2 = 20%, Assignment 3 = 30%, Assignment 4 = 40%.
Final Course Grades for assignments will be assessed on student performance as follows:
- Assignments: Content/Effort as well as Graphic and Oral Quality of presentations: 80%
- Class participation (attendance, discussion, etc.): 20%
Grade Descriptions
In addition to the basic grade levels described below, plus/minus (+ / -) grades will also be used.
A : outstanding work
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and
personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete
on all levels.
B : good work
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
excellence.
C : required work
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete
in one or more areas.
D : poor work
Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.
F : unacceptable work
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when
you have excessive unexcused absences.
X : (excused incomplete)
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate
cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement
as to a new completion date. Studio work must be completed before the second week of the next design semester in which you are
enrolling, according to School of Architecture policy.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR UNEXCUSED ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused absences may be dropped from the course without
further notice. The minimum penalty for more than three unexcused absences is a full letter drop in your final grade for the course. Please
contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class. A student who misses classes or other required activities for the
observance of a religious holiday should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made
to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Software
Adobe software is often used in this course. When accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you will be prompted to sign in
with an Adobe ID. You are not required to purchase Creative Cloud services to sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to
create a free Adobe ID. That can be done here: https://accounts.adobe.com/
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical need. You will be
requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate accommodations
can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for Students with Disabilities, also
found via the web at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
