                   AFS 333 SYLLABUS
          Unique Numbers 30455 and 30456
          Senior Air Force Studies
Course Syllabus AY 19-20 (Fall Semester)
                   AFROTC Detachment 825
               The University of Texas at Austin
                  Colonel Paul A. Tombarge
                 Professor, Air Force Science
     Office Phone: (512) 471‐1776         Office: RLP 5.726
  Hours: By Appointment (https://calendly.com/paul-tombarge)
                                                             1


                                                                                            Fall 2019
MEMORANDUM FOR AS 400 STUDENTS
FROM: Colonel Paul A. Tombarge
SUBJECT: Welcome to AFS333 – Senior Air Force Studies
1. Welcome to AFS333 – Senior Air Force Studies. We designed this course to equip you with
the working knowledge necessary to make the transition from a Professional Officer Course
cadet to a commissioned Air Force officer. The expectations placed upon you by the profession
of arms are extraordinarily high. This is your time to think critically about your role as a future
Air Force officer.
2. The AFS333 curriculum places emphasis on the basic knowledge and skills you will need as a
second lieutenant. During the fall semester, we will discuss civilian control of the military,
examine the Department of Defense structure, and delve into subjects such as the national
security policy-making process, terrorism, and joint military operations. During the spring
semester, we will focus on special topics in preparation for active duty such as ethics, military
law, civilian personnel, the enlisted and officer evaluation systems, pay and allowances, and
other current topics affecting the military as a profession. Writing and briefing assignments will
simultaneously refine your communication skills.
3. No matter what Air Force Specialty Code you are eventually awarded – pilot, space
operations, logistics, engineer, personnel, etc. – you will be first and foremost an Air Force
officer; a leader of Airmen. This is your chance to enhance your military knowledge, expand
your worldview, increase the depth and breadth of your leadership fundamentals, and honestly
assess your strengths and weaknesses. Today you are warriors in training. Soon, you will be
entrusted to lead Airmen in the world’s greatest Air Force.
                 Integrity First — Service before Self — Excellence in All We Do!
                                                       PAUL A. TOMBARGE, Colonel, USAF
                                                       Professor, Air Force Science
                                                                                                    2


                      National Security Affairs/Preparation for Active Duty
                                     Course Syllabus AY19-20
                                    AFROTC Detachment 825
                                 The University of Texas at Austin
1. Instructor:                  Colonel Paul Tombarge, Professor of Air Force Science
                                Office: RLP 5.726
                                Phone: 512-471-1776
                                E-mail: paul.tombarge@austin.utexas.edu
                                Hours by appointment: https://calendly.com/paul-tombarge
2. Class Hours and Location:
    a. Session I: Tuesdays & Thursdays, 1230-1400, RLP 5.404
    b. Session II: Tuesdays & Thursdays, 1400-1530, RLP 5.404
3. Course Description: Air Force Science 333, "Senior Air Force Studies," is an overview of
the complex social and political issues facing the military profession. It is designed to provide
college seniors with a foundational understanding of the role military officers play in American
society.
4. Course Objectives:
    a. Comprehend the basic elements of the national security policy and process.
    b. Know the air and space power functions and United States Air Force (USAF)
        capabilities.
    c. Appreciate selected roles of the military in society and current issues affecting the
        military profession.
    d. Understand the responsibility, authority, and functions of an Air Force commander in
        what is inherently a joint-service warfighting environment.
    e. Comprehend the factors that facilitate a smooth transition from civilian to military life.
    f. Apply listening, speaking, and writing skills in Air Force-specific formats and situations
        with accuracy, clarity, and appropriate style.
                                               NOTE
  Specific lesson objectives are included with reading/lesson materials (posted in Canvas).
                                                                                                  3


5. Course Textbooks: The primary textbook is AS-400 Student Study Guide, T-408.
Supplemental readings are from a variety of sources. The Tongue and Quill (AFH 33-337, 7 May
2015 edition) is the primary source to support writing/briefing assignments. All course material
will be posted on Canvas. All textbooks are available electronically via the Holm Center website
(https://www.holmcenter.com/index.php?menu=as400_cadet1920). You are not required to
purchase commercial texts.
6. Attendance Policy: I expect you to attend all AS400 classes. You must be present at 80%
of class sessions to receive a passing grade. If you will be late or unable to attend a class, you
must make every effort to coordinate with the instructor at least 24 hours in advance. In the case
of unexpected circumstances (i.e., emergencies), notify the instructor no later than 24 hours after
class. Regardless of circumstance, if you miss a class, email the course instructor within 24 hours
about the absence with “ABSENT” as your subject line. If this is not accomplished, your absence
will be “unexcused.” Opportunity for make-up assignments will be at my discretion. If approved
and you do not complete the make-up assignment within one week, I will consider the absence
unexcused. Any unexcused absence will result in a 2 percent reduction of your overall class
grade.
             Examples of Excusable                              Examples of Unexcusable
                Tardiness/Absence                                  Tardiness/Absence
     Death in the family or family emergency           Studying for a test
     Automobile accident                               Sleeping in
     Significant illness or medical confinement        Fraternity or sorority functions
     An approved field study trip                      A “headache” from staying out late the
     A mandatory official University activity           night before
7. Timeliness: I expect students to be present and seated in the classroom prior to class start
time; 1230 for session I and 1400 for session II.
8. Preparation and Participation: We will conduct academic classes as a combination of
lecture and guided discussion. Guided discussion only works if you share your knowledge and
personal views in class. I expect you to complete reading assignments in advance and that you
come to class prepared to participate in discussion. Class preparation and participation will count
towards 10 percent of your overall class grade. I will deduct points if you are not prepared or do
not participate.
    a. Current Events News Briefs: Part of preparation is also being aware of current events
        and understanding how they affect the military profession. As such, I expect you to keep
        abreast of Air Force and military-related news from a variety of publicly available news
        sources. Each class, I will assign a different cadet to provide a short, informal briefing (5
        minutes or less) on a military news item of their choice. The schedule will be posted on
        Canvas. The intent is not simply to regurgitate a news article, but rather to identify the
        key highlights and provide your assessment of why it is important to us as Air Force
        officers. These short briefings will be part of your participation grade.
                                                                                                      4


   b. Student-Managed Lessons: The Unified Combatant Command lessons (24/26
       September and 1/3/8 October) will be “student-managed”. This means you will have an
       active role in preparing for and teaching these lessons. You will be assigned to a team
       and each team will research specific Unified Combatant Commands to gather information,
       answer specific questions, prepare slides, and brief the class. Detailed requirements will
       be posted on Canvas and discussed in class. These student-managed lessons will be part
       of your participation grade.
9. Dress and Appearance: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008, POC cadets will wear the
designated UOD to their AS class and be in compliance with USAF grooming and appearance
standards. If an Operations Order does not apply on class day or does not dictate military
uniform, cadets will wear civilian attire in good taste. Note that AFI 36-2903 requires that dress
and appearance standards be followed both on- and off-duty.
10. Protocol and Classroom Conduct:
    a. Cadets will adhere to military customs and courtesies at all times. When a ranking
        officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to attention until told
        to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the classroom, the students
        will again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer leaves the classroom.
    b. Students are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class
        discussions, but must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address the
        instructor as “sir” or “ma’am” or by rank (e.g., “Captain,” “Major,” or “Colonel”) and
        address Noncommissioned Officers as “Sergeant.”
    c. The classroom is a non-attribution environment and cadets are encouraged to discuss and
        challenge any theory or opinion in order to enhance the learning process. However, non-
        attribution does not relieve cadets from the responsibility for proper respect towards one
        another, and for the military chain of command, to include the Commander-in-Chief.
    d. Tobacco use of any kind is prohibited on the UT campus. Drinks are allowed, but
        containers must have a lid to prevent spills.
    e. Students will turn off cell phones during class.
    f. Students will only use laptops/tablets to take notes unless otherwise authorized by the
        instructor to support class objectives.
11. Assignments: Throughout your career as an Air Force officer, you will be responsible for
solving problems. You may be tasked by senior leaders to provide recommended solutions to
those problems via a decision briefing; a briefing designed to provide decision makers with the
information they need to make the best possible decision on a given subject. Your primary
assignment this semester will be to prepare a decision package regarding an independent Space
Force. The task will be broken into three deliverables:
                                                                                                    5


    a. Bullet Background Paper (BBP): Write a BBP (no more than two pages) advocating
        your position for or against an independent Space Force using AFH 33-337, Tongue and
        Quill format. The BBP must contain the following components:
           Problem Statement: A brief sentence that describes the problem.
           Background: A brief overview of the problem which can include history, changes,
            regulations, policies, examples, time, money, personnel, etc. This should provide the
            overview and prove that a problem exists that needs a solution.
           Assumptions: List all of the assumptions that were made in developing your Courses
            of Action (COAs).
           Pros/Cons: The advantages and disadvantages that need to be considered in making a
            decision. Some common considerations are time, money and people required for
            implementation.
           Second and Third Order Effects: Determining the second and third order effects is
            determining the cause and effects of implementing the course of action. Factor in as
            many inputs as possible such as time, people, money, location, etc.
           Recommendation for Decision: The presenter will summarize and make a COA
            recommendation. The presenter does not make the decision but a recommendation to
            the decision-maker.
        You will be graded on your ability to form a coherent argument and your compliance
        with Tongue and Quill format. Submit your BBP as outlined in paragraph 11.b.
    b. E-mail Exercise: Submit your BBP to me via E-mail
        (paul.tombarge@austin.utexas.edu) no later than 2359 on 5 November 2019 using
        the “senior leader correspondence/Bottom Line Up Front (BLUF)” format. In the
        email body, you should provide a summary of your position, your key points, and an
        overall assessment or way ahead. This sounds simple, but crafting effective
        correspondence that is clear, concise, and complete is harder than it sounds. Senior
        leaders are very busy and their time is precious. When writing an e-mail, every word
        matters. You will be graded on your ability to follow the prescribed format which
        will be discussed in class and posted on Canvas.
    c. Decision Briefing: Prepare and provide a decision briefing (no more than 10 minutes in
        length) advocating the position to outlined in your BBP. The briefing should cover the
        same six components you laid out in the BBP. You will be graded on your ability to
        cover the required items and your compliance with the 10 minute time limit. You must
        submit your briefing slides to me no later than 2359 on 19 November 2019.
12. Midterm and Final Exams: I will derive exam questions from each lesson’s samples of
behavior (SOB). If you can correctly answer the SOBs from the readings and class lecture, you
will do well on the exams. Some SOBs may only be covered in your readings and will not be
explicitly discussed during the class lecture while others are only discussed in the lecture and
may not be covered in the readings. If you have any questions about the SOBs, do not hesitate to
ask. Exams may include multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer
questions.
                                                                                                  6


13. Grading: I will compute your grade using the following scoring system. The total score
possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter grade/4.0 GPA scale used by The
University of Texas at Austin. Grades will be determined based on individual performance; I
will not utilize a curve system.
                              Activity                        Points    % of Overall Grade
                     Class Participation Points                 10              10%
                     Bullet Background Paper                    10              10%
                          E-Mail Exercise                       10              10%
                         Decision Briefing                      10              10%
                           Midterm Exam                         30              30%
                            Final Exam                          30              30%
                               Total                           100             100%
                                                NOTE
Cadets must pass all AS courses with a C- or better. Cadets must maintain a cumulative
GPA of 2.00 or greater to retain AFROTC membership.
Cadets must maintain a term and cumulative GPA of 2.50 to activate or maintain a
scholarship. Should a scholarship cadet’s cumulative GPA drop below 2.50, I will issue an
Academic Conditional Event (CE). Multiple Academic CEs could result in suspension or
termination of the scholarship.
                     Score                   Letter Grade                 GPA Points
                    94-100                         A                          4.00
                     90-93                         A-                         3.67
                     87-89                        B+                          3.33
                     84-86                         B                          3.00
                     80-83                         B-                         2.67
                     77-79                        C+                          2.33
                     74-76                         C                          2.00
                     70-73                         C-                         1.67
                     67-69                        D+                          1.33
                     64-66                         D                          1.00
                     60-63                         D-                         0.67
                      0-60                         F                          0.00
                                                                                             7


14. Course Outline:
                                         NOTE
                     The following schedule is subject to change.
           Date                    Topic                       Assignment / Task
    Thu, 29 Aug 2019 Welcome, Course Overview,          Review syllabus before class
                     Assignment Overview
    Tue, 3 Sep 2019  Civilian Control of the Military   Cadet Reader: Civilian Control
                                                        of the Military
    Thu, 5 Sep 2019  National Security Strategy         Cadet Reader: National Security
                                                        Strategy
                                                        NSS 2017 Fact Sheet
                                                        2017 National Security Strategy
                                                        (Introduction, pp 1-4)
                                                        Grand Strategy Reader
                                                        Joint Publication 1: Doctrine for
                                                        the Armed Forces of the United
                                                        States (Chapter 1 only)
    Tue, 10 Sep 2019 Global “Hot Spots”                 Cadet Reader: Global Hot Spots
    Thu, 12 Sep 2019 Terrorism                          Cadet Reader: Terrorism
                                                        National Strategy for
                                                        Counterterrorism
    Tue, 17 Sep 2019 The Department of Defense          Cadet Reader: DoD
                                                        Web-Based Training Module
    Thu, 19 Sep 2019 Unified Commands (Regional):       * Student-managed lesson
                     USAFRICOM and USCENTCOM
                                                        Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                                        National Security Strategy, pp
                                                        33-55
    Tue, 24 Sep 2019 Unified Commands (Regional):       * Student-managed lesson
                     USEUCOM and USINDOPACOM
                                                        Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                                        National Security Strategy, pp
                                                        33-55
                                                                                          8


       Date                   Topic                    Assignment / Task
Thu, 26 Sep 2019 Unified Commands (Regional):   * Student-managed lesson
                 USNORTHCOM and
                 USSOUTHCOM                     Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                                National Security Strategy, pp
                                                33-55
Tue, 1 Oct 2019  Unified Commands (Functional): * Student-managed lesson
                 USTRANSCOM and USSOCOM
                                                Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                                National Security Strategy, pp
                                                33-55
Thu, 3 Oct 2019  Unified Commands (Functional): * Student-managed lesson
                 USCYBERCOM,
                 USSTRATCOM, and                Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                 USSPACECOM
                                                National Security Strategy, pp
                                                33-55
Tue, 8 Oct 2019  Midterm Exam
Thu, 10 Oct 2019 Air Force Domains - Air        Cadet Reader: Air Force
                                                Domains
                                                Air Force Basic Doctrine,
                                                Volume I, Chapter 2 and
                                                Chapter 5
Tue, 22 Oct 2019 Air Force Domains - Cyberspace Cadet Reader: Air Force
                                                Domains
                                                Cadet Reader: Cyberspace
                                                Joint Pub 3-12, Cyberspace
                                                Operations (Chapters 1 and 2)
Thu, 24 Oct 2019 Nuclear Operations             Cadet Reader: Nuclear
                                                Operations
                                                Doctrine Annex 3-72, Nuclear
                                                Operations
Tue, 29 Oct 2019 Self-Study: Heritage Series –
                 Major Troy Gilbert
                 Independent Research: BBP,
                 Email, and Decision Briefing
                 Preparation
                                                                               9


            Date                          Topic                       Assignment / Task
     Thu, 31 Oct 2019      Self-Study: Heritage Series –
                           MSgt Robert Gutierrez, Jr.
                           Independent Research: BBP,
                           Email, and Decision Briefing
                           Preparation
     Tue, 5 Nov 2019       Air Force Domains - Space           Cadet Reader: Air Force
                                                               Domains
                                                               Cadet Reader: Space
                                                               Joint Pub 3-14, Space
                                                               Operations (Chapters 1 and 2)
     Thu, 7 Nov 2019       The Total Force                     Cadet Reader: The Total Force
                                                               Cadet Reader: Defense Support
                           Defense Support to Civil Authority of Civil Authority
                                                               WBT: Defense Support of Civil
                                                               Authority
     Tue, 12 Nov 2019 How the Air Force Deploys                Cadet Reader: How the Air
                                                               Force Deploys
     Thu, 14 Nov 2019 Joint Operations                         Cadet Reader: Joint Operations
                                                               Joint Pub 3-0, Joint Operations
                                                               (Chapter 1)
     Tue, 19 Nov 2019 Command and Control                      Cadet Reader: Command and
                                                               Control
                           Capabilities and Force Packaging    Cadet Reader: Capabilities and
                                                               Force Packaging
     Thu, 21 Nov 2019      Decision Briefings
     Tue, 26 Nov 2019      Decision Briefings
     Thu, 28 Nov 2019      No Class; Thanksgiving Holiday
     Tue, 3 Dec 2019       National Security Capstone          Cadet Reader: National
                                                               Security Capstone
     Thu, 5 Dec 2019       Final Exam
15. Administrative Information:
    a. Academic Plan Review: All cadets must have their academic plan reevaluated and
       recertified by their university academic advisor every fall term.
    b. Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011 and detachment policy,
       each cadet will meet with their course instructor for an academic plan review and term
                                                                                               10


       counseling interview. Each cadet will schedule an appointment with their instructor to
       complete a counseling session and will bring an updated Academic Plan to the
       appointment. Request an appointment at https://calendly.com/paul-tombarge
    c. Office Hours: If you need my assistance or wish to discuss the course, the Air Force, or
       anything else, do not hesitate to schedule an appointment with me. An open door policy
       is always in effect; however, an appointment will ensure I am available and not
       committed to another task. Request an appointment at https://calendly.com/paul-
       tombarge
    d. Academic Integrity: Integrity is an Air Force core value. Plagiarism and cheating are
       examples of behavior that show a lack of integrity. I will not tolerate a lack of integrity.
       Academic integrity means honesty and responsibility in scholarship. Both professors and
       students must obey the rules of honest scholarship. Additionally, the core values of the
       University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
       opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
       these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
       community. For further information on academic dishonesty, please visit
       http://catalog.utexas.edu/generalinformation/the-university/
    e. Students with Disabilities: Students with Disabilities may request appropriate academic
       accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
       for Students with Disabilities, (512) 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
    f. Accommodations for Religious Holidays: In accordance with UT policy, you must
       notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
       of a religious holy day. If you must miss class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
       project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will have an opportunity to complete
       the missed work within a reasonable time following the absence.
    g. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about your safety or the
       safety of another student, please call the BCAL at (512) 232-5050.
16. Additional AFROTC Cadet Responsibilities and Standards: Cadets must be aware of
AFROTC standards (refer to AFROTCI 36-2011). While not all-inclusive, the following are key
reminders. Cadets must:
    a. Report ALL negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72
       hours. If the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets
       will report the involvement not later than 72 hours after their return following the break.
    b. Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours (exceptions for final semester).
       Failure to maintain full-time status could jeopardize your scholarship or retention in
       AFROTC.
    c. Maintain a cumulative GPA of 2.00 or greater to retain AFROTC membership.
                                                                                                    11


d. Maintain a term and cumulative GPA of 2.50 to activate or maintain a scholarship.
   Should a Scholarship Cadet’s cumulative GPA drop below 2.50, I will issue an
   Academic Conditional Event (CE). Multiple Academic CEs could result in suspension
   or termination of the scholarship.
e. Pass all AS courses with a C or better and no F or incomplete grades in any of your
   classes. Correspondence courses must have prior approval to be counted towards full-
   time status.
f. Remain in good standing at your institution.
g. Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with your course instructor in
   advance.
h. Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
i. Meet medical standards and advise cadre of any changes in your status.
j. Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
k. Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all
   military officers outside, and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all
   ranking cadet officers, of all military services, when in uniform.
l. Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming
   and weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and
   appearance standards are followed both on- and off-duty.
m. Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008, cadets will wear their
   uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and
   for Practical Military Training (PMT). GMC cadets will wear appropriate civilian attire
   to their AS class. POC cadets will wear UOD to their AS class. Cadets may wear
   appropriate civilian clothes at other times while in CLA. Cadets will not wear any hats
   inside the building at any time.
n. Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with
   military order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of, or inflict
   cruelty on subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or
   privilege to which they are legally entitled. Be honorable and be respectful.
o. Drugs and Alcohol: Using prescription drugs without a prescription or using illicit drugs
   is illegal. No drugs, period. Drinking alcohol while under age is illegal. No drinking
   alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be responsible; do not abuse alcohol and never drive
   while under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
                                                                                             12


17. Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
    1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
       evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
       requires exiting and assembling outside.
    2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
       Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
       building.
    3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
       the first week of class.
    4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
       Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Other important
       Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                                                                                 13
