                            KIN 328/628 Sport Management Internship
                                Drs. Sparvero, Bowers, & Ozurtcu
Course Summary
In this course, you will apply principles and skills developed in the major to practical problems
in the sport industry. There are two tracks: (1) traditional internship and (2) professional
development. If you are completing an internship with a sport organization (either in-person or
remotely), you will follow the traditional internship track. If you are not interning with a sport
organization, you will follow the professional development track. You will be assigned to one
of the two tracks within canvas. To begin, you will need to let me know your track by
completing this Internship Track Survey.
Course Format
This course is delivered asynchronously online. There is no in-person meeting
requirement. Students will complete assignments and submit them remotely via canvas. It is
expected that students will maintain regular contact with the instructor through regular updates
and will check canvas for course-related messages.
Course Objectives
At the conclusion of this course, students should be able to:
    1. Apply theories, concepts, and philosophies learned through previous academic and other
        experiences;
    2. Demonstrate skills and competencies in routine business administration;
    3. Apply decision-making and problem-solving skills through the formulation, evaluation
        and implementation of alternative solutions to problems and issues;
    4. Assess personal strengths and weaknesses in light of demands and expectations of
        employment; and
    5. Demonstrate an understanding of current issues in the sport industry.
Course Materials
All students will have an 8-week subscription to the Sports Business Journal and a DISC
assessment provided at no cost to the student. Although students in the traditional internship
track are not required to complete assignments related to these materials, we believe strongly that
these resources will help you increase your understanding of the industry as well as your place
within it.
Course Requirements
Your assignments in this course depend on whether you are on the traditional internship or
professional development track. Assignments for each track are included in the table below.


Assignment                           Traditional Internship         Professional Development
DISC profile
SBJ weekly drill
Linked In Learning
Case studies
Completed hours
Reflection essays
Midterm & final evaluation
Bi-weekly updates
Assignment Summary for Professional Development Track
SBJ Weekly Drill: You will receive a digital version of the Sports Business Journal each week
beginning June 15. You will complete a weekly drill that covers the content of the
article. Weekly drills are due each week on Sunday by midnight.
DISC profile: You will complete a DISC assessment through Athlete Assessments. Instructions
for the assessment will be posted on June 8, and you must complete the assessment no later than
June 12 at midnight. You will complete a comprehensive report based on your profile, which is
due no later than August 10 at midnight.
LinkedIn Learning: You will identify specific professional skills that you want to develop
during this semester. You will complete LinkedIn Learning modules to accumulate a set number
of hours (based on whether you are registered for the 3- or 6-hour class). Faculty have


developed a list of recommended "learning paths." All LinkedIn Learning modules and
associated reports must be completed by August 10 at midnight.
Case Studies: You will select 2 or 4 case studies to complete over the course of the semester
(depending on whether you are registered for the 3- or 6-hour class). These case studies have
been selected to allow you to apply what you have learned in your sport management
coursework and the LinkedIn Learning learning paths that you will complete.
Assignment Summary for Traditional Internship Track
Reflection Essays: Students will respond to six prompts that allow them to apply course content
from the major to their workplace. These responses cover strategic and functional considerations
of the internship site. Responses will be submitted via canvas and should be a minimum of 500
words.
Bi-weekly updates: Students will complete a report on their activities, projects, and
responsibilities every two weeks.
Evaluations: Site supervisors will complete a midterm and final evaluation. Dr. Sparvero will
email the evaluation form directly to the supervisor.
Weekly hours log: Students will update the google sheet with the number of hours worked each
week
         Date                                 Details
 Sun Jun 21, 2020     Assignment June 15 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Sun Jun 28, 2020     Assignment June 22 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Sun Jul 5, 2020      Assignment June 29 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Fri Jul 10, 2020     Assignment Midterm evaluation due by 11:59pm
 Sun Jul 12, 2020     Assignment July 6 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Sun Jul 19, 2020     Assignment July 13 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Sun Jul 26, 2020     Assignment July 20 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Sun Aug 2, 2020      Assignment July 27 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Sun Aug 9, 2020      Assignment August 3 SBJ due by 11:59pm
 Mon Aug 10, 2020 Assignment DISC report due by 11:59pm
 Fri Aug 14, 2020     Assignment Final evaluation due by 11:59pm
                      Assignment Case Studies
                      Assignment Competitors


        Date                                            Details
                         Assignment LinkedIn Learning report
                         Assignment Organizational culture
                         Assignment Pricing/Finance
                         Assignment Promotion/marketing
                         Assignment Report #1 due June 14
                         Assignment Report #2 due June 28
                         Assignment Report #3 due July 12
                         Assignment Report #4 due July 26
                         Assignment Report #5 due August 9
                         Assignment Risk management /legal
                         Assignment Tracking hours
                         Assignment Unique value proposition
Grading
Grading for the course will be based on the aggregation of scores for the assignments listed above.
Grade distribution:
 A              93 to 100 %                                               C+               77 to 79.99 %
 A-             90 to 92.99 %                                             C                73 to 76.99 %
 B+             87 to 89.99 %                                             C-               70 to 72.99 %
 B              83 to 86.99 %                                             D                60 to 69.99 %
 B-             80 to 82.99 %                                             F                59.99 or less
Course administration
    1.  I expect that all students will attend every class meeting. Students who miss class will not have the
        opportunity to complete the two minute drills. Also, students who attend and are prepared for each class
        perform better than those who miss class and/or do not do the assigned readings.
    2.  Punctuality is very important to me. I will start each class on time. If I am not in class on time, something
        unexpected and unusual has occurred, and you are welcome to leave. The only exception to this is if I have
        already been in our classroom and need to return to my office for supplies, assignments, etc. I expect you
        to come to class on time as well.
    3.  All assignments are due at the time indicated on canvas. You will lose 10% of possible points for an
        assignment for each 24-hour period that the assignment is late.
    4.  You are welcome to use your laptop to take notes or to review readings in class. You do not need to use
        your laptop for twitter, Instagram, snapchat, online shopping, or for any other non-course-related purpose.
        Likewise, you should turn your phone off when you enter the classroom. If you use your phone or your
        laptop for anything that is not related to the course, you will be asked to leave.
    5.  By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
        observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
        project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
        within a reasonable time after the absence.


6. If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
   deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
   Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
   http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
7. Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
   Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
   6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
8. Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: You are responsible
   for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the following web address:
   http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php I will make clear when you are able to collaborate
   with your classmates; if I have not explicitly allowed collaboration, assume that it is not allowed.
