                       Department of Accounting
          ACC 311 -- Fundamentals of Financial Accounting
                                  Fall 2019 Syllabus
Instructor:                         William Spiller
E-mail:                             Bill.Spiller@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office:                             GSB 5.126H
Office Hours:                       Tuesday 9-11:30 and Tuesday 1-3:30
                                    Email questions are also encouraged and office
                                    appointments can be set up via email.
Teaching Assistant:                 TBA in Canvas
TA Office & Office Hours:           TBD – See Canvas
                                    Email questions are also encouraged and office
                                    appointments can be set up via email.
Class times and
locations:                          Unique #02390 M?W 9:30-11:00am                GSB 3.130
                                    Unique #02400 M/W            2:00-3:30pm       UTC 4.104
                                    Unique #02415 M/W 12:30-2:00pm                 UTC 4.104
Required Materials and Equipment:
    •   Textbook: Financial Accounting, 10th Edition, by Libby, Libby, and Hodge,
        (ISBN: 9781260936087, McGraw-Hill/Irwin, 2020). This is a customized version
        packaged with Connect access.
                  o On-Line Homework Manager: McGraw Hill Connect, packaged
                       with the textbook. Follow this link once you have purchased the textbook:
                       https://connect.mheducation.com/class/b-spiller-amended-fall-
                       2019-mon_wed
    •   Accounting Cycle Supplement: Solid Footing: Building an Accounting
        Foundation, 12th edition, by Dan Wiegand, (ISBN: 9780997381283, Micro
        Solve Inc.). This is a textbook with accompanying software and files.
    •   Calculator: A financial calculator is required for this course. A financial
        calculator is one that has dedicated keys for convenience in working problems
        involving the time-value of money. The keys typically are labeled N (number of
        periods), I/Yr (required interest rate per period), PV (present value), PMT
        (payment per period), and FV (single future payment amount). If you already
        have such a calculator, you do not need to buy a new one. However, if you do not
        already have such a calculator, you should buy an HP 10bII+. This calculator is
        recommended by both the accounting and finance faculty of the McCombs School


        of Business.
   •    Note: You may NOT use calculators that have text memory (e.g. for programs) or
        cell-phone calculators on quizzes or examinations. Examples of PROHIBITED
        CALCULATORS are the TI-83, 84, 86 and 89. You may use simple 4-function
        calculators if an exam or quiz does not require TVM calculations.
Supplements
   ▪    Certain Homework Solutions (will be made available on Canvas)
   ▪    Instructor PowerPoint Slides and/or Notes (will be made available on Canvas)
   ▪    Sample 311 Midterm Exams (will be made available on Canvas)
   ▪    Canvas Website
Prerequisite:
      The prerequisite for this course is twenty-four semester hours of (prior) college
      credit. If you do not satisfy this prerequisite, you should drop ACC 311, or the
      Office of the Dean of Undergraduate Programs will drop you from the course.
      Instructors may not waive prerequisites to their courses.
Objectives of the course: To learn the following:
     A. The nature and purpose of accounting for businesses, with emphasis on
           corporate business entities.
     B. Accounting methods and their use as an orderly means of recording,
           classifying, and presenting useful information from a mass of data derived
           from transactions and events affecting businesses.
      C. The basic language of business as represented by business and accounting
           terminology.
      D. The concepts and standards underlying the measurements used in accounting
           to prepare the financial statements of businesses.
      E. The use and interpretation of financial reports (i.e., income statements, balance
           sheets, statements of retained earnings, statements of cash flows) prepared for
           users external to businesses (i.e., owners, creditors, government and investors).
Quantitative Reasoning Flag
    This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses
    are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types
    of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional
    life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
    your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
Course Routine
    I will conduct the course by giving lectures, facilitating solutions to in-class
    exercises and conducting discussions in a manner that encourages class participation
    by students, consistent with the objectives of the course and the time available.
    Students are expected to study the chapter readings before topics are
                                               2


   introduced in class and do assigned homework questions, exercises and
   problems to reinforce what they learn (you can’t effectively learn accounting
   without doing exercises and problems). Students are encouraged to ask questions
   and to request that particular points be explained in more detail if they remain
   confused or uncertain about items discussed or if concepts remain unclear.
Homework
   There are two types of homework in the course, Solid Footing homework and
   textbook homework (Libby, Libby, Hodge).
   Solid Footing Homework
   During the first four weeks of the course, you will be learning about the accounting
   cycle, the process with which companies capture transaction data, record them,
   summarize them and transform them into financial statements that conform to
   Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). It is essential that every student
   develop a solid understanding and ability to do accounting cycle tasks because these
   accomplishments are the foundation for learning the remaining content of the course.
   Accordingly, the faculty adopted Solid Footing, a semi-interactive tool for learning
   the accounting cycle and statement of cash flows. It is meant to present, reinforce
   and test progress in the accounting cycle in a way that leads to more consistent and
   deeper understanding among our students, leading to less attrition and disappointing
   grades in ACC 311. To be sure that all students keep up with the lessons during this
   phase of the course, we require that three Solid Footing homework assignments
   be completed and uploaded through Canvas to be graded. See the homework
   column of the course schedule for the assignments and dates on which they must be
   uploaded. All assignments are due by 5pm on the date assigned. Two of the
   assignments will be due in the first few weeks of the course and the last on
   December 6th.
   Textbook Homework
   Textbook homework is assigned from the chapters we cover. As the name implies,
   homework is meant to be completed outside of class. Textbook homework is further
   divided into problems to be submitted for grading and problems that are neither
   submitted nor graded. Graded questions are listed in bold-faced text on the
   Course Schedule and are managed through the Connect system. Graded
   homework must be completed individually, however you are permitted to
   collaborate with classmates on figuring out how to structure the solution to assigned
   questions. Graded homework is due by 8am on the day of class, and late
   homework will not be accepted. Connect changes the numbers in the problem for
   each student, so the data will differ from the textbook and your solution will not be
   the same as your classmates’ solutions. Connect will grade these problems, provide
   solutions (after all sections of ACC 311 have submitted their homework), and
   indicate areas where you need to do additional study.
   The homework grade is the percent of all graded problems completed correctly. No
   homework assignments can be dropped in computing the final homework
                                             3


     grade.
     The problems that are not required to be submitted or graded (not bold-faced) are as
     critical to your success as those that are graded.
If you have difficulty using Connect or encounter a problem with it please first try to
resolve the problem with Connect Customer Support: 800.331.5094. If you have
questions about how to solve the exercises or problems, please see your instructor or
TA’s (listed above).
Instructor Discretion
     Instructor discretion may include (but is not limited to) announced or unannounced
     quizzes (in or out of class), quizzes on Canvas, participation, extra homework, or
     group projects. If I choose to make such assignments their scores will be treated as
     part of the instructor discretion.
Quizzes
    I plan to utilize in-class quizzes for a majority of the instructor discretion grade
    weighting. There will be approximately 5-8 quizzes during the semester. Quizzes
    will consist of short answer, True/False, and/or multiple-choice questions. You will
    be able to drop your lowest quiz grade. If you miss a quiz you will receive a zero for
    that quiz. There are no make-up quizzes. If the quiz is an in-class quiz and you leave
    class after taking the quiz but before the end of class, I reserve the right to discard any
    quizzes for students not in attendance for the entire class period. You MUST come to
    the section in which you are officially registered to receive credit for any quiz or in-
    class assignment. Not all quizzes will have the same point value. I do not return
    graded quizzes, but they are kept in my office and you may come and examine yours
    and ask questions. Complete solutions for each quiz will be posted on Canvas.
Class Protocol
    If for some reason you are running late, do not feel you should skip class. Please
    come in quietly and take a seat at the side or in the rear of the classroom. If you must
    leave class early, please tell me before class starts. I would appreciate it. Such
    comings and goings during class should be rare—do not let them become a habit.
    If you need to miss a class or other required activity, including an examination, for
    any reason, please inform me as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that I
    can approve the absence as excused and arrangements can be made to complete any
    missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. If you miss a class or other
    required activity, including an examination, for reasons beyond your control,
    precluding prior notice, inform me of the circumstances as soon as you are able.
Personal Electronic Equipment Policy
    The University delegates to individual faculty member’s responsibility for and
    authority over classroom procedure and decorum. Due to abuse by those who came
    before you, I regret to announce you may not use a LAPTOP, e-Tablet, CELL
    PHONE, PDA, DVD player or MP3 (iPod) or any other such equipment during class
                                               4


   time (unless it is an accommodation specified by the Office of Services for Students
   with Disabilities). Such types of equipment are distractions. Moreover, if I tolerate
   any one student using such equipment, I cannot deny others. From experience, I
   know that I cannot allow use of these distracters to escalate and get out of hand.
   Therefore, I will not tolerate any use by any individual student while class is in
   session. All such equipment should be turned off and put away. You are encouraged
   to bring a calculator to class and have it ready to use.
   In addition to the use of the above types of equipment, all other forms of distracting
   behavior are prohibited. I won’t begin to list such behaviors; you should know what
   is inappropriate.
E-mail and Canvas
   The use of email and Canvas is required for this course. I will frequently
   communicate with the class with announcements and guidance and I will answer
   questions via email. I check my e-mail at frequent intervals during weekdays and
   somewhat less regularly over weekends. I will use the email addresses that are
   supplied to me on Canvas. They are the email addresses that you have given the
   University for directory purposes. If you need to update your email address with the
   University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal info/all my addresses,
   change your email address. Before each class, I will post on Canvas any PowerPoint
   slides I intend to use. You can print them in handout style to save paper—either six
   slides to a page or, if you prefer, three slides accompanied by note-taking space. It is
   your responsibility to regularly check both your e-mail and the class website on
   Canvas.
Grading Questions or Appeals
   Do not wait until the end of the semester to question or appeal grade components
   other than the final examination.
   If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the grade components, or if you feel
   you need to bring to the attention of our Teaching Assistant or me other facts or
   circumstances that might affect the grade for that item, you will have ONE WEEK
   from the date the grade is posted on Canvas or Connect to take such action and have
   the matter resolved.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
   A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University
   must inform students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class
   roster: Since Fall 2001, web-based, password-protected class sites have been
   available for all accredited courses taught at The University. Class e-mail rosters are
   a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these
   electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the
   Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory
   information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-
   01/app/appc09.html        Privacy in Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by
   your UTEID login. Please be aware that I will use a merged Canvas site for all
   sections of the course that I am teaching this semester. This will allow students in
                                               5


    other sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from
    within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your email address and no other
    personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please
    contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from view of
    other students.
Academic Standards
     A high academic level will be maintained with respect to (a) the quality of the course
     and (b) grading. Semester grades will be determined using the following factors and
     relative weights:
                   Graded homework (Connect & Solid Footing)                                 15%
                   Two (non-cumulative) Midterms:
                      Lower Midterm                                                          15%
                      Higher Midterm                                                         25%
                   Final Exam (comprehensive)                                                35%
                   Instructor discretion—quizzes, group projects, etc.                       10%
                                                                                            100%
    The ACC 311 faculty has adopted the University’s plus/minus grading as the standard
    for all sections of the course.1 The faculty believes that plus/minus grading permits
    us to better distinguish gradations in performance and provides better feedback to
    students on their performance.
    Course grades will be such that the class average will be in the range of 3.0 – 3.2.
    Grades will be based on the total points earned in the course (as shown above).
    You may assess your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-,
    80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and below 60% = F. It is possible, but not
    guaranteed, that we will curve grades at the end of the course. No grades will be
    associated with scores on exams or quizzes during the semester. In addition, no
    individual exam grades will be curved during the semester.
    Incompletes will be given only in the RAREST of circumstances and only in
    accordance with university policy. There will be no opportunity to raise your course
    grade by doing “extra credit” work during or after the end of the semester—that
    would violate University policy.
Examinations
    There will be two midterm examinations and a comprehensive final examination.
    Bags and personal items must be left at the front or side of the testing room (likely
    out of arm’s reach). Plan adherence to campus carry rules accordingly.
     Exams 1 & 2 will be uniform (all sections at the same time).
     Exam 1:              Wednesday Oct. 2nd                  7-9 PM Rooms TBA
1
  Under the traditional grading system an undergraduate student needs a D or better to receive credit for a
course; under the plus/minus system an undergraduate student needs a D- or better to receive credit.
                                                    6


      Exam 2:           Wednesday Nov. 6th               7-9 PM Rooms TBA
      Make-ups will be the following day or evening.
      The Final Exam will be uniform (all sections at the same time) and comprehensive
      (covering the entire course). It will NOT be given on the dates and times listed in the
      UT course schedule. The actual dates and times will be announced later in the
      semester. NO EXAMS WILL BE GIVEN EARLY. IF YOU MUST SCHEDULE
      AIRFARE BEFORE THE EXACT DATE OF THE FINAL IS KNOWN PLEASE
      DO NOT SCHEDULE TRAVEL BEFORE THE LAST DAY OF FINALS.
     Examinations are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. All
     exams are also closed book/notes. Calculators that can store text are not allowed.
     Only students with conflicts with other UT classes or UT exams, medical or other
     documented emergencies and special needs will be given exams at times other than
     the uniform exams. If you have a job, job interview, or extra-curricular activity at
     the time of the exam, this is notice that you are responsible to be excused, miss, or
     work around those other activities. Individual makeup exams must be taken by
     4:30pm on the second day following the original exam.
     Unexcused absence from any examination will result in a score of zero. If you miss
     an exam due to an illness or other emergency reason, you should notify me as soon
     as possible and provide me with written documentation (e.g., a note from the
     attending physician) after you return. I have final authority to determine if your
     absence should be excused and if I can give you a make-up exam. If you have an
     excused absence from a mid-term exam and I cannot give you a make-up exam, you
     will receive extra weight on your final exam (“lowest midterm” weight) to
     compensate for the missed examination.
     If you need to make early travel reservations for the end of the semester, you should
     make them for travel on December 19th or later—because we will not know until
     well into the semester exactly when our examination will be scheduled by the
     University. If you make non-refundable (or non-cancelable) arrangements for travel
     before December 19th they will not be an acceptable reason for taking the final exam
     early.
Dropping the Course
Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who stops
attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a grade of F. Consult the
Academic Calendar on the Registrar’s website (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for
specific deadlines.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                                7


Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives will be well served
by this course, that students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the diversity that students
bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and
benefit. Please let me know right away if this ever is not the case.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to
observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by
the Office of Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
         evacuate buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
     • If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire
         authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                   8


                                                              ACC 311
                      Libby, Libby, Hodge Financial Accounting, Tenth Edition
                               Textbook Material Excluded From the Course
                                                              EXAM 1
Chapter 1
Chapter Supplement B: Employment in the Accounting Profession (p 23-24)
Chapter 11
Key Ratio Analysis: Dividend Yield (p 577)
Stock Dividends and Stock Splits: (p 580-582)
Preferred Stock: (p. 585-586)
Chapter Supplement: Accounting for Owner’s Equity for Sole Proprietorships and Partnerships (p 589-592)
                                                              EXAM 2
Chapter 6
To Take or Not to Take the Discount (bottom page 292)
Report, control and safeguard cash (p 306-311)
Chapter Supplement A: Recording Discounts and Returns (313-314)
Chapter 7
Inventory Methods and Financial Statement Analysis (p 359-361)
Chapter Supplement A: LIFO Liquidations (p 367-368)
Chapter Supplement B: FIFO and LIFO Cost of Goods (p 368-369)
Chapter Supplement C: Additional Issues in Measuring Purchases (p 369-370)
Chapter 8
Units-of-Production (p 411-412)
Declining-Balance Method (p 412-413)
Chapter 9
Present Value Computations Using Excel (p 496-497)
Chapter Supplement B: Deferred Taxes (p 497-498)
                                                              EXAM 3
Chapter 10
The Chapter 10 reading assignment is somewhat different from the other chapters. Read pages 518-529 first, then the supplement
541-547, then finish the chapter with pages 536-541.
Key Ratio Analysis: Times Interest Earned (528)
Chapter 12
Key Ratio Analysis: Quality of Income Ratio (p 629)
Key Ratio Analysis: Capital Acquisitions Ratio and Free Cash Flow (p 632-633)
Chapter Supplement A: Reporting Cash Flows from Operating Activities – Direct Method (p 639-642)
APPENDIX A
Investments for Significant Influence (A16 to A20)
Controlling Interests (A20 to A26)
Appendix Supplement (A-26-A27)
                             Anticipate slight differences in page number for the online textbook (E-book).
                                                                    9
