                                                              ADV 338K & ADV391K
                              DigiPort        Unique Numbers 06465 & 06803
the person handing out grades:                        the real brains of the operation (your TA):
Ryan Romero                                           Regan Gavin
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com                            rtgavin@utexas.edu
Office: BMC 4.306                                     Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays                         Hours: TBD
        11am - 12:30pm, 4pm - 5pm
Highly Recommended Reads:
Advertising Concept:
        Hey Whipple, Squeeze This - Luke Sullivan
        The Advertising Concept Book - Pete Barry
Immersive and Digital:
        The Art of Immersion - Frank Rose
Highly Recommended Software Skills:
        Unreal Engine, Adobe Photoshop, Adobe Illustrator, Adobe Premiere Pro ​(or other video
        editing software)
Man, what did I sign up for?
If you’re here, you already understand basic advertising creativity. Big ideas, conceptual
thinking and the like are all your bag. Here we’re going to take that bag and put it inside a
bigger bag of digital concepts, strategy, and processes. Hopefully, you’ll leave here with a
better idea of how to play in the sandbox of the digital realm.
Do you have to code? Will there be high-level php humor? Do you need to start collecting
original Battlestar Galactica figurines mint in box? No. You’re not a developer…or maybe you
are. The point is, it doesn’t matter. A person who races motorcycles may not know how to
build the engine they ride on top of, but they know how to corner. Here, we learn to corner.


Also, building motorcycles is cool. We should all probably learn that too.
Class Objectives:
    ●    Observing the Digital World
         Creative students must learn to observe and interpolate the digital world around them
         and their targets using a critical and conceptual eye. We’ll learn to ask, “why,” “how” and
         see beyond the obvious.
    ●    Understand and Leverage Target Audience Behavior
         Target audiences perform repeated actions, follow behavioral patterns, and interact
         with people and products on a daily basis. Students are taught to find and leverage
         these patterns in order to inject their communication seamlessly into the targets’ lives.
    ●    Partnerwork
         Students learn to work intimately with multiple partners on several assignments
         ultimately understanding the importance of growing and developing ideas with a partner,
         time management, professionalism, and the importance of the improvisational lesson of
         “yes, and...”.
    ●    Understanding Criticism and Feedback
         Critique is an integral part of the creative process. Students get their first experiences
         here giving, receiving, understanding, and applying feedback in service of bettering
         everyone’s ideas.
    ●    Develop Confidence and Bravery
         Creativity dies in negativity and many of us suffer from an internal editor that makes us
         think our ideas aren’t good enough, smart enough, or will never work. Learning to turn “it
         will never work” into “let’s try and see what happens” is key.
    ●    Skills and Software - Getting your idea across
         Students will spend time outside of class learning new and varying skills as their
         individual ideas and executions necessitate them. Editing Videos, creating websites,
         building 3D models, and other means of presentation will be required.
“So, we made an app.” & other ways to fail
You are advertising creatives and that means you have to think. In this class you will be
expected to produce the amazing ideas I know that are lurking around in that brain of yours or
your partner. That isn’t to say they can’t be very simple, the best ones generally are. They
might even include an app. It just better be awesome and relevant. In short, don’t bring none of
them weak answers up in here. Low-hanging fruit buys you nothing in the digital world. In this
class it buys you low-hanging grades.
Embrace the beep borp
The basic structure is like other portfolio classes in the sequence. The first step will involve a
discussion about the landscape of digital. We’ll talk about what you like, what I like and why we


like these things. Participate and have an opinion. It’s part of your grade.
After talking about other people’s work we’re going to do our own. Bring tons of ideas, present
them, and then we will collectively mock those ideas forcing you to come back with better
ones. I kid. Maybe.
         NOTE: Thicker skin through advertising
         Advertising is not a private endeavor. Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes
         harshly, by your target audience. We improve by sharing our ideas early and often with
         other creatives. Fair and honest critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. Don’t
         take it personally, keep your cool and know that very few ideas ever make the final cut.
You’ll be expected to properly describe your project as you would to a client. We’ll work
together to decide how that should be done, but plan to work just as hard as you do in
Portfolio. This class assumes you (or your partner) possess basic comp skills that can shape
your idea into pretty pictures for all to admire.
Grading
Your final course grade will be calculated like so:
         60% = Digital Portfolio Projects
         20% = In-Class Assignments
         20% = Participation and Professionalism
Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum
grade of C in all communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major.
‣ Nerd out - Keep up to date on new technology, applications and online experiences
‣ Fail big - Make mistakes and own them. We all learn from them.
‣ Play nice - Be a good partner. Seriously. Do your end and then some.
‣ Do cool - Make good ideas happen for no reason other than the joy of doing it.
Open Away From Face
As a child I once asked my father to explain to me the words printed on the caps of bottled soda. He
said it was there to keep people who shook up the soda from accidentally hitting themselves in the eye
when they opened the bottle. “But that’s common sense. We have to tell people basic information like
this? What a giant waste of time.” So anyway, here’s your bottle cap.
         showing up.
         I do not take roll but there is an expectation that you are here. Missing a class that moves as
         quickly as we will puts you significantly behind. If you have a job interview or some other
         pressing emergency it’s up to you to make the call. You are an adult and can decide which is
         more important to attend. You needn’t let me know you’re going to miss a class (see efficiency
         in emails point). Know that repeated absence or lack of participation in class could influence
         your grade. You are a budding professional in a deadline-driven industry. That means you are
         expected to do all of the work all of the time. Show up ready to present in every class. If I decide


to call on you or your partner to show me what you’re up to, you better have something to say. If
the class, as a whole, does not have enough prepared for class then class may just be canceled.
And trust me, you need every bit of class time you can get each semester.
favorites exist.
I, like every professor, has on occasion been accused of having favorites. Guess what. I do. So
do your parents, your bosses, everyone you meet in the world, and you. Maybe you care about
being a favorite and maybe you don’t, but I’d encourage you to keep reading. The thing is, my
favorite students are the ones who apply themselves, do the work, process all the feedback and
work to better their work and themselves. They needn’t always do as I suggest but they should
seek to understand criticism and use that information to do better. Then, they come back big,
hard, and often. They don’t make excuses. They don’t show up without work. They don’t keep
repeating the same mistakes over and over without seeking help to rectify them. Why do I like
these people? Because they’re here to do the work.
Good news! You’re already my favorite student and staying that way makes you more
successful at what you came here to do. But show me you don’t want to work, you don’t want
to care, you don’t have time to participate and while you won’t lose the opportunity to do good
work, you will begin to lose respect from me, your peers, and future bosses. That’s how the
world works. Nobody expects you to be good right off the bat, few are. You just have to want to
be good and then take the steps to get there. Do that and you’ll always be my favorite
snowflake.
thicker skin through advertising.
No matter how much of an introvert you may be, how delicate your feelings are, or how attached
you are to your art, advertising is not and will never be private. It is a public endeavor. Period.
Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes harshly, by your colleagues and me. Fair and
honest critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. It can even be difficult for those who are.
Remember: you are not your work. Don’t take criticism to heart, take it to head. Consider it.
Process it. Use it. Keep your cool and know that very few ideas make the final cut. Critique is
difficult to hear no matter who says it and no matter how they say it. The people in this room are
here to build your book and get you a job. We are not a creative director worried about you
taking his job, we’ve nothing to gain from making you feel bad, and we’re not the internet trolls
who will tear your work down from the shadows. Sadly, all of that is going to happen later on in
the real world. For now, know that we’re your instructors, your colleagues, and your friends
trying to make you better.
let’s get passionate.
We talk about a lot of things in class. As creatives, our goal is to make real, truthful human
emotional connections. And both humans and emotions are nothing if not messy. Touchy
subjects will be brought up and discussed because we’re putting real work out into the real
world where those subjects exist. While we have to discuss (and grow from doing so) the impact
these thoughts and ideas have on society from an academic perspective, I will not tolerate
racism, hate speech, misogyny or any other kind of marginalization and neither should you.
We’re navigating a very delicate time in our society and if someone, including myself, ever
crosses a line, even accidentally, I encourage you to come to me or to my TA and address your


         concerns. Chances are the person in question was simply mistaken or ignorant on the subject
         and will want to apologize. This is how we grow. This is how we move forward. You are safe
         here. You are welcome here. Do not bottle up your concerns as nobody can feel creative if they
         don’t feel safe and we won’t undermine our mission to grow your creativity.
UT Made Me Say It
A collection of mandatory stuff from the University. You should probably glance at it anyway.
Don’t cheat. Don’t steal work.
The usual university rules apply to cheating and plagiarism. When it doubt, refer to Wheaton’s
law. If you are caught doing either, you will automatically fail this course. Please familiarize
yourself with the university’s policy on plagiarism​ ​here.
It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for support. Our
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW | CMA
4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is unavailable)
         Need Immediate Help?
                      - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                          | 512-471- 3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
                      - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
                          cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
If there’s a family emergency, you’re having health issues, miss class, etc.
Hit up Student Emergency Services first. Let them handle telling your profs.
https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Need other accommodations?
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information:
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
This is a safe space, just not always a confidential one. So says the federal government.
You can talk to me about anything. However, if it involves sex discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence (including dating and
domestic violence), stalking, or discrimination on the basis of pregnancy ​I am required by law
to disclose this information to our Title IX office or I will lose my job and be legally prosecuted.
You can find more info at ​titleix.utexas.edu
But, when? WHEN?!​ ​(subject to change)
W, 1/22                   Syllabus, Introductions - Begin Project 1


M, 1/27     Project 1
W, 1/29     Project 1
M, 2/3      Project 1
W, 2/5      Project 1
M, 2/10     Project 1
W, 2/12     Project 1
M, 2/17     Project 1     Deadline for Project 2 choices.
W, 2/19     Project 1
M, 2/24     Project 2     PROJECT 1 DUE
W, 2/26     Project 2
M, 3/2      Project 2
W, 3/4      Project 2
M, 3/9      Project 2
W, 3/11     Project 2     Deadline for Project 3 choices.
3/16 - 3/20 Spring Break
M, 3/23     Project 3     No slacking. Let’s see some great ideas!
W, 3/25     Project 3     PROJECT 2 DUE
M, 3/30     Project 3
W, 4/1      Project 3
M, 4/6      Project 3
W, 4/8      Project 3
M, 4/13     Project 3
W, 4/15     Project 3
M, 4/20     Production Mode: Any project          PROJECT 3 DUE
W, 4/22     Production Mode: Any project
M, 4/27     Last chance feedback on everything, presentation polishing, dry-runs
W, 4/29
M, 5/4      Presentations to real-world “clients”
W, 5/6
