LTC 385 Proficiency-based Language and Culture Instruction: Theory and Practice
Dr. Olla Al-Shalchi
olla@austin.utexas.edu
MTWTHF 10-11:30am, PAR 210
Summer Session 1
Office Hours: T, W 9-10 & by appointment, CAL 508
      Þ This document contains important information and represents an agreement between the
          instructor and students of the class.
      Þ You are responsible for knowing all of the information contained in this document.
      Þ You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
Course Description:
         In this course students will be learning about the different theories and methods used in
teaching and learning a foreign language. The advantages and disadvantages of each will be reviewed
and students will have the opportunity to design and implement classes based on what they have
learned. We will also review the ACTFL guidelines and discuss how these guidelines can be implemented
and used in the foreign language classes.
         The course is designed not only to have students learn about the different theories and methods
in foreign languages, but to also create, revise, and begin to use your own person theory of learning as
well as to reflect on how learning theories impact our everyday lives. By the end of the class students
should begin to think about their own personal philosophies and teaching preferences and knowing
what principles are guiding their own point of views.
Required Texts:
No required textbooks; all course material will be made available to students via Canvas as well as
online: https://coerll.utexas.edu/methods/
Course Requirements:
 Class Observations & Reports                           10%
 Friday Discussions                                     10%
 Midterm                                                20%
 Final Exam                                             20%
 Class Demonstrations (Micro teaching lesson)           20%
 Teaching Philosophy                                    20%
Class Observations & Reports
During this summer, you will complete 4 classroom observations. You will need to observe at
least a 50 minute class session of a foreign language taught at UT. Some of the foreign
languages being offered this summer include American Sign Language, German, French, Korean,
Arabic, Spanish, and Russian. You must first contact the instructor of the course before
attending and get permission to sit in class to complete the observation. The class observation
reports will be due on 6/14, 6/21, 6/28, 7/8. The class observation form that you will need to fill
out can be found on Canvas.


Friday Discussions
One of the areas that we will work on this summer is the importance of professional
development and keeping up to date with the latest research trends in teaching foreign
languages. On 6/14, 6/21, and 6/28 we will be having Friday discussion days in which each
student will be responsible for sharing with the class an article, podcast, video, webinar, etc.
that deals with foreign language education. You will need to prepare a quick summary and
discuss what the implications of the research are and how we may see this being used in the
classroom. We’ll have a google doc in which we will share the resources that we are using.
Midterm and Final
You will have 2 exams during the course of the summer: a midterm exam (6/20) and a final
exam (7/11). Exams will be administered via Canvas.
Class Demonstrations
During the last few days of class, each student will have an opportunity to conduct a class
demonstration of about 20-30 minutes. You may teach a foreign language or you may teach an
English as a second language class. You will prepare a lesson plan and the rest of the class will
act as your students. Class demonstrations may be videotaped to give you the opportunity to
review your own teaching. You will write up a self-reflection in which you will discuss the
process of deciding what you teach, developing the lesson plan, challenges you faced during the
teaching process, and the positive and negative outcomes of your lesson. After each class
demonstration, your “students” will be given the opportunity to evaluate your class
(anonymously) and as a class we will help each other improve in our own teaching.
Teaching Philosophy
Throughout the course, you will be learning about different theories, methods and approaches
used in teaching a foreign language. This will help you decide what your own philosophy of
teaching is, and by the end of the summer, you will submit a draft of your teaching philosophy.
Your teaching philosophy is a work in progress, and I do not expect it to be in its final form by
the end of the session. Teaching philosophies change over time and change depending on our
own expertise and experience. What you believe in today may change later on and will be
reflected in your teaching philosophy; this is just a starting point.
This syllabus is subject to change. However, any changes will be brought to the attention of
students in writing via e-mail communication and also verbally in class.
Daily Schedule can be found on Canvas.
