                                  THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                     STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:          SW 360K / 395K                  Instructor:       Susan M. De Luca, Ph.D.
 Unique Number:          88560 / 87700                   Email:            sdeluca@austin.utxas.edu (preferred)
 Semester:               Summer 2020                     Office:           3.130L
 Meeting Time /          Mondays & Wednesdays            Phone:            512-471-1713
              Place:     8:30 am – 11:00 am              Office Hours:     By appointment
                         Via Zoom
                                              Suicide Prevention
    I.       COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course will examine the public health problem of suicide, with specific attention to prevention, intervention,
and postvention related to micro, mezzo, and macro approaches. Students will gain an understanding of suicide
epidemiology and underlying theory, as well as risk and protective factors for suicidal thoughts and behaviors.
This course will familiarize students with evidence-based practices and ethical considerations with clients
engaging in suicidal thoughts and behaviors, including learning directly from individuals with lived experience
with suicidality. Students will also learn about the current state and national strategies for suicide prevention, as
well as policies related to suicide. Upon completion of this course, based on the completion of all readings and
projects outlined in the syllabus, students will gain skills in assessment and management of suicide risk,
intervention and treatment techniques with suicidal clients, and postvention approaches with survivors of suicide
loss.
    II.      COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
    1. Understand the epidemiology and theories of suicide, as well as the various models of suicide prevention.
    2. Understand risk and protective factors (at multiple levels) for suicide and identify and understand which
        social groups are at high risk for suicide.
    3. Understand the importance of developing a therapeutic alliance for effectively working with suicidal
        clients.
    4. Demonstrate the ability to actively listen to suicidal clients.
    5. Demonstrate reflecting skills necessary to build rapport and trust with suicidal clients.
    6. Be able to critically evaluate, select, and apply evidence-based suicide risk screening and assessment.
    7. Understand, select and modify appropriate suicide intervention strategies based on continuous clinical
        assessment.
    8. Learn about development and implementation of interventions for individuals with suicidal thoughts and
        behaviors.
    III.     TEACHING METHODS
The Professor is committed to helping students prepare for social work field education. A variety of teaching
methods including interactive lectures, experiential group activities, reading assignments, guest speakers,
audiovisual materials, and student presentations will be used to help students understand suicide prevention at the
micro, mezzo, and macro levels. Students are expected to be the chairs of their own education, meaning they will
                                                            1


contribute to their own learning through asking questions, sharing experiences, and actively participating in class
discussion. In covering various topics, our class will intentionally discuss diversity based on gender, gender
identity, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, nationality, immigrant/documentation status, class, religion, varying
ability, and age. This course will highlight diverse perspectives of thought, and encourages students to engage in
new ways of thinking that may be represented by speakers, the professor, and classmates from diverse
backgrounds. If students do not believe they are getting what they desire to learn in class, the Professor strongly
suggests that the student meet with the Professor early on in the semester. The Professor welcomes these
conversations and cannot know if a student is struggling unless he/she/hir informs her.
Use of Canvas in Class & Email
In this class the Professor uses Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected
access at http://canvas.utexas.edu—to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post
grades, to submit assignments, and to give students online quizzes and surveys. Students can find support in using
Canvas at the ITS Help Desk by calling 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. Please plan
accordingly.
It is required that students check their email daily and respond within 24 hours when warranted. This is not only
preparing you for ethical and professional social work practice, but also affords effective communication between
you and the Professor.
      IV.     REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
      V.      Why People Die By Suicide. (2005). Author: Thomas Joiner Harvard University Press.
      VI.     COURSE REQUIREMENTS
The assignments are designed to give each student the opportunity to demonstrate their learning over the semester
in a variety of ways including presentations, essays/papers, and in class debates/discussions.
Discussant 35%
You will be responsible (generally in pairs, depending on class size) for leading one class discussion. Your
objective is to synthesize the day’s readings, co-facilitate the discussion, and summarize the take- home points.
When fulfilling this role, prior to class, you and your partner(s) will submit 4-5 discussion questions based on the
readings (due by 12pm the day before class, so that I can provide you feedback) to really promote a lively
discussion, provide some debate points, even include an exercise if you think it will ultimately promos discussion.
During class you will co-facilitate our discussion with me. After class you will submit a very brief (1-2
paragraphs or 4-5 bullet points) summary of what you learned as a discussant, how you might improve the
discussion in the future, and how you will take this knowledge and share it with friends, family, and professionals
(due within 24 hours of class).
Stakeholder Paper and Presentation 55% (due 7/27)
      -   40% Paper
      -   15% Presentation
A final project typically demonstrates your ability to relate all the information you’ve learned inside and outside
the class and apply it to a specific deliverable. Therefore, this project should reveal your knowledge of suicide
prevention and the stakeholders involved.
                                                             2


First, pick a group that is at heightened risk for suicidal thoughts and behaviors. You will then talk to stakeholders
from that group you would like to serve. Please note, a stakeholder does not include speaking to a social worker
at an agency. I would like you to speak to an individual who identifies as part of the group you are interested in
(for example, someone who identifies as a middle-aged man, a member of the LGBTQ community, family
members with lived experience of suicide, veterans, etc. You will first do research on a few prevention or
intervention programs that are currently used with the specific stakeholder group. When you meet with these
individuals (at least 3) you will describe briefly what each of the interventions or programs include and ask each
stakeholder their thoughts on what could be improved upon or changed with each program. You will then write a
paper and present to the class: 1) what are current interventions/programs for this specific group, and 2) a
synthesized list of stakeholders in one group or you can meet with them individually.
You will be working in groups of 2-3 students. Your paper will be 8-10 pages, APA format with the bulk of your
paper focused on what the stakeholders have said about the intervention(s) or program(s) and how you are going
to improve or change them. The final presentation will be 10-minutes in length and must include all group
members.
In addition to the group paper and presentation graduate students must choose from one of two options:
Option 1: Creating a one-page fact sheet/pamphlet or editorial to send to area agencies, policy advisors etc. that
represent their stakeholder base. Another option is the information provided will share what you found as a group,
what the agency is doing and recommendations for what else they could be doing. You will attach a cover sheet
to your one pager/pamphlet/editorial offering to present your findings at the agency.
I strongly encourage students to meet with me about their papers from conceptualization/brainstorming to rough
drafts. I have consistently found that students’ work is far superior with consultation.
Participation 10%
Do I have to attend class?
In a word, “yes”. Do you HAVE to, “no”. But students who attend class regularly perform better and attain
better grades than students who do not attend regularly.
I have a hard time getting to class on time, is that a problem?
Arriving to appointments on time not only shows your level of maturity, respect for your colleagues, and your
commitment to learning to become the best social worker you can be in your career. It also is a skill you must
achieve in the workforce to show respect for your colleagues and clients, but you will also represent your agency.
Finally, time management is also key to model for your clients. If you want them to be on time for their
appointment, you need to be on time as well.
Do you have an attendance sheet?
Yes. It will be distributed before class. Once class starts, I will take the attendance sheet. If you unfortunately
arrive late, you may sign the attendance sheet, but you will be marked late. Students with perfect attendance
(meaning they are here in class, stay the entire class time and arrive before class starts) will get 3 points added to
their final grade (i.e. they will likely raise their grade one letter grade).
                                                             3


    VII. GRADING SCALE:
94.0 and Above                A
90.0 to 93.999                A-
87.0 to 89.999                B+
84.0 to 86.999                B
80.0 to 83.999                B-
77.0 to 79.999                C+
74.0 to 76.999                C
70.0 to 73.999                C-
67.0 to 69.999                D+
64.0 to 66.999                D
60.0 to 63.999                D-
Below 60.0                    F
    VIII. CLASS POLICIES
Evaluation of students' performance is based on:
Assignments.
    • Most questions can be answered by reading the syllabus. If your question is not answered, your professor
        will further explain her expectations for assignments and specific grading criteria based on questions
        offered by students in class/via email and office hours. Each assignment is due on the date noted in the
        syllabus; any exception must be discussed in advance with your professor.
Class Participation.
    • You are responsible for completing all readings before class and being prepared to apply them in class
        discussions. Class discussion may include in-class discussions, debates, role-plays, and exercises. Class
        participation should reflect the social worker’s professional responsibility for respectful interactions and
        attentiveness with fellow students and faculty. Please review the student policy manual for SHSSW
        standards for professional development and the honor code.
Attendance, Attentiveness, and Punctuality.
    • Students are expected to let the professor know before class when they will be absent. This allows for the
        professor to change activities as needed.
    • Use of computers, phones, and other electronic devices are not allowed during class.
    • Please inform your instructor if you may be late and when late, enter the class quietly and with minimal
        disruption. Repeated lateness will influence evaluation of student performance.
Grading Policies
    • Evaluation of student performance in the class is based on:
                 Discussant (35%)
                 Final Paper and Project (55%)
                 Class Participation (10%)
    • Grading Scale: (there is no curving)
    • Grade Grievance Policy and Procedure.
The instructor reserves the right to alter the course requirements and/or assignments based on new
materials, class discussions or other legitimate pedagogical objectives.
                                                          4


    IX.      UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness,
and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations
must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users
who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of
the semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind
the professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects
students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared
to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings
together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped
by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national
origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of
positive engagement and mutual respect. This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize
and dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with
complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas
and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the
professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to
course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the
professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course
assignments and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support
is desired. If counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including
the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain
that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to
participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is
said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived,
posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms of
electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived
by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to
minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training.
Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
                                                       5


and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are obliged
to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should not be
referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the
identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must
critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional
relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as
well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the
university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity
of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the
student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to
exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action
being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific,
express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act
of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among
other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to
other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision
and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As
such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted.
Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for
review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work
Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as
an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email
for university and course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping
the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly
and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating their e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must
                                                       6


miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, the
professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the
University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from
discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field instructors, staff,
and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or any other forms
of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources.
Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including
student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu
on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that involve
working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present some risks.
Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to
be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students
should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their behavioral
health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made.
Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that the
         nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of
         class.
    · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the
         UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                      7


    IX.   COURSE SCHEDULE
Date     Discussion Topics Required Readings                                                           Assignments
6/8 M    Welcome           Losing my dad                                                               Please come with any questions you have
                           Joiner, p. 1-15                                                             regarding the syllabus. We will not go over it as
                           (It can also be found in the “files” section of the Canvas page in case you I expect you to read it ahead of time. This is a
                           haven’t purchased the book yet)                                             flipped classroom, meaning that I will ask
                                                                                                       questions of whatever is due for readings that
                           Tad Friend. Jumpers: the fatal grandeur of the Golden Gate Bridge. The      day, and then we will go straight into critical
                           New Yorker. October, 3 2004. Available online.                              analysis or application.
                           http://www.newyorker.com/archive/2003/10/13/031013fa_fact
                           (It can also be found in the “files” section of the Canvas page)
6/10 W   Suicide           What we know and don’t know about suicide
         Introduction      Joiner, p 16-45
         &
         Theory            "It's OK to not be OK": Suicide attempt survivors offer insight and advice
                           (9 minutes)
                           https://www.cbsnews.com/news/suicide-attempt-survivors-share-
                           insight-and-advice-on-how-to-help/
6/15 M   Acquired          The capability to enact lethal self-injury is acquired                      Discussant group 1
         capability        Joiner, p. 46-93
6/17 W   Connectedness     The desire for death                                                        Discussant group 2
                           Joiner, p. 94-136
6/22 M  Suicide Prevention * Guest Presenter: Laura Dupuis, LCSW
        in Schools         UT Counseling and Mental Health Center
                           CMHC Assistant Director for CARE
                           Please come with your clinical questions to Ms. Dupuis
                           Please watch this 30-minute video that might help your questions. It’s
                           truly excellent.
                            “A Voice at the Table”
                           http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XG7eH1GLK8E
6/24 W  Means &            What do we mean by suicide? How is it distributed in people?                Discussant group 3
        Demographics       Joiner p. 137-171
6/29 M  Biology & Suicide  What roles do genetics, neurobiology, and mental disorders play in          Discussant group 4
                           suicidal behavior?
                           Joiner, p. 172 – 202
7/1 W   NO CLASS           Interview day for your stakeholder groups
7/6 M   Mezzo and Macro    * Guest Presenter: Jenna Heise, MA, BC-DMT
        Suicide Prevention Board Certified Counselor
                           Texas State Suicide Prevention Coordinator
                           Office of Mental Health Coordination
                           Health and Human Services Commission
                           No required readings, but please look at Ms. Heise’s work. She is
                           prepared to answer questions about her work and advocacy.
                           Here are some places to get started:
                           https://www.sprc.org/states/texas
7/8 W   Assessment &       Risk assessment, crisis intervention, treatment, and prevention             Discussant group 5
        Prevention         Joiner, p. 203-222
                           Zero Suicide: (take a look at this and have some opinions on the pros and
                           cons of Zero Suicide)
                           http://zerosuicide.actionallianceforsuicideprevention.org/
7/13 M  What is missing in The future of suicide prevention                                            Discussant group 6
        suicide prevention Joiner, p. 223-230
                           Epilogue 231-232
                                                                              8


 7/15 W      Lived Experience    The Kevin Hines story (13 minutes)                                         Discussant group 7
                                 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=loiGNZTfu6g
                                 Pick 2 “stories of hope” to watch/read: (there are 7 pages of stories to
                                 choose from, so choose the ones that speak to you!)_
                                 https://suicidepreventionlifeline.org/stories/
                                 Discussants, be prepared to watch them all to address all stories.
 7/20 M      Policy Implications * Guest Presenter: Will Francis, LMSW
             and National        Government Relations Director
             Directives          National Association of Social Workers/Texas Chapter
                                 Please read the following articles as they will help bring up some
                                 questions to Mr. Francis.
                                 Anestis, M. D., Houtsma, C., Daruwala, S. E., & Butterworth, S. E. (2019).
                                 Firearm legislation and statewide suicide rates: The moderating role of
                                 household firearm ownership levels. Behavioral Sciences & the
                                 Law, (available online UT library)
                                  Lezine, D. A. (2018). U.S. political parties and support for suicide
                                 prevention. Suicide and Life‐Threatening Behavior, 48(2), 199-203.
                                 (available online UT library)
                                 Corey Booker calls for a Suicide Czar
                                 https://www.newsweek.com/cory-booker-suicide-czar-guns-2020-
                                 1425733
 7/22        Class topic to be   Students and Dr. De Luca will come up with readings/videos to watch on     All students will be responsible for the discussion
             determined by       the agreed-upon topic.                                                     along with Dr. De Luca
             students
 7/27        Final Presentations                                                                            Stakeholder Paper and Presentations Due
Suicide Prevention Services Available:
Suicide can be a sensitive topic for many people, even those with professional training and experience. If you find
the class is causing personal difficulty or stress, or brings up issues you’d like to discuss, the University of Texas
has campus resources available: UT Counseling and Mental Health Center is a resource to all students. They are
located at SSB – 0980 in the Student Services Building and are open from 8:00am to 5:00pm, Monday through
Friday. The phone number is: 512-471-3515. The crisis line for students is 512-471-2255. Additionally, there is
anonymous help available 24/7 at the Suicide Prevention Lifeline, which can be reached by phone at: 1-800-273-
TALK (8255). You can visit their website at: http://www.suicidepreventionlifeline.org/. If you are concerned
about a classmate contact the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) UT at 512-232-5050.
                                                                                 9


                           Additional Reading and Resources
                            These are not endorsed by the professor
                                            MEMOIRS
• An Unquiet Mind by Kay Redfield Jamison
• Night Falls Fast, Understanding Suicide by Kay Redfield Jamison
• How It Feels: Attempting Suicide and Finding Life by Craig Miller
• Out of the Whirlpool by Sue Wiygul Martin
• How I Stayed Alive When My Brain Was Trying To Kill Me by Susan Rose Blauner
           see http://www.mentalhelp.net/poc/view_doc.php?id=1787&type=book&cn=5
• Cracked, Not Broken: Surviving and Thriving after a Suicide Attempt by Kevin Hines
• Eight Stories Up: An Adolescent Chooses Hope over Suicide by DeQuincy Lezine
• Waking Up: Climbing Through the Darkness by Terry L. Wise
  Waking Up, Alive: The Descent, the Suicide Attempt, and the Return to Life by Richard A. Heckler
• Children of Jonah: Personal Stories by Survivors of Suicide Attempts by James Clemons
• Conquering the Beast Within; How I Fought Depression and Won… by Cait Irwin
• The Noonday Demon by Andrew Solomon
• Struck By Living by Julie Hersh
• Seeking Hope: Stories of the Suicide Bereaved by Michelle Linn-Gust & Julie Cerel
                                       SELF-HELP BOOKS
• Suicide: The Forever Decision by Paul Quinnett
• Choosing to Live by Thomas Ellis and Cory Newman
• The Center Cannot Hold by Elyn Saks.
• Haldol and Hyacinths by Melody Moezzi
• Hello, Cruel World: 101 Alternatives to Suicide for Teens, Freaks, and Other Outlaws by Kate Bornstein
  (for a youth)
• The Dialectical Behavior Therapy Skills Workbook for Bipolar Disorder by Sheri Van Dijk
• Secrets of Suicide by Ken Tullis
• Seduction of Suicide by Kevin Taylor
• Step Back from the Exit: 45 Reasons to Say No to Suicide by Jillayne Arena
• Undoing Depression; What Therapy Doesn’t Teach You and Medication Can’t Give You by Richard
  O’Connor
• Suicide Why: 85 Questions and Answers about Suicide by Adina Wrobleski
• Waking the Tiger: Healing Trauma by Peter A. Levine and Anne Frederick
• Healing Trauma: A Pioneering Program for Restoring The Wisdom of Your Body by Peter A. Levine
• Overcoming Trauma Through Yoga: Reclaiming Your Body by David Emerson and Elizabeth Hopper
• The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind and Body in the Healing of Trauma by Bessel van der Kolk
• Peace, Love and Healing: Bodymind Communication & the Path to Self-Healing: An Exploration by
  Bernie S. Siegel
• Minding the Body, Mending the Mind by Joan Borysenko
                                   RESOURCES FOR HELPERS
• The Oxford Textbook of Suicidology and Suicide Prevention by D. Wasserman et al. (2008)
• International Handbook of Suicide Prevention: Research, Policy & Practice by R. O’Connor et
  al. (2010)
• Managing Suicidal Risk: A Collaborative Approach by D. Jobes (2006)
• Grief After Suicide: Understanding the Consequences and Caring for Survivors, J. R. Jordan & J. L.
  McIntosh, Eds. (2010)
• Building a Therapeutic Alliance with the Suicidal Patient, K. Michel & D. Jobes, Eds. (2010)
• Why People Kill Themselves by David Lester (2000)
                                                 10


    •   Teen Suicide Risk by C. A. King, C. Ewell Foster, & K. M. Rogalski (2013)
    •   But I Didn’t Say Goodbye: Helping Children and Families After a Suicide by B. Ruble (2009)
    •   After A Suicide: An Activity Book for Grieving Kids by The Dougy Center (2001)
    •   Online trainings from the Suicide Prevention Resource Center: http://training.sprc.org/
    •   Resources for coping with a client’s suicide: http://cliniciansurvivor.org/ and
        http://www.suicidology.org/suicide-survivors/clinician-survivors
                                          RESOURCES FOR SCHOOLS
    •   Preventing Suicide: A Toolkit for High Schools – available at:
        http://store.samhsa.gov/product/Preventing-Suicide-A-Toolkit-for-High-Schools/SMA12-4669
    •   After a Suicide: A Toolkit for Schools – available at:
        http://www.sprc.org/sites/sprc.org/files/library/AfteraSuicideToolkitforSchools.pdf
    •   Suicide Prevention Resource Center page for Colleges & Universities:
        http://www.sprc.org/collegesanduniversities
                                        OTHER BOOKS & RESOURCES
Books
    •   Stay: A History of Suicide and the Philosophies Against It by Jennifer Michael Hecht
    •   The Suicide Index by Joan Wickersham.
    •   The Suicidal Mind by Edwin M. Shneidman
    •   Autopsy of a Suicidal Mind by Edwin M. Schneidman
    •   The Turning Hour by Shelley Fraser Mickle
    •   All My Puny Sorrows by Miriam Towes
    •   Many recommendations available at:
        http://www.suicidology.org/resources/recommended-reading
Videos
A Voice at the Table Video http://attemptsurvivors.com/2014/05/19/watch-this-video-people/
Websites
    • www.AttemptSurvivors.com
    • www.ThisIsHowItFeels.com
    • www.TalkingAboutSuicide.com
    • www.LiveThroughThis.org
    • http://lifelineforattemptsurvivors.org/
    • http://diorvargas.com/poc-mental-illness
    • http://ihurtmyselftoday.com/
    • www.conversationsmatter.com.au/
    • bit.ly/afterasuicide.
Articles Available Online:
    • Coping with Suicidal Thoughts: A Resource for Patients –
        http://www.sfu.ca/carmha/publications/coping-with-suicidal-thoughts.html
    • “How I Live – and try to die – with Schizophrenia” by Reshma Valliappan –
        http://scroll.in/article/703383/how-i-live-%E2%80%92-and-try-to-die-%E2%80%92-with-schizophrenia
Support Lines & Chat Services
    • Affirmations: Peer Counseling helpline with resources for the LGBT community.
        Monday-Saturday, 3:00 pm – 8:00 pm (EST), 1-800-398-GAYS
    • Common Grounds: 24-hour Crisis and resource hotline
        Call 1-800-231-1127 or text 248-809-5550, or live chat at www.commongroundhelps.org
                                                         11


    •    The Trevor Project: National LGBT issues line for youth age 13-24
         Call 1-866-488-7386 or live chat daily 3:00 pm – 9:00 pm EST at www.thetrevorproject.org
    •    National Suicide Prevention Hotline: 1-800-784-2433
    •    National Suicide Prevention Lifeline: 1-800-273-TALK (8255)
    •    Veterans Crisis Line: 1-800-273-8255, then press the number 1
    •    Also, check out these apps: My3, Safety Plan, Virtual Hope Box, Suicide Safe
Reports/Articles
The Way Forward Report:
http://actionallianceforsuicideprevention.org/sites/actionallianceforsuicideprevention.org/files/The-Way-Forward-
Final-2014-07-01.pdf
                                                         12
