HED/KIN 627
SUMMER 2020
                                          COURSE INFORMATION
  Instructor Contact                      Enrollment in this class means you have been approved to earn
                                          KIN/HED Fieldwork credit by working at an agency external to this
  Information                             Department, working in a research lab within the Department, or
                                          participating in another organized activity on campus under the
  Dixie Stanforth, Ph.D.                  supervision of a faculty member. Below you will find the assignments
                                          and deadlines for successful completion of this course; all of this
  GRE 4.144                               material is provided for you electronically on the Canvas site.
  (512) 232-3950                          You must register for this class for a letter grade; pass/fail is
                                          not an option.
  d.stanforth@austin.utexas.edu
                                          Note: The internship is a chance for students to gain new skills and
  Please email directly and not           competencies. As such, it is NOT to provide academic credit for
  via Canvas messaging                    continuing an existing job. If you already work for the organization,
                                          you are not eligible to obtain fieldwork credit at this work site.
  Office Hours: Zoom Appt.
CANVAS contains all course materials,
organized by MODULES.
Easily find:
¨Weekly reflections/logs
¨Plan Your Work form
¨Work Your Plan forms
¨Great Reads! List
¨Semester project info                    SET UP YOUR DISCUSSION THREAD
¨Grading rubrics
Home page contains all due dates          • Please go to Discussions on the left navigation bar of Canvas and create a
                                          Discussion forum for yourself. Use your name as the "title" of the Discussion
                                          thread. You will post/attach your weekly reports, project materials, etc. here
                                          all semester long.
                                          DON’T HAVE A SCANNER?
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY FLAG
Independent Inquiry courses are           • If you don't have a scanner, consider an app like Scannable. Please be sure
designed to engage you in the process     to name/identify all emailed documents appropriately for professional
of inquiry over the course of a semester, communication as noted in all Modules.
providing you with the opportunity for
independent investigation of a            COURSE REQUIREMENTS
question, problem, or project related to
your major. You should expect a           This is an independent study class. As the faculty member assigned to this
substantial portion of your grade to      class, I am here to facilitate you receiving credit for your fieldwork
come from the independent                 experience. You must read the directions below and follow them carefully to
investigation and presentation of your    maximize working towards the best possible grade; additional details are
own work.                                 provided in each Canvas Module.
                                                                                                                         1


                                        HOURS
                                        You must work a minimum of 270 hours of work during the semester
                                        at the fieldwork site (approx. 20 hours per week during long
                                        semesters; may be more than 20 hours/week during the summer
                                        weeks to accrue the minimum 270 hours.
                                        WEEKLY REFLECTION/HOURLY LOG
                                        ¨Submit a weekly report of your activities and respond to a reflection
                                        prompt related to your fieldwork experience.
                                        ¨ Your reflections need to be well written (grammar, spelling, etc.)
                                        and of sufficient length to communicate a thorough response to the
                                        prompt, including an action response based on the reflection.
GRADING                                 ¨Weeks 6 & 11 report on a book read for professional development.
                                        Check out Canvas for a list of great reads and other suggestions.
60% Mid-term and final supervisor       ¨There is a 1 point deduction per day for each late submission/
evaluations (10% reflects evaluation of posting and additional points will be deducted for work quality as
project development and completion)     necessary. You will have one chance to revise/resubmit an inadequate
                                        response.
15% Weekly reflection/report            ¨Email your weekly reports directly to Dixie and post them into your
                                        folder on the Discussion Board.
25% Semester project development and    ¨Sample excellent reflections are posted on Canvas.
presentation                            ¨Due each week on Mondays by 5 p.m.
                                        It is not by muscle, speed, or physical dexterity that great
                                        things are achieved, but by reflection, force of character,
                                        and judgment. Cicero
                                        SEMESTER PROJECT
                                        ¨Because fieldwork opportunities vary dramatically in the nature of
                                        the work performed, there is no set “standard” for the outside project.
                                        In the past we've had students do such diverse things as: a) run a
                                        competitive tournament; b) create a website; c) create a business plan;
                                        d) redo the marketing materials for a particular ad campaign; e)
Grading Scale
                                        create an internship manual for the business; f) organize a trip for
                                        residents; g) provide specialized care for one or more individuals in a
          93-101      A                 clinical setting; h) develop social media tools for their site, etc..
          90-92       A-
                                        Steps (all due dates/forms on Canvas)
          87-89       B+                1. Project development: Students must come up with several ideas
          83-86       B                 for this outside project in consultation with both the site supervisor
                                        and faculty advisor. The project is NOT the same as work performed
          80-82       B-                for internship hours; you must develop an idea, pitch it to your
          77-79       C+
                                        supervisor, refine it with his/her feedback along with input from Dixie
                                        and then “do” the project. There must be identifiable "work product"
          73-76       C                 associated with your project: simply leading workouts, for example, is
                                        something you may do in the normal course of your internship.
          70-72       C-                Designing a new exercise program, which you develop, strategically
          67-69       D+                market/advertise, and then lead, followed by assessing effectiveness
                                        would be a project associated with exercise leadership.
          63-66       D
                                                                                                                2
          60-62       D-
          <60         F


LIABILITY INSURANCE
¨Must be paid prior to starting your  2. Plan Your Work: This form lets you create a timeline and initial
internship; fee covers the academic   draft of your project plan.
year, i.e., one payment covers fall,
spring and summer.                    3. Work Your Plan 1-3: These forms let you track and report
                                      progress as your project evolves and moves towards completion.
¨$14.00 check or M.O. made out to UT  4. Final presentation: Create an electronic presentation of your
Austin with your EID in the subject   fieldwork experience that includes a description of your internship
line. You may pay cash in BEL 718.    and highlights your semester project.
¨Note the semester paid OR receipt
number on your advising form.        ¨The presentation should be between 10-12 slides. Slide 1 is to be a
                                     Title slide with the name of your project, semester of completion, and
                                     your name.
                                     ¨Dress for a professional presentation and plan to arrive 15 minutes
                                     before start time.
                                     ¨Previous semester project/presentations are located on the KHE
                                     Internship Group found on your Canvas Home page.
                                     ¨Since this course is associated with an Independent Inquiry flag, this
                                     material is reflected in 35% of your grade, including supervisor
                                     evaluations and final presentation.
                                     SUPERVISOR EVALUATIONS
                                     ¨Mid-term and final supervisor evaluations are submitted through
                                     Docusign.
                                     ¨Follow the instructions provided on Canvas and reviewed in the
                                     initial internship meeting.
                                     GRADING
                                     ¨The University sets the deadline for reporting all fieldwork grades.
                                     ¨Incompletes will not be approved for KIN/HED 627L.
                                            Learning without reflection is a waste.
                                          Reflection without learning is dangerous.
                                                               Confucius
                                                                                                           3


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSIBILITIES
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded or
diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful
of others.
• Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone
is excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the
student’s legal name. We will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate
name or gender pronoun. Please advise us of this preference early in the semester so that
we may make appropriate changes to our records.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As
a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found
at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q- drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law,
you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For
more information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the
                                                                                                                         4


Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of Students
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/)
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code written
above. Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student’s
own work. Instructors will indicate on a daily basis the appropriate protocol for in-class work. For
example, we may allow you to use notes or work with another student to complete an in-class
assignment. Talking or discussion is not permitted during examinations, nor may you compare
exams, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during
examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course or further
University disciplinary action.
Other examples of scholastic dishonesty in this class include turning in work for another student,
falsifying reasons for absence, copying material from another student, failure to cite the work of others appropriately, etc.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify us of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination or assignment in
order to observe a religious holy day, we will give you the opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence, when approved and scheduled in advance.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your email
address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—we recommend daily, but
at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Your success in this class is important to us. If there are aspects of this course that prevent
you from learning or exclude you, please let us know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are
also a range of resources on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in
case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an
effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your
needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these
discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259
(voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of
struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an
important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support
sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic
stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you
                                                                                                                              5


to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
CARECounseling
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center. It is common to
need support when dealing with feelings and problems that seem beyond your control. CARE
Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as a barrier to
your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of Education is Danie White,
LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I. Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an
appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a
voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also
available on Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM. You will check-in at the College of
Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let Danie know you’re waiting. All
services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without your written consent.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist
appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different
subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512- 471-
3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
• If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors,
call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
• The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
• Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires
exiting and assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                   6
