‫‪University of Texas at Austin‬‬                                              ‫‪Dept. of Middle East Studies‬‬
                             ‫ﺻﻒ اﻟﺪارﺟﺔ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﯿﺔ اﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮى اﻹﺑﺘﺪاﺋﻲ‬
                                    ‫)‪ARA 130D (40910‬‬
‫‪Instructor:​ Sarah Schwartz‬‬
‫‪Email:​ ​srschwartz@utexas.edu‬‬
 ‫ﻣﺮﺣﺒﺎ ﺑﻜﻢ ﻟﻠﻘﺴﻢ دﯾﺎل اﻟﺪارﺟﺔ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﯿﺔ!! ﻏﺎدي ﻧﻘﺮاو وﻧﺴﺘﻤﺘﻌﻮ ﻣﺰﯾﺎن ان ﺷﺎء اﷲ!‬
                                                                                            ‫● اﻟﻤﻮاد‪:‬‬
     ‫○ ﻛﻞ اﻟﻔﯿﺪﯾﻮﻫﺎت واﻟﻤﻮاد اﻻﺧﺮﯾﻦ ﻏﺎﯾﻜﻮﻧﻮ ﻓﻲ ﺻﻔﺤﺔ ‪ Modules‬ﻓﻲ ﻛﺎﻧﻔﺎس‪ ،‬وزﯾﺪ ﻋﻠﻰ‬
                     ‫داﻛﺸﻲ ﻏﺎﻧﺤﻂ ﺷﻲ ﻣﻮاد ﻣﻤﺘﻌﺔ وﻣﻔﯿﺪة ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﺼﻔﺤﺔ اﻷوﻟﻰ ﻓﻲ ﻛﺎﻧﻔﺎس‬
                                                                                          ‫● اﻷﻫﺪاف‪:‬‬
                                    ‫○ اﻟﺘﻘﺪم ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘﺪرة ﻋﻠﻰ ﻓﻬﻢ اﻟﻤﺴﻤﻮع ﻓﻲ اﻟﺪارﺟﺔ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬
                                          ‫○ اﻟﺘﻘﺪم ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘﺪرة ﻋﻠﻰ اﻟﻬﺪرة ﻓﻲ اﻟﺪارﺟﺔ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬
             ‫○ ﺗﻌﻤﻖ اﻟﻔﻬﻢ دﯾﺎل اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﯿﺔ واﻟﻤﺠﺘﻤﻊ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﻲ واﻟﻘﻀﺎﯾﺎ اﻟﻤﻬﻤﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻐﺮب‬
                      ‫○ اﻟﺒﺤﺚ اﻟﻔﺮدي ﻋﻠﻰ واﺣﺪ اﻟﺠﺎﻧﺐ دﯾﺎل اﻟﻤﺠﺘﻤﻊ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﯿﺔ ﻟﻠﻲ ﻛﺘﻬﺘﻢ ﺑﻪ‬
                                                                                         ‫● اﻟﻤﺘﻄﻠﺒﺎت‪:‬‬
                                               ‫○ اﻷﻋﺪاد ﻟﻠﺼﻒ واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ ﻓﻲ اﻟﺼﻒ‪%40 :‬‬
                                                                            ‫○ اﻟﻮاﺟﺐ‪%25 :‬‬
                                                         ‫○ اﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ ﻓﻲ ﺟﻮج ﻣﻨﺎﻇﺮات‪%10 :‬‬
                                                                    ‫○ اﻟﻤﺸﺮوع اﻟﻨﻬﺎﺋﻲ‪%15 :‬‬
      ‫ﻣﺴﻠﻢ ﻓﻲ ﻛﺎﻧﻔﺎس )ﻋﻠﻰ أي ﻣﻮﺿﻮع ﻟﻠﻲ‬   ‫ﺑﻤﺪة ‪ 20-15‬دﻗﯿﻘﺔ ّ‬    ‫○ ﺣﻮار أﺳﺒﻮﻋﻲ ﻣﻊ زﻣﻼﺋﻜﻢ ّ‬
                                                                             ‫ﺑﻐﯿﺘﻮ(‪%10 :‬‬
                                                         ‫● ​اﻟﻤﻮﺿﻮﻋﺎت اﻟﻜﺒﺎر ﻟﻠﻲ ﻏﺎﻧﻨﺎﻗﺸﻮ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻘﺴﻢ‪:‬‬
                                                                           ‫○ اﻟﻤﺠﺘﻤﻊ اﻟﻤﻐﺮﺑﻲ‬
                                                       ‫■ اﻟﻤﺪن‪ :‬ﺑﯿﻦ اﻟﻤﺎﺿﻲ واﻟﺤﺎﺿﺮ‬


                                                                ‫■ اﻟﻘﺼﺺ اﻟﺘﻘﻠﯿﺪﯾﺔ‬
                                                                     ‫■ ﻗﻀﯿﺔ اﻟﻤﺮأة‬
                                                                ‫■ اﻟﺪﯾﻦ ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻐﺮب‬
                                                                      ‫○ اﻷﻗﻠﯿﺎت ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻐﺮب‬
                                                                          ‫■ اﻷﻣﺎزﯾﻎ‬
                                                                   ‫■ اﻷﻓﺎرﻗﺔ اﻟﺴﻮد‬
                                                                            ‫■ اﻟﯿﻬﻮد‬
                                                                 ‫○ اﻟﺘﺎرﯾﺦ واﻟﺤﯿﺎة اﻟﺴﯿﺎﺳﯿﺔ‬
                                                            ‫■ اﻟﺘﺎرﯾﺦ دﯾﺎل اﻟﻤﻐﺮب‬
                                            ("‫ "اﻟﻐﺮﻓﺔ اﻟﻜﺤﻠﺔ‬:‫ )ﻓﯿﻠﻢ‬II ‫■ ﻓﺘﺮة ﺣﺴﻦ‬
                                                          ‫ ودور اﻟﻤﻠﻚ‬VI ‫■ ﻣﺤﻤﺪ‬
                                                              ‫اﻟﺘﻤﺮد ﻓﻲ اﻟﻤﻐﺮب‬
                                                                             ّ     ■
                                                                                   ‫○ اﻟﻔﻨﻮن‬
                                                              ‫■ اﻟﺼﻨﺎﻋﺎت اﻟﺘﻘﻠﯿﺪﯾﺔ‬
                                                                      ّ
                                                                   ‫اﻟﻤﺆدﯾﺔ‬  ‫■ اﻟﻔﻨﻮن‬
                                                                  ‫■ اﻟﻔﻨﻮن اﻟﺒﺼﺮﯾﺔ‬
                Important UT and Departmental Policies and Regulations
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your
own, or that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. For the full UT
Honor Code, please refer to the site for Student Judicial Services found here:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/spot_honorcode.php
Disabilities​ Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter
that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office
of the Dean of Students (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days
before an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will
be needed. See website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php


Use of Canvas​ This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a
password protected site is created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas
course site regularly for class work and announcements. Canvas is available at
http://canvas.utexas.edu/​ Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through
Friday 8 am to 6 pm.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students​ All students should become familiar
with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to
keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to
check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete
text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html​.
Important dates
Friday, January 20th​ is the last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in
registration require the approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
Wednesday, February 1st​ is the last day a student enrolled in graduate school or professional
school may drop a class without a possible academic penalty.
Monday, April 3rd​ is 1) the last day a graduate student may change registration in a class to or
from a credit/no credit basis, 2) the last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s
approval, withdraw from the University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated,
non-academic reasons, 3) the last day an undergraduate student may change registration in a
class to or from a pass/fail basis.
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy​ The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the
number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the
fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate
student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
dropping more than that number.”
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) ​If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the


Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal​.
Emergency Evacuation​ The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation
from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/​ :
    ● Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated.
    ● Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
    ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
    ● In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    ● Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
        Services office.
    ● Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at: ​www.utexas.edu/emergency
Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault​ It is the policy of the University of Texas at
Austin to foster a campus environment that is free from intimidation and one in which students
may be educated to their fullest potential. Therefore, the University will not tolerate any forms of
harassment, physical abuse, threats of violence, physical assault, or any form of sexual assault,
including but not limited to acquaintance or date rape. Title IX makes it clear that violence and
harassment based on sex and gender is a Civil Rights offense subject to the same kinds of
accountability and the same kinds of support applied to offenses against other protected
categories such as race, national origin, LGBTQ identity, etc. If you or someone you know has
been harassed or assaulted in any way, you can find the appropriate resources here:
Voices Against Violence Program (512) 471-3515 for information, counseling and advocacy.
UT Austin Police: ​http://www.utexas.edu/police/
Dean Of Students: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/
http://www.utexas.edu/ogs/student_services/ethics/harassment.html
Student Counseling & Health Services ​http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Campus Carry


1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do
not attempt to question or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to
handle this situation.
2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited,
including some portions of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible for
knowing the locations that exclude concealed handguns and to plan their daily activities
carefully.
3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on
campus. "About" the person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in a
backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license holder
can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger
area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
4. All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times when the
consequence of your activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are
going to a Rec Sports area, have a class that requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact
with other students, you might expose the handgun. Remember that there is no storage on
campus except in a privately owned vehicle.
