LA 320WB: LIBERAL ARTS INTERNSHIP COURSE
SUMMER 2020 SYLLABUS
Instructors
   Instructor:                 Alyssa Wyvratt • Liberal Arts Career Services, FAC 18 • a.wyvratt@austin.utexas.edu
   Office Hours:               Please email or call to schedule an in-person or telephone appointment time.
Course Information
   The purpose of this undergraduate course is to establish the academic foundations of the Liberal Arts students’
   internship. Students will integrate knowledge derived from their academic studies with the experiences gained from
   real-world work settings. This class will support these work experiences by fostering personal reflection as well as
   professional growth and development.
Course Application Process
   Application Deadline: Thursday, June 4, 2020 at 12:00 PM.
   See the full details and access the application at: http://goo.gl/JC5EEd
Internship Completion Requirement
   In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the internship before
   the end date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week, you will
   automatically fail the internship course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you will not
   automatically fail this course; we will work with you in such cases.
Assignment Schedule
   Date    Assignment                        Details
    6/4    Introductions                     Not a graded assignment. Please respond to the discussion post to introduce yourself
                                             to your peers.
    6/9    Journal 1 & Big                   Journal: Part I: Picture yourself on the last day of your internship. What do you hope
           Interview Part 1                  to have learned from this experience? What new skills will you have gained? How
                                             will you have changed? Part II: Epiphany/Observation of the Week
                                             Big Interview: Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
   6/16    Research Paper                    Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
   6/23    Journal 2                         Part I: How do you introduce yourself at work? Write a description of who you are,
                                             where you’re from, what’s your background, what makes you unique, what you’re
                                             interested in and what your professional goals are. Use this description to create a
                                             15-second succinct elevator pitch (and include this pitch at the end of your journal).
                                             Learn about elevator pitches at: http://goo.gl/kxkeMZ Part II: Epiphany or
                                             Observation of the Week
   6/30    Midterm Evaluations               Evaluation links available in Canvas Assignments section.
    7/7    Resume                            Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
   7/14    Informational Interview           View details and download interview form in Canvas Assignments section.
   7/21    Academic Connection               Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
           Paper
        LA 320wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer 2020                                                          Page 1 of 4


                                                                                                          Assignment Schedule, Continued
    Date     Assignment                        Details
    7/28     Journal 3                         Part I: A first-year student asks you why it’s important to do internships. Describe the
                                               value of complementing your academics with professional experience using examples
                                               of what you are learning, whom you are connecting with and how you are growing in
                                               your current internship. Part II: Epiphany/Observation of the Week
     8/4     Final Paper                       Final Paper details in Canvas Assignments section.
    8/11     Student & Supervisor              Final Evaluations: Evaluation links and Final Paper details in Canvas Assignments
             Final Evaluations Due;            section.
             Big Interview Part 2
                                               Big Interview: Details in Canvas Assignments section.
Assignment Deadlines
    Assignments are due by 11:59 pm CST on the due date. All deliverables will be considered late if not properly
    submitted by 11:59 pm on the due date. Note: The deadline is 11:59 pm Texas time (Central Standard Time); if you are
    in a different time zone please make sure you submit your assignment by the deadline according to Texas time (CST).
    Late submissions may be accepted with point deductions if submitted within the late submission period. Assignments
    submitted after the deadline but before Wednesday at 5:00 pm will be accepted at 75% point value. Assignments
    received after Wednesday at 5pm but before Friday at 8:30 am will be accepted at 50% point value. Submissions
    received after 8:30 am on the week of the due date will not be accepted. For example: assignments submitted on
    Tuesday by 11:59 pm 100%; Wednesday by 5pm 75%; Friday by 8:30am 50%; and after Friday at 8:30am assignments
    are not accepted (0%).
Assignment Formatting Requirements
Please do not include the prompt or headers (i.e. your name, Professor, date, etc.) on the documents that are to be
uploaded to Canvas. All written documents are to be double-spaced, 12-point font, typed in Arial or Calibri font, and
submitted on a word document unless otherwise specified. If an assignment asks for works-cited, a separate page in
addition to the document, should be created to house a list of citations. All citations should be in MLA format.
If formatting requirements are not adhered to, points will be deducted at the discretion of the instructor.
Assignment Descriptions (All assignments are available in Canvas)
    Journals: Please include both parts in one document so that you are only uploading one document to Canvas.
           PART I: Write on the journal topics provided in the schedule above. Journals should be reflective, comprehensive,
           well thought out and well composed. Each journal’s Part I should be at least 1-page and no more than 1.5-pages
           in length (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced, Arial or Calibri font).
           PART II: Write a brief description of your epiphany or observation of the week and its current relevance. Your
           epiphany can be directly or indirectly related to your internship, personal/professional goals, career objective or
           daily schedule. There is no minimum length for Part II.
    Big Interview Part 1:
           Visit Big Interview https://utexas.biginterview.com/ , login using your EID and Password. Click on the
           “Assignments Tab” in the upper toolbar and use the access code a1adf1 to take a short mock interview. This is a
           baseline interview. You will complete another at the end of the semester to compare.
          LA 320wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer 2020                                                           Page 2 of 4


Big Interview Part 2:
       The purpose of this assignment is to reflect on everything you learned at your internship and in this course to
       craft strong answers to a virtual interview.
       PART I: Find a job posting that you are interested in applying for now or in the future. You are going to then
       complete a virtual mock interview based on that job description. Visit Big Interview
       https://utexas.biginterview.com/ , login using your EID and Password. Click on the “Assignments Tab” in the
       upper toolbar and use the access code 3042dc to find the assignment.
       PART II: Upload a document to the assignment in Canvas with the job description that you have chosen and a
       one-page essay (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced, Arial or Calibri font) reflecting on the mock interview.
Research Paper: Write a 2-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced, Arial or Calibri font) on a specific
issue of significance to your internship site. Explain the significance, what it means to your office, how it is being
managed and what you think about this issue. This paper will provide an opportunity to research a particular topic of
interest to you. Examples include the stock market drop in an investment bank, the ethics of reporting in media, a
marketing campaign in advertising and a policy issue in political offices. Please use and cite at least 1 resource for this
assignment.
Evaluations: You will submit a midterm and final self-/site evaluation of the internship. Your supervisor will complete a
midterm and final evaluation of your performance. Evaluations are the only assignments not uploaded to Canvas;
instead evaluations will be completed as web forms online. Evaluation form links for students are available in Canvas.
Evaluation links for supervisors will be sent to their email of which you provided in part I of your application.
Resume: Create a resume or update your resume with your current internship details. You should target your resume
to a job, company or industry of interest to you. For help creating your resume, visit: http://goo.gl/c0My80
Informational Interview: Conduct an informational interview with a professional working in a position or industry of
interest to you (this person may or may not work at your current internship site, either is acceptable). Transcribe your
interview on the form available in Canvas in the Q&A format. Please include at least 10 questions and answers. For
more information about info interviews, visit: http://goo.gl/R5ccaV
Academic Connection Paper: Write a 2-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced, Arial or Calibri font)
demonstrating the connection between your academic studies and your internship. You can focus on your major and
its connection to your internship, or you can focus on a connection between a particular class and your internship site.
Your paper should take the form of your liberal arts story, designed to help communicate:
          •       why you study what you study and why you are interning where you are interning;
          •       what the connection is between the two;
          •       how your studies have helped you succeed at the internship and
          •       how your internship will help you succeed in future classes.
Final Paper: The final paper has three parts; please include all parts in one document so that you are only uploading
one document to Canvas.
    PART I: Write a short description (no page requirement) of your internship and your internship site to be shared
    with other liberal arts students on our website. The goal of this assignment is to help other students learn about
    the company or organization as a potential internship site by describing your role and responsibilities. Use the
    template in files titled “Internship Course Final Paper”
    PART II: Write a one-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) reflecting on your experience: what
    have you learned about the work environment as well as yourself. Part II will not be shared publicly.
    PART III: Write a one-page (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) response to the following scenario. Part III
    will not be shared publicly.
        Scenario: In a future interview, a recruiter asks you why you would make an ideal hire. Using your internship as
        a foundation for the response, write a qualitative overview demonstrating your advantages over other
        candidates. Include in your overview the following:
      LA 320wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer 2020                                                    Page 3 of 4


               1. Your top two or three strengths – try not to use the strengths most commonly repeated in interviews
                  (communication, time management, organization, interpersonal).
               2. Concrete examples of how you developed these strengths during your internship. Consider using the PARL
                  method to develop your examples. Learn about the PARL method: http://goo.gl/tAS2cZ
Grading
    Journals ........................................................... 25%
    Big Interview Assignments ……………………………… 10%
    Resume ........................................................... 10%
    Informational Interview .................................... 10%
    Research Paper................................................. 10%
    Academic Connection Paper ............................. 10%
    Evaluations ....................................................... 5%
    Final Paper ....................................................... 20%
      Grading Scale: A = 90-100; B+ = 87 – 89.99; B = 83 – 86.99; B- = 80 – 82.99; C+ = 77 – 79.99; C = 73 – 76.99; C- = 70 –
      72.99; D+ = 67 – 69.99; D = 63 – 66.99; D- = 60 – 62.99; F = 59.99 and Below
      Grade Note: In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the
      internship before the end date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week,
      you will automatically fail the internship course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you
      will not automatically fail this course; we will work with you in such cases.
Course Information & Downloads
      Course information and downloads are available in Canvas: https://courses.utexas.edu/
University Policies
Students with Disabilities: Please notify us of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-
related need. Students may register with SSD and receive accommodations. It is important to note that accommodations
will not take effect until you have met with the instructor and have presented your accommodation letter to them. You
may find out more information on the Services for Students with Disabilities website.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty
harms the individual, all students and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, please visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website.
Religious holy days: A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can
be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements: Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the professor and TAs for this course
are required to report for further investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault,
dating violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also
require reporting incidents of sex-and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title IX
incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such incidents that you share with us. If you
need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or
512-475-6877)or the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255).We strongly urge you
make use of these services for any needed support and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
          LA 320wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer 2020                                                   Page 4 of 4
