    UNITED STATES AND AFRICA
HIS 317L (39035)/AFR 317C (30365)/WGS 301(301)
         T & TH 12:30-2:00 PM UTC 3.112
Instructor:           Toyin Falola
Office:               GAR 2.142
Office hours:         T & TH 2-3 PM
E-mail:               toyinfalola@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant:
Office:
Office Hours:
E-mail:


Course Description and Objectives
This class will examine the history of the political, economic and cultural relations between the United
States and Africa from the early origins of the slave trade to the present. It explores the role of the US
in historical global contexts. The class is intended to elucidate historical developments both in the US
and on the African continent, and should satisfy students with a strong interest in US history as well as
those interested in the place of the US in the African Diaspora. The semester is divided into four parts,
each covering a major theme. The course aims; (1) to develop a base of African and US history and
increase the level of awareness of the African Diaspora in the US; (2) to obtain a well-rounded
approach to the political, economic, and cultural connections between the United States and Africa; (3)
to reevaluate perceptions of Africa, to recognize the vibrant nature of African culture, and to apply new
knowledge to the different cultural agents active in US popular culture, such as music, dance,
literature, business and science; (4) to help students understand present-day politics in Africa at a
deeper level and to obtain a better understanding of racial conditions in the US; and (5) to learn how to
assess historical materials—their relevance to a given interpretative problem, their reliability and their
importance—and to determine the biases present within particular scholarship. These include historical
documents, literature, and films.
Course Policies
     1. In matters relating to grade, you must first meet with your TA before scheduling an
        appointment to meet with your Instructor. Also, your TA will not provide lecture notes under
        any circumstances.
     2. There are three mandatory books. They can be purchased at the University Co-op.
            a. Joseph E. Holloway, ed., Africanisms in American Culture (Bloomington: Indiana
                 University Press, 2005 second edition).
            b. Curtis A. Keim, Mistaking Africa: Curiosities and Inventions of the American Mind
                 (Westview Press, Fourth Edition, 2018).
            c. Toyin Falola, The African Diaspora: Slavery, Modernity, and Globalization (Rochester,
                 NY: University of Rochester Press, 2013)
     3. Essay prompts will be posted on blackboard under course documents.
     4. All assignments must be submitted in class on due dates. Email submissions will not be
        accepted. 5 points per day are deducted thereafter. Failure to read the assigned materials will
        incur negative grading and treated as an evidence of cheating. Answers to questions will be
        used to reveal the failure to read. ***A part of writing history includes clearly communicating
        your ideas. As such, written assignments must conform to standard rules of written English
        including the organization of essays and grammar***
     5. University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
        learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
        member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
        fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Any student found guilty of scholastic
        dishonesty may receive an “F” in the course and be remanded to the appropriate University of
        Texas authorities for disciplinary action. For more information, view Student Judicial Services
        at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.


6. Use of Class Materials: No material presented in lecture may be directly or indirectly
    published, posted to the Internet, or rewritten for publication or distribution in any medium.
    Neither these materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer except for personal
    and non-commercial use. All information derived from the internet must be adequately cited.
7. Student Privacy: The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) require that
    student privacy be preserved. Thus the posting of grades, even by the last four digits of the
    social security number, is forbidden. All communication will remain between the instructor
    and the student, and the instructor will not be able to share details of the student’s performance
    with parents, spouses, or any others.
8. Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
    appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
    information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937
    (video phone).
9. Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
    least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
    class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day,
    I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
    absence.
10. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
    differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your
    concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
    among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),
    the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
    (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
11. Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students: E-mail is recognized as an official
    mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your e-mail for
    university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the
    university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail
    regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current
    with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT
    Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
    http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
12. Use of Canvas in Class: In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system
    with password-protected access at https://canvas.utexas.edu/—to distribute course materials,
    and examination study guides. I will not post grades on Canvas. You can find support in using
    Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan
    accordingly.
13. Emergency Evacuation Policy
        a. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
            outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of
            the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of
            the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one
            you used when you entered the building.


          b. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
              class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
              Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire
              Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
  14. Q drop Policy: Texas law limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six. Per
      Section 51.907 of the Texas Education Code, students enrolled on or after the fall 2007
      academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a
      total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
      another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
      than that number.
Grading and Assignments


Final Grade Breakdown
  Assignment                                   Due Date                             Grade
  Percentage (100%)
  Class Attendance                                                                     10%
  Geographical Literacy Test                                                           10%
  Mid-term Examination                          Oct. 23                                30%
  Book Review                                   Nov. 8                                 20%
  Final Examination                             Dec. 6                                  30%
Evaluation and Points: (No extra credit will be awarded, and the course is not graded on curve)
The weight is distributed to ensure success for all students, balancing the various needs to participate,
interact, engage, think critically, and write well. Not all students seek an A or B grade, but those who
do should expect to do the maximum required. Always read before the class so that you can understand
the lectures and ask questions.
Book Reviews: (The African Diaspora, Part 3, chapters 8 to post-script) Reviews should be no less
than 3 pp. and no more than 5 pp., typed and double spaced. Book reviews should be analytical, and
not just a retelling of the narrative. The best way to do this is by synthesizing the narrative in your
own mind and then critically examining such things as the historical content, style and the overall
impression the book made on you. You will probably want to assess how the book fits in with
particular topics or themes we are developing in the course. Feel free to express your own opinion, but
do so clearly. Organize and develop the main points you wish to make and re-emphasize them in a
conclusion. Proofread your review before submitting it. Turn your review in on time (that means at the
beginning of class on the assigned day), because late submission will be penalized. If you are
reviewing a book for the first time, speak with your TA about structure and style.
Public Lecture Review: All students must endeavor to attend the public lecture to hold on (additional
information will be announced in class). During the lecture, students will be allowed to ask the speaker
questions on issues pertaining to the lecture. For the review, students will be expected the fulfill a two-
fold task: first, summarize the lecture in no more than 1 page (roughly 300 words); second, give your
opinion of the lecture in no less than 1 page (roughly 300 words). Report will be due in class on .
Attendance Policy:
The class attendance will be counted from the 4th of September. It will be counted based on the total of
26 classes. So for each absence, students will lose approximately 0.38 points from the final grade.
Absences will be excused if a student provides documentation of emergency health situation, death in
family, job interviews, etc. However, without documentation no excuses will be granted.
Book Review Guidelines:
        1. Watch is the book about?
        2. Give your opinion on the book.
                 a. What are your overall impressions?
                 b. Likes and dislikes?
                 c. Make sure to provide impartial details that support your assessments of the book.


        3. Understand that you are writing to an academic audience. Facts and specifics are
           mandatory, as is objective prose. Saying something “sucks” or “stinks” is unacceptable
           unless you can back up your opinions with facts.
        4. Give an outline of the book without excessive details. Too much detail will result in
           summarization, which you want to avoid.
        5. Analyze the narrative structure of the book. Are there continuity gaps?
Examinations: The course is divided into five parts, each covering a major thematic issue. The mid-
term examination consists of two essay questions. Students are expected to answer both questions,
writing at least three pages on each. Essay questions will be drawn from a pool submitted by the TA.
Students who integrate materials from class text, public issues, lecture notes, films, and discussions on
key issues will be rewarded. The final examination consists of two essays. Students will be expected to
answer both questions, writing at least three pages on each.
Volunteers for Class Discussion: During the course of the semester, students may be asked to
volunteer to lead discussion groups. All students are encouraged to participate so as to develop public
speaking skills and learn how to work effectively in a group.
Make-up policy: Make-ups will be granted only in the case of medical illness or university-related
conflict. Such conflicts will require signed documentation from the Dean’s Office explaining the
reason for absence.
Overall semester averages will earn the following letter grades:
        93-100: A       90-92: A-
        87-89: B+       83-86: B      80-82: B-
        77-79: C+       73-76: C      70-72: C-
        67-69: D+       63-66: D      60-62: D-      0-59: F


     Lectures and Reading
                        PART A: Connections, Relevance, and Perceptions
Date    Main Topics                             Readings                                Assignments/
                                                                                        Activities
Aug 30  Introduction
        Africa – the continent and its people
        Information about the course
        **Teaching Approach:
        Lectures
        Class discussions
        Films (these are integral to the class,
        and materials can be drawn from
        them).
Sep 4   Africa in World History                 “Introduction: Africa Role’s in World
                                                History” Erik Gilbert & Jonathan T.
                                                Reynolds, Africa in World History: From
                                                Prehistory to the Present. New Jersey:
                                                Pearson, 2004.
Sep 6   Africa and the United States: Why - Mistaking Africa, chapters 1-4
        is the Connection Important?
Sep 11  Film Screening: Mandabi: Money
        Order by Sembene Ousmane
Sep 13  Documentary Screening: Legacy
        of Spirits by Kramer Karen
        https://utexas.kanopystreaming.com/
        video/legacy-spirits


                    PART B: Origins and Historical Phases of Connections
Date    Main Topics                       Readings                                 Assignments/
                                                                                   Activities
Sept 18 Africa in American Images and     - Mistaking Africa, Chapters 5-10
        Perceptions
Sept 20 Class discussion: Perceptions and - Remaining chapters of Mistaking Africa
        Stereotypes
Sep 25  The Peering and Politics of       - African Diaspora, Introduction
        Interrelations
Sept 27 Africa and the United States:     - African Diaspora chapter 1 & 2.
        Historical Overview 1
Oct 2   Africa and the United States:     Douglas R. Egerton et al, The Atlantic
        Historical Overview 2             World: A History, 1400-1888,
                                          Wheelings, IL: Harlan Davidson, 2007.
                                          -- Chapter 6: “The Trans-Atlantic Slave
                                          Trade and Slavery in the Americas,
                                          1580-1780.”
                                          -- Chapter 7: “Trade in the Atlantic
                                          World, 1580-1780.”


               PART C: Slavery, Culture, and Africanism in the United States
Date   Main Topics                                Readings                       Assignments/
                                                                                 Activities
Oct 4  Africa, the United States, and the The Atlantic World
       Atlantic World                     -- Chapter 8, “Racial and Cultural
                                          Mixture in the Atlantic World, 1450-
                                          1830”
Oct 9  Documentary
       Slavery’s Buried Past
Oct 11 Documentary: Religions of the
       World: African and African-
       American religions. (1998)
       Wynnewood, PA.
       VIDCASS 7789
Oct 16 The Basis of Africanisms: Slavery  Holloway, Africanisms, Chapter 1, “The Students to
       in the United States               Origins of African American Culture”   volunteer for
                                          Holloway, Africanisms, Chapter 4,      discussion on
                                          “Gullah Attitudes”                     Holloway,
                                                                                 Africanisms
Oct 18 Afro Atlantic Religion:            Holloway, Africanisms, Chapter 5, “The ***Mid-term
       Film Screening: Voodoo             case of Voodoo.”                       examination
       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=                                          questions will be
       gtKpkm7xYi8                                                               circulated in class.
Oct 23 Afro Atlantic Religion: Lecture    FIRST MID-TERM                         (Submission in
                                          EXAM DUE                               class)


                          PART D: Africanism and Pan-Africanism
Date    Main Topics                              Readings                          Readings
Oct 25  Africanisms 1                    Holloway, Africanisms, Chapter 8.
Oct. 30 Africanism 2                     Holloway, Africanisms, Chapter 10.
Nov 1   Pan-Africanism                   - The African Diaspora, Chapter 4.
Nov 6   Back to Africa Movement          - The African Diaspora, Chapter 10
                       SECTION E: Contemporary Culture and Politics
Nov 8   Tourism                                                                    *** Book Review
                                                                                   submission in class.
        *** Book Review Due
Nov 13  Guest speaker:
        Prof. Olajumoke Yacob-Haliso
        Department of Political Science
        and Public Administration,
        Babcock University
Nov 15  African Popular Culture          The African Diaspora, Chapter 12.
Nov 20  Documentary,                     Geoffrey Philip, “Marcus Garvey and        (TF Absent)
        Back to Africa Movements         President Obama’s Missed Opportunity”
        Marcus Garvey: Black-nationalist Journal of Pan African Studies, vol. 10,
        leader. DVD 12394                no. 1, 2017.
Nov     No Class: Thanksgiving
22-24
Nov 27  Contemporary Immigrants 1        John A. Arthur, Invisible Sojourners:
                                         African Immigrant Diaspora in United
                                         States. Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers,
                                         2000.
                                         --Chapter    1.    Introduction:  African
                                         Immigrants in the New Global Migration
                                         --Chapter 2. Causes of African Migrations
                                         to the United States and the Dynamics of
                                         the Post-Arrival Adjustment Process.
                                         (posted on canvas)


Nov 29    Contemporary Immigrants 2                Bridget Teboh, “Reproducing African        **Take Home
                                                   Communities in US: Settlement Patterns     Final examination
                                                   and Social Organizations,” (eds.)          question will be
                                                   Emmanuel Yewah & Dimeji Togunde,           circulated.
                                                   Across the Atlantic: African Immigrants
                                                   in the United States Diaspora,
                                                   Champaign, IL: Common Ground
                                                   Publishing, 2010. (posted on canvas)
Dec 4     Globalization                             - African Diaspora, Chapter 12.
Dec 6     FINAL-EXAM                               **Submission of the final examination
                                                   answers in class.
      Appendix: Information on Movies/Documentaries
      Mandabi: Money Order
      This French-Senegal co-production is based on a story by L.S. Senghor. An out of work Senegalese
      man, Ibrahim (Makhouredia Gueye), receives a money order by his nephew. Unfortunately, the uncle
      has no identity card which will enable him to cash the check. He tries to obtain a card, but is stymied
      because he lacks a birth certificate. In order to get this valuable document, he must have a photograph
      taken... and on and on and on it goes. Thus begins Ibrahim's nightmarish foray into the honeycomb-like
      world of African bureaucracy.
      http://www.fandango.com/mandabi_v101511/plotsummary
      Africa Buried Past/Slavery’s Buried Past
      In 1991, New York City construction workers were digging a foundation for a skyscraper when they
      unearthed an 18th century slave graveyard containing the remains of 427 bodies. It was a major news
      story – and a political fight – as African-Americans in New York sought to preserve a sacred place.
      After months of negotiation, the skeletons were sent to Washington, D.C.'s Howard University for
      study.
      http://www.worldcat.org/title/slaverys-buried-past/oclc/70853795


African and African-American religions
Discusses the cultural diversity of Africa through its many religions. Shows how shared elements of
various customs serve as unifying threads across tribes, centuries, and continents.
http://library.anderson.edu/uhtbin/cgisirsi/x/0/0/5?searchdata1=1572252014
http://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/search~S29?/X(VIDCASS+7789)&searchscope=29&SORT=D/X(VIDCA
SS+7789)&searchscope=29&SORT=D&SUBKEY=(VIDCASS+7789)/1%2C13%2C13%2CB/frames
et&FF=X(VIDCASS+7789)&searchscope=29&SORT=D&13%2C13%2C
Marcus Garvey: Black-nationalist leader
In this documentary, black historians discuss the life of Marcus Garvey from his birth in Jamaica to his
young years of trying to organize Black workers in Jamaica, Latin America and London, to his role as
a Black-nationalist leader in the United States and the failure of the Universal Negro Improvement
Association, of which he was the founder.
http://www.worldcat.org/title/marcus-garvey-black-nationalist-leader/oclc/29862009
Legacy of the Spirits
For centuries, the religion of Vodou (commonly called "voodoo" by outsiders) has been thought of as
sticking pins in dolls or witchcraft. It has been kept underground and practiced in secret, giving way to
much misunderstanding and sensationalism. This documentary - the first of its kind - shows how
Vodou is a valid and serious belief system. The film interweaves exciting Vodou ceremonies,
important scholarly information, compelling music, and images of colorful ritual objects, to show the
beauty behind what has been one of the world's most misunderstood religions.
     Legacy of the Spirits traces the religion from Africa to Haiti to New York City. It explains the
theology of the religion, the meaning of the rituals, the pantheon of spirits, possession, the sacred
drawings (called ve-ve), the Catholic influence, the history of persecution and more. This is all
explained by priests and priestesses who practice Vodou and who give the film the quality of being
both informative, yet personal.
     Filmed entirely in the Caribbean communities in New York City, participants speak of what the
religion means to them and their families, how the spirits have helped them, and why they continue to
practice these ancient traditions today. Since the religion has always been kept underground (the
reasons why are explained in the film), this is the first time the practitioners have spoken about it
openly on camera.
http://www.der.org/films/legacy-of-the-spirits.html
http://www.karenkramerfilms.com/content/legacy_of_spirits/index.htm
Black Hawk Down
From acclaimed director Ridley Scott (Gladiator, Hannibal) and renowned producer Jerry Bruckheimer
(Pearl Harbor, Armageddon) comes a gripping true story about bravery, camaraderie and the complex
reality of war. Black Hawk Down stars an exceptional cast including Josh Hartnett (Pearl Harbor),
Ewan McGregor (Moulin Rouge!), Tom Sizemore (Saving Private Ryan), Eric Bana (Chopper),
William Fichtner (The Perfect Storm), Ewen Bremner (Snatch) and Sam Shepard (All The Pretty
Horses). In 1993, an elite group of American Rangers and Delta Force soldiers are sent to Somalia on a
critical mission to capture a violent warlord whose corrupt regime has led to the starvation of hundreds
of thousands of Somalis. When the mission goes terribly wrong, the men find themselves outnumbered
and literally fighting for their lives.
http://www.sonypictures.com/movies/blackhawkdown/
Internet Resources


Africa Dialogue Series: http://www.utexas.edu/conferences/africa/ads/index.html
USA Africa Dialogue Series: http://groups.google.com/group/USAAfricaDialogue
Historical Progression of African Cartography:
http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/gallery/2012/oct/02/africa-maps-history
