Cultural Anthropology​ ​(ANT 302) — Fall 2019
Lecture - Tuesday & Thursday 2-3 pm, GAR 0.102
Instructor: James Slotta
Email: jslotta@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Monday 2-4 pm or by appointment
Discussion - All discussion sections are held in SAC 4.118
  30890 - Friday 8-9am
  30900 - Friday 12-1pm
  30905 - Tuesday 3:30-4:30pm
  30915 - Monday 4-5 pm
  30895 - Friday 10-11am
  30910 - Thursday 3:30-4:30 pm
University Course Description
The concept of culture; social and political organization; language; the supernatural; elementary cultural theory.
May be counted toward the cultural diversity flag requirement. Meets core curriculum requirement for Social &
Behavioral Science (I).
Detailed Course Description
This course provides an introduction to cultural anthropology, the inductive study of the human condition insofar
as it is shaped by our social surround. Accordingly, anthropologists investigate humanity in all of its variety,
developing methods of data collection and analysis, conceptual frameworks, and modes of presentation that are,
ideally, adequate to capturing what it means to be human. In the process, cultural anthropology highlights the
variability of humanity and, as a consequence, it forces us to rethink the nature of the human. What may appear to
be natural or fundamental characteristics of humans come to appear cultural and contingent once we start looking
beyond our own social worlds.
           In this course, we look at a wide range of cultural beliefs, values, and identities to understand: 1) how such
cultural intangibles are produced and sustained in the course of people’s social lives and yet 2) how these cultural
intangibles appear to be grounded in the very nature of reality for those enculturated to them. We focus on ritual
in particular as a locus where beliefs and values palpably materialize in social life, connecting people in the mundane
here-and-now to seemingly more primordial realms of reality.
           Where the first half of the course seeks to situate cultural intangibles in social life, the second half looks at
how social life is rooted in these very values and beliefs. We consider social and political arrangements both
familiar (the nation, class stratification) and unfamiliar (the patrilineal segmentary lineage, the matricentric virilocal
residence group ) to see how they are sustained and transformed in concert with cultural beliefs and values. We
consider (Lockean) possessive individualism in particular as a cultural model of humans-in-society that increasingly
shapes social, political, and economic arrangements around the world.
           Ultimately, we aim to be able to bring anthropological methods to bear on our own lives to consider how
we are embedded in and influenced by social, political, historical and cultural environments in ways that we often
do not realize. We challenge our own beliefs about the nature of humanity and society, about the moral and


                                                                                                                    2
immoral, about the valuable and valueless through careful attention to the wide diversity of ways in which humans
live. How do humans’ construct their socio-cultural environment? What becomes striking about our own social
lives when set alongside the social lives of others? What aspects of our socio-cultural surround are particularly
potent in shaping the way we live?
          More particularly, the course aims 1) to develop students’ ability to approach social life as
“ethnographers”—that is, to empathize with people through careful attention to their social and cultural surround,
and to recognize ourselves as part of particular social and cultural worlds; and 2) to develop the ability to read
non-fiction prose—and anthropological writing, in particular—so as to be able to follow and critically appraise
arguments, to evaluate and draw conclusions from evidence, and to empathetically engage with diverse forms of
humanity through the written word.
Course schedule (subject to revision)
At the start of each week the thematic headings listed below most likely will not mean much to you. That’s okay.
By the end of each week, the thematic headings for the week’s classes should be clear to you. That means you
should be able to discuss how the readings relate to the issues mentioned in the thematic headings and how those
issues relate to others we have discussed previously in class. If you find at the end of the week that you cannot do
so, you should share your questions in class or make an appointment with me or your TA to discuss them during
office hours.
Discussion sections will begin on Tuesday, September 3 and end on Monday, December 9. There will be NO
discussion sections October 15-21 and November 25-26.
Deductive & Inductive Studies of Humanity
  Aug 29      A Culture of Critique: Anthropology & Enlightenment
  Sept 3      A Philosophical View of Anthropos: Human Nature, Human Rights & the Remaking of Society
                 ○    Locke: The Second Treatise of Government (sections § 4-21, 87-131)
  Sept 5      The Anthropological Critique of the Human Sciences & the Paradox of Anthropological Induction
                 ○    Benedict: ​Patterns of Culture (​ Chapter 1: pp 1-7 & Chapter 2)
                 ○    New York Times: Why Teenagers Act Crazy
Relativism, Rights, and Human Nature
  Sept 10     Human Rights vs. Anthropological Understanding: Relativism, Ethnocentrism, and Virginity Testing
                 ○    Delaney: Seeds of Honor, Fields of Shame (start on p. 37 ‘The Locale’ and read through the
                      rest of the article. Then go back and read the introduction)
                 ○    New York Times: Turks Clash Over Defense of Virginity Tests
  Sept 12     Anything Goes?: Relativism, Amoralism, and Sexual Promiscuity
                 ○    Valeri: Kingship & Sacrifice (pp. 154-161)
                 ○    Sahlins: Supplement to the Voyage of Cook (pp. 1-4, 9-26)
Anthropological Understanding in a Relative World: the Ethnographic Method
  Sept 17     The Natives’ Point of View: Ethnography & Anthropological Induction
                 ○    Malinowski: The Subject, Method, and Scope of this Inquiry (pp. 4-25)
                 ○    Descola: T​ he Spears of Twilight​ (Chapters 1 & 2)


                                                                                                              3
Where is the Natives’ Point of View?
 Sept 19    Ritual: The Manifestation of Cultural Values and Social Identities in Space & Time
               ○    Barthes: The World of Wrestling
 Sept 24    Ritual Action: Giving Life to the Nation in an American Cult of the Dead
               ○    Warner: An American Sacred Ceremony
 Sept 26    The Ritual Significance of Semen: Homosexuality or the Makings of Men in Papua New Guinea?
               ○    Elliston: Erotic Anthropology (First read the paragraph on p. 853 under the heading: “the
                    Sambia: ‘ritualized homosexuality’ template.” Then, read pp. 848-850, 852-863)
 Oct 1      The Ritual Significance of Sex: Sex Roles & Gender Identities among Travesti
               ○    Kulick: ​Travesti (​ Introduction, Chapter 1-3)
 Oct 3      The Ritual Significance of Sex: Sex Roles & Gender Identities among Travesti
               ○    Kulick: ​Travesti​ (Chapters 4-5)
 Oct 8      Ritual & Reality: the Making & Unmaking of Cosmic Order in Bali
               ○    Bateson: Bali, the Value System of a Steady State (pp. 112-121 only)
               ○    Geertz: Deep Play
 Oct 10     Midterm Review
 Oct 15     Midterm
No discussion sections Oct 15-21
Gender, Identity, Kinship: Biological Nature or Social Role?
 Oct 17     Kinship Relations and Gender Identities Decomposed: Rights, Obligations, and Social Roles
               ○    Oboler: Is the Female Husband a Man?
 Oct 22     Kinship Relations and Gender Identities Composed: Mythical & Sociological Realities
               ○    Film: Masai Women
Society Without a State: Kinship, Descent, and Polity
 Oct 24     The Segmentary Lineage as a Solution to the Lockean Problem
               ○    Evans-Pritchard: The Nuer of the Southern Sudan
 Oct 29     Cultural Values & Social Conflict: the Tensions of Matrilineal Systems
               ○    Turner: S​ chism & Continuity​ (Chapter 3)


                                                                                                     4
Society without a State: Gifts & Commodities
 Oct 31     The Market & the Gift: Other Solutions to the Lockean Problem
               ○     Mauss: ​The Gift​ (pp. 3-14, 33-46, 71-78)
 Nov 5      Gifts, Status, and the Creation of Social Ties in Papua New Guinea
               ○     Film: ​Ongka’s Big Moka
 Nov 7      From Gifts to Commodities: Bridewealth, Prostitution & the Lockean Individual
               ○     Wardlow: W  ​ ayward Women​ (Chapters 1-2)
 Nov 12     From Gifts to Commodities: Bridewealth, Prostitution & the Lockean Individual
               ○     Wardlow: W   ​ ayward Women​ (Chapters 3-5)
Inequality: Economic Value & Cultural Values
 Nov 14     Spheres of Exchange & the Values of Money
               ○     Hutchinson: The Cattle of Money and the Cattle of Girls among the Nuer, 1930-83
 Nov 19     You Are What You Eat: The Value(s) of Things & the Value(s) of People
               ○     Sahlins: La Pensée Bourgeoise (pp. 170-176, 179-185)
 Nov 21     Anthropological Research Showcase
No discussion sections November 25-26
Mythical Realities: Cultural Beliefs & Social Realities
 Nov 26     Mythical Identities and Colonial Inequalities
               ○     Memmi: T  ​ he Colonizer & The Colonized ​(Part 2)
 Nov 28     No Class, Thanksgiving
 Dec 3      Myth Made Reality
               ○     Bourgois: Crack in Spanish Harlem
               ○     Film: OJ, Made in America
 Dec 5      Final Review
 *Dec 18    Final Exam (2-5 pm) — Subject to Change


                                                                                                                     5
Course requirements and general policies
Required Materials​. There are two books you will need to purchase at the bookstore.
Kulick, Don. T​ ravesti: Sex, Gender, and Culture among Brazilian Transgendered Prostitutes. ​University of Chicago
          Press
Wardlow, Holly. ​Wayward Women: Sexuality and Agency in a New Guinea Society.​ University of California Press.
All other readings are available electronically through Canvas at: https://utexas.instructure.com/
An Advisory about the Readings.​ Both of the books and several of the articles we will be reading this
semester contain explicit accounts of sexual practices and sexual assaults. We will be approaching these
materials—as with all of the materials discussed in this class—in an anthropological fashion. That means we work
to empathize with the experiences of others and we discuss them in a respectful fashion. If you have concerns
about the readings and the issues discussed in them, please speak with the instructor or a TA as soon as possible.
Reading as an Anthropological Practice.​ Though anthropologists typically spend some period of time doing
research “in the field,” we ​gain access to other social and cultural environments largely through reading the
accounts of other anthropologists. This course will be no different; we will glimpse other social worlds through
careful reading.
          And as anthropologists, we are often confused by what we encounter in the field. In this course, we
simulate that confusion by grappling with challenging data presented in articles and books written by
anthropologists for other trained anthropologists. ​This course has no textbook. ​Our goal—through reading,
lecture, and discussion—is to come up with anthropological interpretations of this data and to understand the
larger anthropological issues and concepts raised by the data and its interpretation. You should treat the reading as
a challenge, working to come to grips with the material with the help of our authors, the questions I provide to
guide your reading, the lectures, and your discussion in sections. The aim is not just to help you become savvy
readers of anthropological arguments, but to help you to become better consumers of information more generally.
Over the course of the semester, you should become increasingly able to take in the information and arguments
presented in readings and arrive at your own complex and well-supported interpretations of the material.
Preparation for Class.​ To assist your reading for each lecture, questions for each reading will be posted on the
Canvas website. You should use these questions to guide your reading; they point out the particular issues and
data that we will be focusing on in the reading. I recommend that you do your best to answer these questions as
you do the reading before class. You are welcome to work with classmates to develop your answers to these
questions. Then, bring your answers along with the reading to the lecture, where the reading will be discussed
further. Following the lecture, you should be comfortable answering the questions on the reading. Again, I
encourage you to speak with your classmates about the answers to these questions before and after the lecture. If
you are uncertain how to answer some of the questions, you will have the chance to ask questions during your
discussion section. Section leaders are not there to provide answers to these questions, though they will facilitate
discussion and ask questions that help you to answer the reading questions.
          At the end of your discussion section, you will have a quiz that consists of one of the questions on the
previous week’s readings. At this point, if you have done the reading, attended lecture, worked with classmates to
develop answers to the questions, raised any residual questions during your discussion section...at this point, it
should prove easy to answer any of the questions from the previous week’s readings. Some of the reading
questions will also appear on midterms and finals, so you are encouraged to retain your answers to these
questions to review in preparation for these exams.
Student Evaluation.​ Your grade consists of four components:
                                      One-question quizzes                 35%
                                      Midterm                              25%
                                      Final                                30%
                                      Participation                        10%


                                                                                                                     6
One-question quizzes​. There will be 12 quizzes over the course of the semester and your lowest quiz grade will
be dropped before calculating your final grade. Your 11 best quiz grades compose 35% of your final grade. These
quizzes will consist of one reading question selected from the questions on the two (occasionally three) most
recent sets of assigned readings. Different sections will not necessarily have the same question. Quizzes are closed
book. You are allowed—encouraged, in fact—to discuss the questions ahead of time with classmates.
           The quizzes are the centerpiece of the course.​ ​They are your opportunity to integrate concepts and data
from the readings and lecture, and demonstrate your own synthesis of them. And so, we look not only for “the
right answer” to the quiz questions, but a well-supported syntheses of course materials in your answers.
           Quizzes will be graded with a letter grade (no pluses or minuses):
                           responses that are clear, thorough, and particularly thoughtful, drawing connections to
       Excellent (A)
                           other readings or larger themes discussed in class
       Good (B)            responses that offer an accurate answer to the question based on the reading and lecture
                           responses that show some familiarity with the reading but do not thoroughly answer the
       Acceptable (C)
                           question
       Unacceptable (0) missed quizzes and responses that show no familiarity with the reading will receive a zero
Midterm & Final Exams​. There will be a midterm and a final exam. The midterm will be given in class and the
final will be given during the assigned final slot for our class. You should not book tickets or make travel plans
before finding out when our final exam will be held (see http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/exams). The midterm
and final will consist of multiple choice, fill in the blank, definition, short answer, long answer, and mapping
questions. The questions you are given with the reading for each class will form the basis of some exam questions
as will the material covered in lectures. ​You are also responsible for being able to locate on a world map the
country discussed in each of the readings​. We will have review classes for both exams that will go over material
from lectures that you should be prepared to answer questions on. The best preparation for exams is to: 1) work
through the reading questions in the way described above and be able to identify on a world map the country
discussed in the reading; 2) attend lectures and take notes, paying attention not only to answering the reading
questions, but to other materials introduced in lectures that are not in the readings; 3) review your lecture notes
and discuss them with classmates; 4) raise any questions you have about lectures during discussion section; 5) if
questions remain after discussion section, raise your questions in office hours with me or your TA; and 6) attend
the review sessions for the exams held during the lecture period prior to the exam. The midterm comprises 25%
and the final 30% of your final grade.
Participation.​ Participation in discussion sections accounts for 10% of your grade. Letter grades (no pluses or
minuses) will given for your participation over the course of the semester:
                           regular, respectful, and thoughtful participation that is informed by the readings and
       Excellent (A)
                           lectures
                           occasional and respectful participation that shows familiarity with the readings and
       Good (B)
                           lectures
                           rare participation, disrespectful participation, or participation that does not indicate
       Acceptable (C)
                           familiarity with the readings and lectures
       Unacceptable (0) no participation or more than six absences will receive a zero


                                                                                                                     7
Grade Ranges. ​Grade ranges are as follows. Decimal values will not be rounded up when calculating final grades.
                A       93-100 (95)          B-     80-82   (81)            D+  67-69 (68)
                A-      90-92 (91)           C+     77-79   (78)            D   63-66 (65)
                B+      87-89 (88)           C      73-76   (75)            D-  60-62 (61)
                B       83-86 (85)           C-     70-72   (71)            F   Less than 60 (50)
Excused Absences & Make-ups. ​The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays
and for extenuating circumstances due to an emergency (with a note from a doctor, nurse, or university official
documenting the emergency). If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday, you must notify the
instructor at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of the religious holiday. ​You will be given an
opportunity to complete missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. Otherwise, ​there will be no
make-up quizzes or exams without a note from a doctor, nurse, or university official excusing your absence.
Inside & Outside the Classroom.​ Readings for the day’s class should always be brought to class. I recommend
that you print out readings available electronically on Canvas so that you are not dependent on electronic devices
to do class readings. Computers, phones, and other electronic devices are allowed in class so long as they are not
disruptive to others. If these devices become disruptive, I will ask that they not be brought into class. As long as
these devices are not disruptive to others, you are solely responsible for how you use these devices in class. Your
TA and I are not responsible for rehashing material that you miss because you are distracted by electronic devices
or because you are absent (unless the absence is excused). If you miss a class, you should speak with your
classmates to catch up on course announcements and notes. If you attend class and discussion section and still
have questions about class materials, please see me or your TA during office hours. ​It is your responsibility to
ensure that you are keeping up with all that is being done in class​. Do not hesitate to ask questions in class or
during office hours.
Academic Integrity.​ Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
       “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
       uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, quizzes and exams is all your own work, unless it is assigned as
group work. You are welcome to work with classmates to prepare for quizzes and exams, but you may not help
each other in any way while taking quizzes and exams. All quizzes and exams are closed book. Copying answers
from any source during quiz or exam periods is a serious offense and you will be subject to academic disciplinary
action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which
can be found at the following web address: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Students with Disabilities.​ ​Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
     ●    Please request a meeting as soon as possible for us to discuss any accommodations
     ●    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     ●    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you


                                                                                                                     8
University Policies
Religious Holy Days. ​By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment,
or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy. ​If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students.​ The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance
and support for your learning. Use these to help you succeed in your classes.
     ○   The Sanger Learning Center:​ ​For more information, please visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc​ or call
         512-471-3614 (JES A332).
     ○   The University Writing Center​ offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by
         appointment or on a drop-in basis. ​http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     ○   The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and
         prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and
         well-being.​ http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     ○   Student Emergency Services: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
     ○   ITS: Need help with technology?​ http://www.utexas.edu/its/
     ○   Libraries:​ ​Need help searching for information?​ http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     ○   Canvas help is available 24/7 at​ https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
