                                  RHE F309K: The Rhetoric of Fashion
                                      Syllabus, Policy Statement, Schedule
Instructor: Patrick Aaron Harris (He/They)                      Course Website: http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Unique number: 83390                                            Office hours time/location: ThF 12-1:30 at Caffé
Class Time and Place: MTWThF 10-11:30 BEN 1.108                 Medici (check by the windows upstairs), and by appt.
E-mail: paharris@utexas.edu
Course Description
“Clothes mean nothing until someone lives in them”—Marc Jacobs
“Style is a way to say who you are without having to speak”—Rachel Zoe
“I don’t do fashion, I am fashion”—Coco Chanel
         When we talk about “fashion statements” we are usually describing the clothing someone might wear
to call attention to themselves. What would it mean, though, to think of all fashion as making a statement? All
of us use clothing, makeup, jewelry and other accessories as a way of expressing our interests, values, and
beliefs. Fashion is a way of saying (and showing) who we are. At the same time, all of us encounter the fashion
industry and are susceptible to the way designers and advertisers play on our desires to belong, to live
luxuriously, or to feel beautiful. We are constantly filtering messages and images meant to tell us what to look
like and who to be.
         In this class, we will use fashion as a medium for learning and practicing the elements of effective
argumentation. As our primary “texts” we will read fashion journalism and style reviews, but we will also watch
clips from films, television, music videos, and video blogs to see what arguments people make about fashion or
with fashion. Students will also maintain a blog that they will update regularly in response to prompts. These
blogs will allow students to practice critical writing skills and to learn how to use images and graphic design
persuasively. The course will culminate in a final research project of the students’ own making (with instructor
approval) that critiques fashion’s role in shaping our individual and interpersonal lives.
This course carries the Writing Flag and is designed to help students develop their critical thinking skills and
their ability to formulate ideas as analytical and argumentative writing.
Course Goals
    •     explore popular fashion (clothing, makeup, accessories, etc.) as a rhetorical medium
    •    learn core elements of rhetoric and rhetorical analysis through fashion analogues
    •    develop skills using and analyzing visual rhetoric
    •    practice rhetorical composition and college-level research & writing


                                                                                Harris—RHE F309K Page 2 of 11
Course Texts:
Everything’s an Argument, 7th ed. (2016)—available at UT Co-Op (required)
Textiles and Clothing Sustainability: Sustainability, Fashion, and Consumption (ebook available thru UT
Libraries) (required)
Fashion (2003)—on reserve at the PCL (recommended)
Rules for Writers, 8th ed.—available at UT Co-Op (optional)
Course Website
In this course we will be making use of a Canvas site to submit assignments, host readings, and maintain
regular communication. Students should regularly check Canvas for upcoming deadlines, assignment
guidelines, schedule changes, and other course announcements.
Assessment Breakdown
8 Blog Posts (25%)
Major Projects (75%):
         Project 1: Defining “Fashion” Essay (15%)                   Project 3.2: Aesthetic Argument Revision
         Project 2: Rhetorical Analysis (15%)                        (25%)
         Project 3.1: Aesthetic Argument (20%)                              includes:
                includes:                                                       ▪   peer review
                     ▪  project conference                                      ▪   presentation
                     ▪  annotated bibliography
Campus Resources
The following websites offer resources and services that may be helpful to students this semester, and in the
future:
Department of Rhetoric and Writing—http://www.drw.utexas.edu/
University Writing Center—http://uwc.utexas.edu/
UT Libraries—http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
University Health Services—http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu
Counseling and Mental Health Center—https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services—http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
Services for Students with Disabilities—http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/


                                                                                Harris—RHE F309K Page 3 of 11
Class policies
Tardiness & Absences
Students who arrive to class late should enter and settle in for the remaining class period as quickly and
unobtrusively as possible. While there is no formal penalty for tardiness, students should be aware that they
may miss opportunities to complete or submit work for participation points. In such an event, there will be no
opportunity for late submission or make-up work.
Deadlines & Late Work
As you will note in the course schedule, deadlines for the course’s three major assignments are set with a
target due date. There is also a built-in grace period of 2 calendar days where students may submit major
assignments without any penalty, after which time I will no longer accept submissions. This policy is part of my
ongoing commitment to creating an equitable and accessible learning environment. The goal of this policy is to
ensure that students and the instructor have freedom to balance their personal and academic commitments.
Any work not submitted by the assigned deadline will automatically receive a grade of 0.
Communication/Scheduling Meetings
Your best means of reaching me outside of class is either to attend my office hours or by email. Office hours
are your time to come by to ask questions, get help with an assignment, or to check in on your progress in the
course. You can make the most of your office hours visits by emailing in advance to let me know what you
might want to discuss. You are welcome to schedule a meeting outside of office hours. If you need to do so,
please allow at least 48 hours before the proposed meeting time so that I may adjust my schedule as needed.
As for email, I will try to respond promptly and within 24 hours of receiving your message. Please note, I will
not respond to email between 6pm and 8am. If you email me during that time, you should not expect an
immediate response. Relatedly, I will check and respond to email over the weekend intermittently but may be
otherwise unavailable. Plan accordingly.
Technology Policy
Students are encouraged to make use of laptops, tablets, or other technology that productively contributes to
their learning experience. Students should be mindful that certain uses of technology (such as texting,


                                                                                  Harris—RHE F309K Page 4 of 11
watching videos, completing other coursework, etc.) are distracting to the instructor and other students and
will not be tolerated and may result in the loss of participation points.
Accessibility
This course requires significant reading, writing, and discussion. Students who have disabilities, permanent
or temporary, that affect their ability to participate in class or to complete outside work should schedule
an appointment with the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) office as soon as possible to take
advantage of UT’s accommodation services (visit the SSD link included above for more information about
consultations). In addition, students are welcome to meet with me as needed to discuss any other
potential access barriers so we may develop strategies that will help them to meet both their needs and
the course objectives.
Statement on Diversity & Inclusion
Our shared goal is to make our classroom an inclusive, interactive, and productive learning environment. For
me that has meant trying to curate course materials that invite and represent an array of perspectives, values,
experiences, and identities. It is impossible to design a course, though, without feeling that something has been
left out. Rather than ignore those lapses, I hope students will (respectfully) call our attention to those deficits
so that we work towards creating a more inclusive classroom and course. I also want all of us to be thoughtful
of how we frame our comments in our discussions, as any offensive and/or exclusionary language or behavior
relating to any topic (including but not limited to race, gender, sexuality, disability, religion, and class) will not
be tolerated.
If you are troubled by or feel unsafe in any class discussion, please speak with me as soon as possible so that
we can work to resolve the immediate problem and prevent future issues.


                                                                         Harris—RHE F309K Page 5 of 11
COURSE SCHEDULE
UNIT 1
Th 6/6  Course Intro/Syllabus Overview
F 6/7   Why Bother with Fashion?: Intro to Unit 1 (Fashion Statements/What is Rhetoric)
        READ: “Why We Make Arguments” (EA)
Su 6/9  NO CLASS
        DUE: Blog Post 1
M 6/10  Dressed for all occasions
        READ: “Occasions for Argument” (EA)
T 6/11  Styles
        READ: “Kinds of Argument” (EA)
                “10 Types of Fashion Styles”
        DUE: Project 1 (Submissions close at 11:59pm on F 6/14)
UNIT 2
W 6/12  Intro to Unit 2 (Basic Black/Elements of Rhetoric); “Beat for the gods!”: Audience; Rhetoric of
        the YouTube “influencer”
        READ: “Appealing to Audiences” (EA)
Th 6/13 Dress Codes: Ethos
        READ: “Arguments Based on Character: Ethos” (EA)
                “The Role of the Retailer in Socially Responsible Fashion Purchasing” (TCS)
        DUE: Blog Post 2
F 6/14  Dress to Impress: Pathos; Rhetoric of TV Makeovers
        READ: “Arguments Based on Emotions: Pathos” (EA)


                                                                        Harris—RHE F309K Page 6 of 11
                “Connectivity, Understanding, and Empathy” (TCS)
                “Can You Believe? An Oral History of ‘Queer Eye’”
Su 6/16 NO CLASS
        DUE: Blog Post 3
M 6/17  Form vs. Function: Logos; Serving Looks: Visual Rhetoric; Faux Pas: Rhetorical Fallacies
        READ: “Arguments Based on Facts and Reason” (EA)
                “Visual Rhetoric” (EA)
                “Fallacies of Argument” (EA)
UNIT 3
T 6/18  Intro to Unit 3 (Fashion Police/Rhetorical Analysis); Breaking it Down: Rhetorical Analysis
W 6/19  Alterations I: Harm-Free Fashion
        READ: “To Fur or Not to Fur” (TCS)
        DUE: Blog Post 4
Th 6/20 Alterations II: Body Positive Fashion & Accessible Fashion
        READ: “Body Positivity in Fashion”
        WATCH: “What is adaptive clothing?”; “How adaptive clothing empowers people with
                   disabilities”
F 6/21  Alterations III: Competitive Fashion & Selfie Fashion
        READ: “Why Instagram’s ‘outfit of the day’ hashtag is bad for fashion
Su 6/23 NO CLASS
        DUE: Project 2 (Submissions close at 11:59pm on T 6/25)
M 6/24  Alterations IV: Queer Fashion I
        WATCH: “How Drag Queens Shaped the Beauty Industry”


                                                                  Harris—RHE F309K Page 7 of 11
T 6/25  Alterations V: Queer Fashion II
        READ: “Nonbinary Fashion is Finally Getting Its Museum Moment”; “What fashion needs to
        understand about being gender neutral”
        WATCH: “Gender Capitalism”
UNIT 4
W 6/26  Intro to Unit 4 (Self-Fashioning); Sourcing I
        READ: “Finding Sources” (EA)
        PROJECT CONFERENCES (DAY 1)
        DUE by 11:59pm: Blog Post 5
Th 6/27 Sourcing II
        READ: “Evaluating Sources” (EA)
                “Using Sources” (EA)
        PROJECT CONFERENCES (DAY 2)
F 6/28  Structure & Style
        READ: “Structuring Arguments” (EA)
                “Style in Arguments” (EA)
Su 6/30 NO CLASS
        DUE by 11:59pm: Annotated Bibliography
M 7/1   Fashion Forward
        READ: “Multimodal Arguments” (EA)
        DUE by 11:59pm: Blog Post 6
T 7/2   Drafting Workday
W 7/3   Drafting Workday


                                                                  Harris—RHE F309K Page 8 of 11
Th 7/4  ***INDEPENDENCE DAY—NO CLASS***
F 7/5   Drafting Workday
        DUE by 11:59pm: Blog Post 7
Su 7/7  NO CLASS
        DUE: Project 3.1 (Submissions close at 11:59pm on T 7/9)
M 7/8   Presentation Workday
        DUE by 11:59pm: Project 3.1
T 7/9   Conclusions; Course Evaluations
W 7/10  Peer Review; Presentation Workday
        PREPARE: Hard copy of Project 3.1
        DUE: Blog Post 8
Th 7/11 Fashion Show
        DUE: In-class presentations
Su 7/14 NO CLASS
        DUE: Project 3.2 (Submissions close at 11:59pm on T 7/16)


                                                                                  Harris—RHE F309K Page 9 of 11
Department of Rhetoric & Writing
RHE Course Policies Statement, 2018-19
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses. Any questions or appeals
concerning this policy must be made directly to the department Associate Chair. You are expected to attend
class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing, and to participate in all in-class editing,
revising, discussion, and conference sessions. Should you miss the equivalent of six class sessions this
semester, you will fail the course. If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class,
you should contact your instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let him or her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or other
required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the
instructor, in writing, at least one week before the absence, so that alternative arrangements can be made to
complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this reason, provide your instructor with the
date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University specifies very few other excused absences (e.g.,
jury duty).
When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from a classmate.
SCHOLASTIC HONESTY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a major course
penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and assignments, and a report of the
incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students and filed in your permanent UT record. Under
certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will initiate proceedings to expel you from the University.
So, take care to read and understand the Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php If you have any doubts
about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the assignment.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES


                                                                                Harris—RHE F309K Page 10 of 11
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) as soon as
possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More information is available on the
Services for Students with Disabilities website at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will use this medium to
communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email account and to check it daily.
All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to the IT Services website at
https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at Austin Police
Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found on the UT
emergency page at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
Other important Emergency Information
You can find more information about planning for emergencies on the Emergency Preparedness site at
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050


                                                                            Harris—RHE F309K Page 11 of 11
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. You can learn more about the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line on their site at https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
                             Questions about these policies should be addressed to:
                                      Department of Rhetoric & Writing
                                       The University of Texas at Austin
                                              Parlin Hall, Room 3
                                          rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu
                                               (512) 471-6109
