AMS 370: Feminist Interventions in Borderlands History (31180, 45635 and
40440)
Dr. Guidotti-Hernández                                  Spring 2019
MW 10:00-11:30am
BUR 436B                                                Office Hours M 11:30am-12:30pm, 2:30-
                                                                4:30pm and by appointment
This seminar will provide undergraduates with an in-depth understanding of the social,
economic, and spatial transformations in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries U.S.-
Mexico borderlands. In particular, students will learn the history of empire on this continent. As
we track the shifts and changes during the Spanish and British empires to the current
configuration of the U.S. and Mexico as independent nation-states, we will see how the border
became porous at times and highly policed at others. Further, we will examine how chattel
slavery, Indian removal, the Texas wars for Independence, the Mexican American war of 1848,
and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo continue to influence how ideas of nation, space and
citizenship (or lack thereof) are articulated in these regions today. Lastly, this course stages an
intervention in the typically masculinist formation of the field of Borderlands history by
operating from a feminist scholarly perspective. In doing so, the course materials and your own
research projects will demonstrate how thinking transnationally exposes the most interesting
intersections of race, class, gender and sexuality as they formed this distinct history. The
contextual historical texts and methodological essays we read will expose the concerns, anxieties
and preoccupations with the contested nature of subjectivity in the nineteenth and early twentieth
century U.S.-Mexico Borderlands.


Learning Objectives: The main purpose of this course is to understand the role of empire in the
making of the U.S.-Mexico Borderlands from a Feminist Perspective. Students will
• learn intermediate level histories of the U.S.-Mexico Border and understand the role of political
and social intervention, especially generated by feminist scholars.
• develop a sophisticated and responsible vocabulary for discussing pressing political and social
issues related to the history of the U.S.-Mexico Border
•understand how intersectionality (the nexus of sex, gender, disability, race, class, and religion)
creates overlapping and interdependent systems of disadvantage and inequality in historical
context
•learn how to use a critical ethnic and gender studies framework for discussing conflicts and
violence amongst and between minority groups in the U.S.-Mexico Borderlands
• develop critical reading and writing skills.
•develop an independent research project using archival source material
This course carries three flags: Independent Inquiry, Cultural Diversity in the United States, and
the Writing Flag. The description of how these requirements are met is listed below.
For a class at UT to satisfy the Independent Inquiry Flag, it must meet the following definition:
    •    At least one-third of the course grade must be based on the students’ independent
         investigation and presentation of their own work. The presentation of their work can take
         place in many venues including presentations in a capstone course, a performance,
         independent research, or a thesis.
For a course at UT to satisfy the Cultural Diversity Flag, it must meet the following definition:
    •    At least one-third of the course grade must be based on content dealing with the culture,
         perspectives, and history of one or more underrepresented cultural groups in the United
         States.
For a class at UT to satisfy the Writing Flag, it must meet the following three criteria:
    •    Students must write regularly (several times during the semester) and complete writing
         projects that are substantial
    •    Students must receive feedback from the instructor to help them improve their writing,
         and be given an opportunity to revise at least one assignment
    •    Students’ writing must make up at least one-third of the course grade
Required Texts


Barr, Juliana Peace Came in the Form of a Woman
Boag, Peter Re-Dressing America’s Frontier Past
Guidotti-Hernández, Nicole Unspeakable Violence
Pinedo, Encarnación El Cocinero Español
Course Requirements
Attendance and Participation
In order to keep up with the class discussion and the writing assignments, it is important not only
that you come to class regularly, but that you also come prepared. You should read carefully and
think about what you are reading. This class is small enough to allow for discussion and your
contributions can help to shape the direction of our inquiries. Students are permitted up to four
unexcused absences. Every excused absence needs to be adequately justified with a doctor’s note
for illness, family emergencies, or other documentation. Students will be responsible for
knowing class materials.
Students are expected to participate in class discussion. Come to class with one idea you want to
discuss based on the reading. Please bring your books and articles to class for the appropriate
day’s material. I hope you actively participate in this course because I have found it is the best
way to engage you in learning.
Laptops are allowed in class given the way that students take notes. Please be judicious and
mindful of your screen usage in class, utilizing it for the task at hand (readings and taking notes).
Students should have the opportunity to engage in multiple forms of learning and this is one that
should be done with good faith intentions.
Groundrules: When I lecture, you can use your laptops; when we are engaging in conversation
with one another, we put them away. When you are solving problems, you can use your laptops;
when we discuss the meaning of those problems, we put them away. When we write in class, you
can use your laptops; when we are giving one another feedback on our writing, we put them
away.
Policy on late work
NO LATE WORK WILL BE ACCEPTED. IF YOU ARE ILL OR WILL MISS THE PAPER
DEADLINE, CONTACT THE INSTRUCTOR 24 HOURS PRIOR TO THE DUE DATE. YOU
MAY BE GRANTED AN EXTENSION DEPENDING UPON THE CIRCUMSTANCES. IT IS
YOUR RESPONSIBILITY TO MAKE ARRAGNMENTS PRIOR TO ASSIGNEMENT DUE
DATES.
Position Papers


** All essays should conform to the standards for this course: 12 point times font, double spaced
type, with one inch margins, and a standardized citation format (MLA, Chicago, etc.).***
Students will write 1-2 page papers with the same objectives and goals: to start class discussion
and lead to ideas for the final archival research paper. Students are required to write three (3)
papers on any text of their choosing throughout the semester. All three papers need to be
completed by the final meeting of class. For a paper to be counted as on time, it must be turned
in on the day that we are reading the text(s) you are writing about. In other words, a paper from
the week 2 readings must be turned in on the day we discuss the readings for week 2. I will not
accept all 3 papers on the last day of class.
Students will have an opportunity to rewrite the any of essays if they received a “B” grade or
lower. The two grades will be averaged for the final total.
If you are concerned with your particular level of writing expertise, please see me during Office
Hours for more information and additional skills-based support.
(20% of final grade)
Archival Assignment and Archive Days
After our visits to the Benson and based on your field of research, students will select one
document (letter, newspaper, patent, memorandum, map, telegram, press release, report,
advertisement, congressional records, census reports, painting, other) and fill out the Written
Document Analysis worksheet. Students need to select a document that we did not view during
our class visit. You’ll need to return to the library to look at something new. This assignment is
designed to get you prepared for the final research project. The form will be available on Canvas.
To make sure you have enough time to dedicate to finding archival materials for your final
research paper, I have designated particular class days as archive days. You should use these
class periods to do archival research at the Benson, Briscoe, or Ransom. Ideally, you want your
archival sources lined up before the prospectus is due. (5% of grade)
Paper and Prospectus
A two-page prospectus describing your research project for the course will provide a narrative of
your proposed research paper and argument. This will include a thesis statement and thesis
paragraph. I will also expect an annotated bibliography to be submitted with the prospectus. The
bibliography should have at least 6 primary sources and 2 secondary relevant sources to your
proposed research project. This assignment is designed to provide guidance as you write your
final paper. The professor will provide feedback on the preliminary stages of your paper and
research.
Final Paper


All students will perform archival research about the development and social conditions existing
between the Colonial Period and Early Twentieth Century U.S.-Mexico Borderlands. The topic
must be prior to 1950.
Using the newspapers, photographs, paintings, census data, unpublished manuscripts, maps,
personal letters, broadsides, or post cards from this region or depicting this region, your task is to
construct an argument about race, class, gender and citizenship along the border. Using your
primary sources, you will formulate an argument. Secondary sources should be used to
contextualize and support your argument. They may not, however, form the basis of your
argument.
The purpose of this assignment is to apply what you’ve learned from the case studies we’ve read
throughout the semester. You should see yourself as someone reconstructing history, perhaps
taking a small event out of obscurity and bringing it to the attention of a larger public who would
be better informed armed with the materials you have recovered. Work with Spanish or
Indigenous language sources and translation will be encouraged but not required. A more
detailed handout will be circulated in late January.
The final paper must be 7-8 pages in length and reference a minimum of 6 primary sources and 3
secondary sources. (25%)
Peer Review
Prior to when the final papers are due, students will work in groups for peer review. A detailed
handout will accompany this process. By this stage, students should have a minimum of 4 pages
of the final paper written. You will perform the peer review, hand the author back the review
sheets and edited essays, and turn everything in with your final paper. Be sure to turn
everything in so that your peers can receive credit. (5%)
Presentation of Final Projects/Essays
Students will present their papers to the class on the final days of the semester using Powerpoint
or Prezi. Please be sure to hand in a printed copy of the Powerpoint or Prezi to the instructor,
along with your paper.
Your presentation should contain an argument and evidence, just like your paper. (5%)
Extra Credit
Students can earn extra credit by reading one to two of the unread chapters from the course in
Peace Came in the Form of a Woman, Unspeakable Violence or Redressing the West and write a
1-2 page response paper. Students must discuss how the chapter engages or changes the
theoretical concepts and themes we have used during the semester. This paper can add additional
points to grade overall. Students can write a maximum of two papers for extra credit, for an
additional 2% added to their participation and attendance grade. For example, if you have a 85%
average and receive full credit for extra credit papers, these extra papers will provide 2% extra
and give you 87%. In addition, there will be events that students can attend throughout the
semester to earn extra credit. On designated days the professor will alert the students of these


opportunities. After attending one of these events, students must write a 1-2 page critical
response paper detailing the event, providing an analysis and arguing how it does/does not relate
to the course concepts.
Students can also earn extra credit with an archival consult. To receive extra credit, students will
need to meet with Dr. Daniel Arbino at the Benson library for a formal research consultation.
The consultation will be 30 minutes or more, depending on how prepared you are for the
conversation. Please follow all of the steps to ensure you complete the assignment. For extra
credit, students are required to complete the consultation by March 4th and turn in the signed
form in class that day or earlier.
    1. Email Dr. Arbino to set up an appointment d.arbino@austin.utexas.edu
    2. Once the appointment is set, go to the consultation with your form printed and a potential
         topic or two that you’d like to discuss. Make sure that your topic is an issue or event that
         occurred on or before 1950. If you have no idea about what you’d like to research, use
         this as an opportunity to figure out what a possible topic might be.
    3. Discuss your topic and take notes about the collections he recommends based on your
         topic.
    4. Make sure to fill out the form with your notes and have Dr. Arbino sign at the end of your
         consultation.
Turn in your form as soon as possible so that you can receive credit. I will return them asap so
that you may have your notes with which to continue your research.
With the exception of the archival consult, the last day to turn in extra credit is May 8, 2019
Final non-graded one page addendum:
For the last week of class, please write a one-page summative, ungraded statement about what’s
changed for you in taking the class. This course is about transformation and critical thinking and
I’d like to hear from you.
Grades
Your final grade is calculated through the following components.
25% Final Paper
10% Prospectus and Bibliography
5% Archival Assignment
5% Final Paper Presentation
25% Position Papers
30% Attendance and Class Participation
Accommodations:
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. If you think you need accommodation under these


circumstances, you must provide written proof within the two first weeks of class. For more
information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259, or visit the website
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/m)
    •   Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
    •   Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
        accessible
    •   Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
