Linguistics 344k, Summer 2019
                     Phonetics: Production and Perception of Speech Sounds
                      Linguistics 344k, Summer 2019, Unique Number 82395
                   Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday 10:00-11:30
Instructor:     Laura Faircloth                        Office Hours: MWF 11:30-12:30
                lrfaircloth@utexas.edu                                 subject to change
                                                                       (and by appointment)
Rationale: This class focuses on the sounds of speech in human spoken languages. We will
examine three main domains: the articulation of speech sounds, the acoustics of speech sounds,
and the perception of speech sounds. Then, we will discuss how the field of phonetics impacts
other areas of linguistics, such as child language acquisition.
Format: This is a lecture-based course, but participation in class is strongly encouraged.
Students will contribute through discussions and practice in class. Students are also encouraged
to attend office hours to review the material, ask questions, and discuss the course. Students will
be evaluated through tests, homework assignments, and in-class labs. There are no prerequisites.
Textbook: There are two required textbooks (listed below). There will also be supplementary
readings posted on canvas. Complete the reading by the class specified in the syllabus.
Ladefoged, Peter, and Sarah Ferrari Disner. Vowels and Consonants. 3rd ed. Malden, MA:
        Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
Reetz, Henning, and Allard Jongman. Phonetics: Transcription, Production, Acoustics, and
        Perception. Blackwell Textbooks in Linguistics 22. Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell
        Publishing, 2009.
                                         Course Procedures
        Attendance and Participation Policy: Students must attend class to succeed in this
course. There are textbooks and supplemental readings, but they may not cover all of the
material. You will learn the most if you come to class regularly and participate, and you are
responsible for the material in the lectures and in the readings. If you miss a class, you are
responsible for contacting classmates to obtain missing information.
        Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence
and the date of observance of a religious holy day as far in advance as possible. If you must miss
a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I
will give you an opportunity to complete missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
        Classroom Behavior: Observe normal classroom etiquette. In particular, do not use your
cell phone during class. If you must use your computer to take notes, avoid anything unrelated to
this course (social media, email, homework, etc.) and sit at the back of the room. Research has
shown that using personal electronics in class is detrimental to your own learning and grades, in
addition to distracting your classmates and the professor.
        Canvas: I use Canvas to post assignments, grades, and readings. I will use the Canvas
announcement system to communicate with the class- make sure that you check these regularly.
(You can change the settings in Canvas to send you an email when announcements are posted)
URL: http://canvas.utexas.edu
        Email: You must regularly check your university email, ideally at least once a day. Please
use my email address, listed on the top of the syllabus, to contact me instead of the Canvas email
system, which is unreliable. I answer emails in a timely fashion (24 hours during the week, 48
hours on the weekends), but do not expect an immediate response.
                                                                                                  1


Linguistics 344k, Summer 2019
                                             Assignments
Grading Procedures: Grades are based on exams, homework assignments, and in-class lab
assignments. When a grade is posted on Canvas, questions about the grade must be asked within
one week. After that time, I will discuss the material on the assignment but not the grade itself.
        Homework: 30% (5% each)
        Exams: 60% (20% each)
        Labs: 10% (5% each)
Final Grades: Your letter grade will be determined by your overall final grade. This course
grades on a +/- scale.
 A      93-100            B        83- 86.99        C      73-76.99         D      63-66.99
 A-     90-92.99          B-       80-82.99         C-     70-72.99         D- 60-62.99
 B+ 87-89.99              C+ 77 -79.99              D+ 67-69.99             F      0-59.99
        Homework: You will have a total of six homework assignments, as indicated on the
course schedule below. The assignment will be posted on Canvas, and you will submit a typed,
pdf homework via canvas by midnight on the day the assignment is due. Late work will not be
accepted except in the case of extenuating circumstances (contact me ASAP to make alternate
arrangements). An incomplete homework assignment is better than none. You must plan ahead,
such as by making arrangements to turn an assignment in early.
        Exams: This class has three in-class exams. Make-up exams will also only be given in
extenuating circumstances; if you have an emergency, please contact me ASAP before the exam.
                                     Tentative Course Schedule
This syllabus represents current plans and objectives, which may need to change slightly during
the semester. Such changes, communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
L = Ladefoged’s “Vowels and Consonants”, R&J = Reetz and Jongman’s “Phonetics”
    Date         Topic                                Readings                   Assignments
    Week 1       Th: Introduction, Syllabus           Th L ch 1                  hw 0 (6.7)
    June 6-7     F: Sound and speech production       F R&J ch 5 and 7
    Week 2       M, T: Articulation                   W L ch 3 and 12            hw 1 (6.12)
    June 10-14   W, Th: Vowel articulation            Th L ch 15                 Exam 1 (6.14)
                 F: Exam 1
    Week 3       M: Acoustics                         M R&J ch 7                 hw 2 (6.20)
    June 17-21 T, W: Acoustics of Vowels              T L ch 4
                 Th: Airflow Mechanisms               W L ch 5
                 F: Consonant articulation            Th L ch 12
                                                      F L ch 6, 11
    Week 4       M-Th: Consonants and Acoustics T L ch 14                        hw 3 (6.26)
    June 24-28 F: Exam 2                              W R&J 10                   Exam 2 (6.28)
    Week 5       M: Supersegmentals                   M L ch 2, 10, R&J ch 11    hw 4 (7.3)
    July 1-5     T: Coarticulation                    T L ch 16
                 W, F: Perception                     W R&J 12
                 no class July 4 th
                                                      F R&J 13
    Week 6       M-W: Applied Phonetics               TBA                        hw 5 (7.8)
    July 8-11    Th: Exam 3                                                      Exam 3 (7.11)
                                                                                                   2


Linguistics 344k, Summer 2019
University Notices and Policies:
         Academic Integrity: Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of
Texas Honor Code. Work submitted by a student must be the student's own work. You are
encouraged to discuss the course material outside of class with your classmates, however, your
assignment must be written up separately. Cite your classmates by listing the names of the
people you worked with on the top right of your assignment (this helps distinguish assignments
that are similar because of cheating from those that are similar because the students worked
together). Avoid discussing your homework online as well, since your assignments will end up
sounding similar. If you have questions about academic integrity, please ask the instructor. You
may not receive or give help during exams. Any academic dishonesty will be handled following
the guidelines from Student Judicial Services. University of Texas Honor Code “The core
values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
If you see someone engaging in academic dishonesty, you should report it to the instructor.
         Documented Disability Statement: If you have accommodations, request a letter from
SSD and submit them to the instructor as soon as possible. Instructors are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please notify me as
quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g., instructional
videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
etc.). Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
         Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss your concerns about
another individual’s behavior. Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
         Q Drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course
drops for academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall
2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student
a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
than that number.”
         Emergency Evacuation Policy: Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is
made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    * Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. The nearest
         exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
    * If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week.
    * In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
    * Do not re-enter a building without instructions from the Austin Fire Department, the UT
         Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                                                                    3
