                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
               STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:             SW 310                      Instructor:          Rosalie Ambrosino, PhD
 Unique Number:             87535                       Email:               rambrosino@utexas.edu
 Semester:                  Summer 2020                 Office:              Remote
 Meeting Time/Place:        Asynchronous                Phone:               210-241-0391
                            offered via distance        Office Hours:        TR 12:30-1:45 p.m.
                            learning                                         Other times by appointment
            INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL WORK AND SOCIAL WELFARE
                                (Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag)
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural diversity
courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This is an introductory social work course in which students will learn about the profession of
social work, its fields of practice, values and ethics, policies and history of the social work
profession, its interactions with contexts which shape practice, and its promotion of social and
economic justice to advance human rights, alleviate critical social problems, and promote
well-being. The course will also offer knowledge and practice behaviors in engaging diversity
and differences in social work practice. As an introduction to the social work profession, the
course will discuss being a professional social worker and how to conduct oneself accordingly.
The course is also a UT Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag course and will focus on
the underrepresented cultural groups of immigrants and refugees and women, covering the
culture, perspectives and history of these groups.
The diversity of UT students and the diverse variables of their potential social work clients - as
manifested by ethnicity, age, gender, sexual orientation, social class, and religious beliefs - will
be explored in the context of the social work helping relationship.
Students will have the opportunity to assess their personal strengths and weaknesses and
identify potential ethical conflicts with clients. The course will offer the knowledge of
principles and practice behaviors to guide professional ethical decision-making.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
By the end of the course, the student will be able to:
    1. Demonstrate and apply knowledge, values and skills of the social work profession.
    2. Demonstrate and apply social work ethical principles to guide professional practice;
                                                      1


    3. Demonstrate and apply knowledge about diversity and engage in diversity and
        differences in practice;
    4. Explain the history of the social work profession and the American social welfare
        system;
    5. Explain the various contexts and settings in which social workers practice, including
        the roles and functions that they perform, and respond to contexts that shape practice;
    6. Identify some of the social, economic and political forces that have shaped the
        evolution of social welfare history, policies and services in the U.S.
    7. Analyze the important ideologies, values and ethical decision-making process in the
        NASW Code of Ethics that have helped to shape social welfare and social work and
        that continue to guide the profession.
    8. Demonstrate knowledge of how diversity variables, such as race and ethnicity, gender,
        age and sexual orientation affect the helping relationship, especially with populations at
        risk.
    9. Describe and analyze major issues and trends in various areas of social work practice,
        such as child welfare, gerontology, substance dependence and domestic violence.
    10. Critically analyze how social services enhance the individual and social wellbeing of
        people, promote social and economic justice, and advance human rights.
    11. Develop an identification as a professional social worker and conduct oneself
        accordingly, assuming the student is interested in majoring in social work.
    12. Assess one’s strengths and weaknesses as a potential professional social worker.
III. TEACHING METHODS
The class is taught online and will use a form of blended learning where students learn
content by analyzing readings and articles, watching videos, completing exercises,
participating in virtual discussions, and completing remote service-learning activities.
These methods intentionally draw on diverse pedagogical approaches to be inclusive of a
variety of learning styles.
This course will highlight diverse perspectives of thought and encourage students to engage in
new ways of thinking that may be represented by speakers, the professor, and classmates from
diverse backgrounds. Experiential learning will be the foundation of this class and students will
be expected to critically process and reflect on what they are learning through readings,
lectures, videos and service learning.
Students will need to have access to a computer with reliable internet connection to complete
this course. This course will use an electronic Canvas site—a Web-based course management
system with password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu/. It is the student’s
responsibility to ensure that their e-mail address is correct on this site so that class e-mails are
received. To reach your class site on Canvas, please go to http://courses.utexas.edu. You will
need a UT EID and password. You will also meet in small groups several times during the
semester via zoom (the instructor will place you into a group of your peers whose schedule
allows them to meet at the same time as you are available). The Help Desk, available through
the UT home page (www.utexas.edu/its/help/), can assist you with your computer and Canvas
and zoom questions. You can also call them at 475-9400.
                                                 2


IV. REQUIRED AND RECOMMENDED TEXTS AND COURSE MATERIALS
Required Text:
Ambrosino, R., Ambrosino, R.J., Heffernan, J. & Shuttlesworth, G. (2016). Social work and
       social welfare: An introduction. Boston: Cengage. (available electronically).
Other supplemental course materials (worksheets, assignments, resources, articles) will be
posted on Canvas.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
    1. Participation in weekly online discussions and assignments                              40%
    2. Service learning (10 hours and self-reflection)                                         25%
    3. Cultural diversity paper                                                                20%
    4. Take-home exam                                                                          15%
SUMMARY OF COURSE REQUIREMENTS (Additional details can be found in the
syllabus appendix)
    1. Online Discussions and Assignments (See course schedule for due dates)                  40%
       Each week, students will be required to watch videos and complete readings and
       exercises related to the topics of that week. In order to integrate what is learned for that
       week, as well as reflect on service learning experiences in relation to course work,
       students will be required to complete weekly assignments and incorporate their learning
       in a discussion forum on Canvas. PowerPoint presentations with links to readings and
       media resources will be posted Sunday-Wednesday, and you will have until Wednesday
       evening at 11:59 p.m. to complete the required assignment and linked online discussion
       for the week. You will then need to respond to at least two colleagues in the course no
       later than Friday evening at 11:59 p.m. Students should use critical thinking skills and
       integrate readings and synchronous materials in completing assignments and
       responding to the discussion prompt. Each week’s assignments/discussion posts will
       count 8 points toward the final course grade.
    2. Service Learning Completion (See appendix for additional information)                   25%
       10 hours of service learning must be completed by the last day of class. A list of
       possible remote learning opportunities is posted on the course Canvas website. If you
       have another idea you would like to pursue, let the course instructor know. Note that
       activities must not be conducted in face-to-face settings for health reasons.
    3. Cultural Diversity Paper (Due June 29; see appendix for more information) 20%
       Students will complete a 5-7 page, doubled-spaced paper addressing the intersectional
       nature of cultural diversity in the United States by examining two or more intersectional
       identities (race, ethnicity, class, sex, gender identity, sexual orientation, religion,
       refugee status, immigrant status, ability/disability). Students will meet in small groups
                                                   3


       with the instructor via zoom during the second week of the course to discuss their ideas
       for the paper and get any questions/clarification needed about the paper or other aspects
       of the course.
    4. Take Home Exam (Due July 11 at 11:59 p.m.)                                         15%
       Students will be required to complete a take-home exam that gives students an
       opportunity to apply course content to a contemporary film (available on Netflix or
       Amazon prime).
Summary of Semester Assignments and Grade Breakdown
Assignment                                  Date Due                                        % of
                                                                                            Grade
Assignments/discussion posts and peer •     Wednesdays 6/10, 6/17, 6/24, 7/1, and 7/8;      40%
responses                               •   Responses to peers Fridays 6/12, 6/19,
                                            6/26, and 7/3
Service learning completion             •   Selection of service learning options form      25%
                                            and liability sign-off to be completed on
                                            GivePulse due 6/15
                                        •   Update on service learning form due 7/1
                                        •   Documentation of all completed hours and
                                            self reflection due 7/11
Cultural diversity paper                •   Monday, June 29                                 20%
Film application/take home exam         •   Saturday, July 11                               15%
                                                                                            100
VI. GRADES
       94.0 and Above      A
       90.0 to 93.999      A-
       87.0 to 89.999      B+
       84.0 to 86.999      B
       80.0 to 83.999      B-
       77.0 to 79.999      C+
       74.0 to 76.999      C
       70.0 to 73.999      C-
       67.0 to 69.999      D+
       64.0 to 66.999      D
       60.0 to 63.999      D-
       Below 60.0          F
                                                4


VII.    CLASS POLICIES
1. Instructor Contact: If you wish to make an appointment to see me or have a question
   about the course, please send an email to me at rambrosino@utexas.edu. You can also call
   or text me at 210-241-0391 (cell) or we can set up a conference via zoom. I check my e-
   mail and phone messages regularly and will respond as quickly as possible.
2. Attendance: This course is online and interactive, with students learning from each other
   through virtual discussions as well as two-three scheduled small group one-hour sessions
   scheduled on zoom. The instructor will ask for several times during the week that you are
   available to meet and place you in a group with 4 or 5 peers who are also available at one
   of those times.
3. Submission of Papers and Late Assignments: Social workers are expected to be
   punctual in meeting deadlines. Assignments other than discussion board posts and
   responses must be submitted on Canvas in a word document (no PDF files) by 11:59 p.m.
   the day that an assignment is due. (Discussion board posts should be submitted directly to
   the discussion board rather than in a word or PDF document so your peers can read them
   easily.) Changes in work schedules, personal celebrations, transportation problems,
   computer/ printing problems, etc. are not considered legitimate reasons for missing an
   assignment deadline. After one day of grace, late assignments will result in a deduction of
   5% for each day it is late. Any legitimate adjustments in due dates must be discussed with
   the instructor at least 24 hours PRIOR to the regularly scheduled due date unless there is a
   valid documented reason for not being able to meet this requirement.
4. APA & References: The School of Social Work uniformly requires APA editorial style as
   the standard format for all written assignments. Details of APA style are included in the
   Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association. Information on APA style
   and format can be found at the Learning Resource Center (LRC) in the School of Social
   Work and on the UT library website. Another excellent source is Purdue University’s
   Online Writing Lab (OWL). Appropriate referencing is required. Failure to use quotation
   marks for direct quotes or citations for indirect quotations and/or others’ ideas constitutes
   plagiarism and may result in receiving no credit for the assignment. All assignments in this
   course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an
   archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may
   also be used to determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results
   of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member will make the final determination as to
   whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
5. Course Feedback: Students will have two formal opportunities to evaluate the quality of
   the course and instruction. About midway into the course students will be asked to provide
   an anonymous evaluation about the course and any suggestions for improving content,
   delivery, and discussion. The second evaluation will occur at the end of the course, using
   the format provided by the University. At any time during the course, students should feel
   free to comment on the quality of the course and instruction and suggest changes that will
   increase their learning. These comments can either be made by making an appointment to
   meet with the instructor, by email or phone, or via any other means selected by the student.
6. Course Modifications: Any modifications, amendments, or changes to the syllabus and or
   assignments are at the discretion of the instructor. Changes will be announced in a zoom
   session and posted on Canvas. It is the responsibility of students to inquire about any
   changes that might have been made in their absence.
                                                 5


VIII.     UNIVERSITY POLICIES
1.    The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
      Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
      responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
      through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
2.    Documented Disability Statement: Any student who requires special
      accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
      Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community
      Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
      hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the
      semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student
      should remind the professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business
      days before an exam. For more information,
      visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
3.    Professional Conduct and Civility in the Classroom: The professor expects students
      to act as professionals in class. This means students should sign in on time for zoom
      class sessions, be prepared to participate in class discussions both online and in zoom
      sessions, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group
      of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by
      such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs,
      national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each
      other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social work also
      deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
      uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive course experience that
      did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this
      environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will
      not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that
      students engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
4.    Unanticipated Distress: Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
      reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
      encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive
      regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are
      responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is
      needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
      Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
5.    Policy on Social Media and Professional Communication: Public social networks
      are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
      certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work
      students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can
      be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded,
      subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional
      reputations and prospective careers.
               Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram)
      and other forms of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their
      communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social
                                                 6


   work students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be
   considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this,
   social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
   and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their
   professional image.
            Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on
   these sites and are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’
   social networks. Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic
   media, including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or
   compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically
   evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional
   relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social
   Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of
   Ethics.
            Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional
   social work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social
   Work program while in courses, the university community, and the broader area
   communities.
6. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
   dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
   course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
   individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
   dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to
   the Web Site of the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity, Office of the
   Dean of Students https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
7. Use of Course Materials: The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
   to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any
   unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may
   result in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of
   course materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be a
   violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
   which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other
   things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those
   materials to other current or future students.
8. Classroom Confidentiality: Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
   personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on
   educational supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational
   Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with
   individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of
   confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for
   review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards
   for Social Work Education.
9. Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students: Email is recognized as an
   official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for
   reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
   Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail
                                              7


    address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at
    minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some
    of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions
    for updating their e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
10. Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
    pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious
    holy day. If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in
    order to observe a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity
    to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
11. Title IX Reporting: In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of
    1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning
    environment that is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, field
    instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated
    reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence,
    stalking, dating violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report
    such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to
    the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources
    related to Title IX, may also be found at http://titleix.utexas.edu.
12. Campus Carry Policy: The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
    here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing
    the Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
13. Safety: As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments
    that involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these
    assignments may present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks
    inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to
    policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should
    notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
14. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If students have concerns about their
    behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else,
    students may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their
    concerns. This service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean
    of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
    Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
    Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
15. Emergency Evacuation Policy: Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
    required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
    announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
        • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building.
            Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
            the building.
        • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the
            first week of class.
        • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
        • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
            Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
            office.
                                               8


IX. Class Schedule
       Date                    Topic                             Readings/
                                                              Assignment Due
    Thursday       • View introductory video      • Syllabus
        6/4          posted on Canvas; Review     • Review information on service learning
                     syllabus;                      options, select tentative placement(s)
                                                    and contact organizations
     Week 1        • The relationships between    • Text, Chapter 1, Social welfare, past
     Monday          social work and social         and present;
        6/8          welfare                      •  Chapter 2, Social work and other
                   • Overview of history of         helping professions
                     social welfare in the United
                     States
                   • Historical influences that
                     shape social welfare today
     Tuesday       • Continuation of discussion
        6/9          on history of social work
                     and social welfare
                   • The profession of social
                     work
   Wednesday       • Frameworks to guide          • Text, Chapter 3, The
       6/10          understanding social           ecological/systems perspective
                     welfare issues and social    • Discussion post 1 due incorporating
                     work practice                  application of content assignment
      Friday                                      • Responses to at least two peers’
       6/12                                         discussion posts 1 due
                                                  • Submission of form to instructor
                                                    noting availability for small group
                                                    meetings due
     Week 2        • Diversity and social justice • Text, Chapter 4, Diversity and Social
     Monday        • Oppression and privilege       Justice
       6/15
                   • One-hour small group         • Selection of service learning options
                     meetings will be held this     form and liability sign-off to be
                     week via Zoom                  submitted on GivePulse
                                             9


 Tuesday  • Continued discussion on      •  Text, Chapter 5, Social work practice
   6/16     diversity and social justice    with individuals, families and groups
          • Structural racism, classism, •  Mattson, Intersectionality as a useful
            sexism, and homophobia          tool: Anti-oppressive social work and
            and impact on individuals,      critical reflection (available through
            families and groups             UT library; link in readings file on
          • Impact of intersectionality     Canvas
Wednesday   •   Social work practice      •  Text, Chapter 6, Social work practice
   6/17         with organizations and       with organizations and the community
                the community:            •   Discussion post 2 due incorporating
                Advocacy, community           application of content assignment
                organization, social
                justice
  Friday                                 •  Responses to at least two peers’
   6/19                                     discussion posts 2 due
 Week 3   • Poverty and income           •  Text, Chapter 7, Poverty, income
 Monday     assistance in the U.S.          assistance and homelessness
   6/22   • Disparities in race,
            ethnicity, class, and gender
 Tuesday  • Homelessness and
   6/23     affordable housing
            challenges in the U.S.
          • Impact of gentrification
Wednesday • Health care:                 •  Text, Chapter 8, Health care
   6/24   • How the U.S. compares
          • Health disparities in the
                                         •  Discussion post 3 due incorporating
            U.S.
                                            application of content assignment
          • Health care challenges
  Friday                                 •  Responses to at least two peers’
   6/26                                     discussion posts 3 due
 Week 4   • Mental health, disabilities  •  Text, Chapter 9, Mental health,
 Monday     and substance use:              substance use, and disability
   6/29     Challenges in the U.S.
          • Disparities in race,
                                         •  Diversity paper due at 11:59 p.m.
            ethnicity, class and gender
                                    10


 Tuesday  •   Challenges facing U.S.         • Text, Chapter 10, The needs of
   6/30       children, youth and families     children, youth and families
          • Disparities in race, class and
              gender
          • Impact on immigrant
              families
Wednesday Services to children, youth and •    Text, Chapter 11, Services to children,
    7/1   families – divorce,                  youth and families
          interpersonal violence, child      • Discussion post 4 due incorporating
          abuse and neglect
                                               application of content assignment
                                             • Update on service learning form to
                                               be completed and posted on Canvas
  Friday                                     • Responses to at least two peers’
    7/3                                        discussion 4 posts due
                                             • Take home exam posted; View film
                                               for take-home exam (due 7/11)
 Week 5   •   Older adults: Needs and        • Text, Chapter 12, Older adults: Needs
 Monday       services                         and Services
    7/6   •   Disparities in race, class and
              gender in health care,
              income and housing
          •   One-hour small group
              meetings to share service
              learning experiences/times
              to be scheduled
 Tuesday  •   The U.S. juvenile and          • Text, Chapter 13, Criminal justice
    7/7       criminal justice systems
          •   Race, ethnic, and class
              disparities
Wednesday •   Social work in international   • Text, Chapter 16, The globalization of
    7/8       settings                         social work
          •   Work with immigrants and       • Discussion post 5 due incorporating
              refugees                         application of content assignment
                                               (no responses to peers this week)
 Saturday                                      •   Take-home exam and service
   7/11                                            learning portfolio due on Canvas
                                                   by 11:59 p.m.
                                       11


X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Alexander, M. (2012). The new Jim Crow: Mass incarceration in the age of colorblindness.
         NY: New Press.
Ambrosino, R., Ambrosino, R.J., Heffernan, J. & Shuttlesworth, G. (2016). Social work and
         social welfare: An introduction. Boston: Cengage. (available electronically).
Birkland, T.A. (2015). An introduction to the policy process: Theories, concepts, and models of
         public policy making (4th edition). Florence, KY: Routledge.
Brown, L., Langanegger, J.A., Garcia, S., Lewis, T.A., & Biles, R. (2015). Practicing Texas
         politics (16th edition). Boston, MA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.
Clemons, R., & Mcbeth, M.K. (2016). Public policy praxis (3rd Edition). Florence, KY:
         Routledge.
Cox, L. E., Tice, C.J., & Long D. D. (2018). Introduction to social work: An advocacy-based
      profession (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Crofoot, T. L., & Harris, M. S. (2012). An Indian Child Welfare perspective on
      disproportionality in child welfare. Children and Youth Services Review, 34(9), 1667–
      1674.
 Delgado, R., & Stefancic, J. (2017). Critical race theory: an introduction. New York: New
      York University Press.
 Deluca, S., Clampet-Lundquist, S. & Edin, K. (2016). Coming of age in the other America.
          NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
DeParle, J. (2005). American dream: Three women, ten kids, and a nation’s drive to end
         welfare. NY: Penguin Press.
 Edin, K.J., & Shaefer, H.L. (2016). $2.00 a day: Living on almost nothing in America. Boston,
         MA: Houghton-Mifflin Harcourt.
 Engler, M. & Engler, P. (2016). This is an uprising: How nonviolent revolt is shaping the
         twenty-first century. New York: Nation Books.
 Foster, C. H. (2017). Anchor babies and welfare queens: An essay on political rhetoric,
      gendered racism, and marginalization. Women, Gender, and Families of Color, 5(1), 50.
 Hill, M. (2016). Nobody: Casualties of America’s war on the vulnerable, from Ferguson to
      Flint and beyond. New York: Atria.
 Hoefer, R. (2015). Advocacy practice for social justice (3rd edition). Chicago, IL: Lyceum.
 Holmes, S. (2013). Fresh fruit, broken bodies: Migrant farmworkers in the United States.
      Oakland, CA: University of California Press.
Institutional racism & the social work profession. (2007). Retrieved from
      https://www.scribd.com/document/344615801/Institutional-Racism-the-Social-Work-
      Profession.
Jansson, B. (2018). Reluctant welfare state (9th edition). Boston, MA: Brooks Cole Wadsworth.
Karger, H.J., & Stoesz, D. (2017). American social welfare policy: A pluralist approach (8th
      Edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Kolivoski, K. M., Weaver, A., & Constance-Huggins, M. (2014). Critical race theory:
      Opportunities for application in social work practice and policy. Families in Society: The
      Journal of Contemporary Social Services, 95(4), 269–276.
Leighninger, L. (2000). Creating a new profession: the beginnings of social work education in
      the United States. Alexandria, VA: Council on Social Work Education.
                                                 12


Libby, P. (2012). The lobbying strategy handbook: 10 steps to advocating any cause
      effectively. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mattsson, T. (2013). Intersectionality as a useful tool. Affilia, 29(1), 8–17.
Moore, W. (2011). The other Wes Moore: One name, two fates. New York: Spiegel & Grau.
NASW Code of Ethics (2017). Retrieved from
https://www.socialworkers.org/about/ethics/code-of-ethics.
NAW Press. (2018). Social work speaks, 11th edition: NASW policy statements. Washington,
DC: Author.
Popple, P.R. (2018). Social work practice and social welfare policy in the United States: A
  History. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Popple, P.R., & Leighninger, L. (2018). The policy-based profession: An introduction to social
  welfare policy analysis for social workers (7th edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Seccombe, K. (2015). So you think I drive a Cadillac? (4th edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Smith, C.F. (2018). Writing public policy: A practical guide to communicating in the policy-
  making process (5th ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Smith, K.B. (2016). The public policy theory primer (3rd edition). Florence, KY: Routledge.
Stern, M. & Axinn, J. (2017). Social welfare: A history of the American response to need (9th
  edition). New York, NY: Pearson.
Weible, C.M., & Sabatier, P.A. (Eds.). (2017). Theories of the policy process (4th edition).
  Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
                                                13


                                         APPENDIX
                                ASSIGNMENT GUIDELINES
 I.          SERVICE LEARNING                       (counts 25% toward your final grade)
Students are required to complete 10 clock hours of service learning that provide an
opportunity to learn about social welfare systems and diversity within the United States. This
semester all activities will be completed remotely; there will be no face-to-face contact to
protect you and others in the community. You have a choice of organizations and programs
that are posted on the course Canvas website in the service learning file. If you have another
option you would like to pursue, let your instructor know and if it is approved, we will add it to
our list of options. The School of Social Work has a teaching assistant who coordinates service
learning options, so you will have access to help in locating a placement of interest to you and
completing the service learning requirements. Her contact information is
sswservicelearning@austin.utexas.edu.
UT uses a website, GivePulse, https://www.givepulse.com/, which helps you locate a
placement and also tracks the service hours that you input to the website as you complete hours
once you have confirmed the placement.
When you find a placement of interest to you, you are required to contact the organization and
agree to any requirements the agency has (i.e., attending an online orientation, serving as a
volunteer for a specific amount of time which may be beyond the summer session). Most
students complete their hours once a week throughout the semester. It may take time for you
to complete required orientation depending on the agency’s schedule (these hours may be
counted toward the 10 clock hours), so secure your placement early so you don’t have to clock
extra hours at the end of the semester in order to meet course requirements.
The service learning file has a video that steps you through how to secure a placement, enter
your choice, and post hours each time you complete them on the GivePulse site.
As you complete hours, log them into GivePulse. During the semester, you also should keep a
journal of your service learning experiences, noting what you did to assist the organization,
self-reflecting on your experiences and what you are learning, and including any questions that
come up as you volunteer. You also can integrate relevant service learning experiences in your
weekly discussion submissions. Additionally, students will complete the following during the
semester:
• Participation registration and liability agreement: This form is accessible through the
    GivePulse website and is required. You must log in and register on the website when you
    have confirmation from an organization that you will be completing your service learning
    hours there. You must log in and register no later than June 15.
• Agency selection form: A service learning agency selection form (available on Canvas)
    must be submitted once you have secured a placement. This form must be also
    submitted on GivePulse no later than June 15. Note that you can complete the ten hours
    by working in more than one organization; however, the number or organizations should be
    limited so you can gain a better understanding of how the organization operates and the
    services it provides.
                                                 14


• Service learning update summary: Drawing from your journal, you are to submit a brief
  update submitted on Canvas no later than July 1 providing an summary of your
  experiences to date (format available on Canvas in the service learning file). This summary
  will ask you to describe what you have done at the organization(s) to meet the learning
  objectives you established, as well as the number of hours you have completed to date.
  The purpose of this update is so you and the instructor can gauge whether you are on track
  to complete your ten hours or if you need assistance in doing so.
• Oral presentation reflecting on your service learning experience: Students will work in
  small groups, with each individual giving a 3-5 minute presentations on zoom during the
  last week of class, briefly describing their service learning experience, including what
  they did while at the organization, what they learned about the profession and client needs,
  and what they learned about themselves.
• Service learning portfolio: This will include submission of documentation of completion of
  your hours on GivePulse, an evaluation from your supervisor at the organization where you
  completed your hours, and a 3-5 page double-spaced paper focusing on your learning as
  you completed this requirement (note that it is good to keep an electronic version of this
  information for use when applying for admission to the social work major if that is your
  plan and/or applying for graduate school or employment).
      o Service learning reflection: This 3-5 page double-spaced paper should focus on
          your learning as you completed this requirement. It should address the following:
          the name of the agency and a brief description of the services provided and the
          population served; a brief description of your role at the agency and the tasks you
          completed; a summary of the specific activities in which you participated to
          complete your established learning objectives; and a reflection of your learning (the
          most important part of the paper) – e.g., about the organization, the roles of social
          workers if applicable, the experiences of those the organization serves, strengths
          and barriers that exist in meeting client needs including programs and policies, your
          own personal growth/challenges experienced during the semester as you completed
          this assignment, and a brief description of recommendations that could strengthen
          the organization/services provided.
      o Service learning hour log: This information should be downloaded from the
          GivePulse website and documents the 10 hours required to meet the guidelines for
          this assignment. It must be signed (electronic signature is fine) by your agency
          supervisor verifying your hours.
      o Service learning evaluation forms: You are to include a form from your
          supervisor/agency contact person evaluating your work at the agency (available on
          Canvas) and a self-evaluation form evaluating your views about your work as well
          as the agency and giving feedback about your experience there (you will be asked
          to do this by the Service Learning TA with a link to the survey who will then
          provide documentation to me that you have completed the survey).
      Your portfolio is due on Canvas in a word or PDF document no later than June 11
      at 11:59 p.m.
                                               15


     II.     DISCUSSION POSTINGS INTEGRATING WEEKLY CONTENT AND
             ASSIGNMENTS                             (counts 40% toward your final grade)
     Students are required to complete five weekly assignments that are then integrated into a
     learning reflection that integrates readings, content covered in asynchronous materials
     (PowerPoint slides, videos), and their service learning experiences. Prompts for each
     week’s reflections will be posted on Canvas. Note that your discussion post should not be
     a regurgitation of readings or class content or a listing of what you did at your service
     learning placement, but your reflections about what you read, what was discussed in
     videos, the PowerPoints slides, and other materials you reviewed, and your service learning
     experience. Make connections between these components of the course, or connect content
     to personal or other “real world experiences” (e.g., previous and current life experiences,
     the Texas legislature, national and global policies and issues). There is no set expectation
     about what should be discussed in your reflection other than it must incorporate the
     information called for in the prompt and incorporate the week’s readings and other
     materials, as students will have different interests and perspectives about what is important
     to them and their learning.
     Reflections should generally be about one page single spaced, though there will be no
     penalty if you include additional pages. Citations should be included as appropriate
     following APA format. Initial postings will be due on Wednesday evenings at 11:59 p.m.
     Then no later than Friday evenings at 11:59 p.m. you will read and respond to at least two
     peers’ postings. Responses to peers should be between 1/3 to ½ in length, though after you
     have responded to two peers you can continue the conversation with shorter comments.
     Note that postings can be either a response to a student’s initial posting or a response made
     to another student’s initial posting. The idea is to deepen the conversation by asking
     additional questions, integrating content from other sources, and offering other ways of
     looking at the perspectives shared in the discussion. Since this course focuses on cultural
     diversity, it is suggested that you use the discussion board to learn from those who have
     had different experiences and different ways of thinking than you might have. Thus, it is
     suggested that you vary responses to different peers each week, rather than engaging in a
     dialogue with two individuals the entire semester who have similar life experiences and
     share your perspectives. Students are expected to be respectful as they dialogue with each
     other and to keep content shared confidential (see course and university policies.) Students
     will receive up to 8 points each week for their posts.
     Initial posts will be due at 11:59 p.m. on the following dates: Wednesdays June 10,
     June 17, June 24, July 1, and July 8. Responses to peers will be due at 11:59 p.m. on
     Fridays June 12, June 19, June 26, and July 3. No peer response is due the last week
     of class.
III.     CULTURAL DIVERSITY PAPER (counts 20% toward your final grade)
This course focuses on cultural diversity in the United States, and topics on various social
welfare issues incorporate content on strengths and challenges experienced by various cultural
groups. The course also incorporates content on the intersectionality of cultural identities: i.e.,
race, ethnicity, class, sex, gender and gender identity, sexual orientation, religion, ability/
                                                   16


disability, immigration status, refugee status, and the impact of the intersectionality (i.e. being
female, lesbian and Latinx) on an individual’s positionality within society (access to resources
and power, experiences with oppression or privilege, and how that affects individual, family,
and community outcomes. “In social work, intersectionality has been used as an analytical
approach during recent years and it has been a way to understand both complex identities and
how social structures affect people’s living conditions” (Mattson, 2013, p. 10).
You are asked to complete a 5 page double-spaced paper addressing the intersectional nature of
cultural diversity in the United States by examining two or more intersectional identities. You
should start by identifying two or more intersecting identities involving race, ethnicity, class,
gender, sexual orientation, age, nationality, religion, and /or disability, then critically analyze
the inequities encountered by a person with these intersectional identities.
Your paper should follow the following outline. Include bolded headings except for your
introduction (APA guidelines don’t call for a heading with this heading):
    •   Introduction
             o Identify the identities you are writing about and why you are interested in
                exploring them
             o Basic demographic information
    •   Social Structures and Inequities
             o Identify some of the social structures that surround a person with these identities
             o What inequities are present?
    •   Oppression
             o What types of oppression exist for a person with these identities?
             o How do social structures contribute?
             o What concepts of power surround these identities?
    •   Strengths
             o What strengths might a person with these intersecting identities demonstrate and
                why?
    •   Intersectional Viewpoint
             o What would have been lost in other sections of the paper by examining
                identities without intersectionality?
    •   Unconscious Assumptions and Reflections
             o Think back to when you started writing this paper. What assumptions did you
                have about these identities or what you might find?
             o What remained invisible to you at the start?
             o How have your assumptions changed?
    •   Conclusion
             o Include a short conclusion summarizing your discussion.
This is a formal paper but may be written in first person due to the reflective nature of the
assignment. APA format should be used in formatting and for citations. A minimum of four
citations must be used for this paper with one of them the required use of the Mattson article
(available through UT libraries/link is in course readings on SW 310 Canvas website).
                                                 17


Papers should be submitted in a word document (not a PDF file) on Canvas by 11:59 p.m.
on Monday, June 29.
.
IV.     TAKE-HOME EXAM (counts 15% toward your final grade)
Students will view a film (available on Netflix and Amazon in class which will be used as a
case study for a take-home exam, applying content covered in the course to the film. The exam
will be short-answer essay and will be posted on Canvas at least one week before it is due.
Students are expected to complete this exam independently and will verify upon submission of
the exam that all completed work is their own. The exam will be due on Canvas Saturday,
July 11 at 11:59 p.m.
                                               18
