                Sociocultural Influences on Learning (ALD 327/AFR 372D)
                                           Fall, 2019
                                Unique Numbers: 09095/30115
                                 University of Texas at Austin
                              Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
                                       Tuesdays, 4-7pm
                                            SZB 278
Instructor: Dr. Noah De Lissovoy
Pronouns: he/him/his
Office Hours: Thursdays, 1:30-3pm
Office: SZB 528L
Email: delissovoy@austin.utexas.edu
Phone: (512) 232-1954
REQUIRED TEXTS
    •    Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African
         American Students, 2nd Edition
    •    Angela Valenzuela, Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics
         of Caring
    •    Course Reader (available from Jenn’s Copies, 2518 Guadalupe St.)
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is devoted to exploring the relationships between education, culture, and
society. It will focus on: structures of social and educational inequality, in particular as they
relate to race, class and gender; processes of power and control in education, as they are
expressed in curriculum, policy, and pedagogy; education as a process of social and
cultural reproduction; and teaching as a form of intervention in these processes. The course
will give special attention to the experiences and educational conditions of those who have
been marginalized within U.S. schools. It is expected that in this course students will
become familiar with the sociological, cultural, and political contexts and dimensions of
education in U.S. society, will come to understand relationships of power within society
and as they are expressed in schooling, and will develop the foundational knowledge
necessary for working with children and youth from diverse backgrounds.
TEACHING PHILOSOPHY
I believe that it is important for educators to engage intellectually with central questions in
their discipline in order to be effective in their work. I also believe that intellectual and
practical issues in education cannot be separated from political and ethical issues: to think


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 2
honestly about education means confronting injustices. I encourage everyone to express
their ideas on issues we take up, and also to think critically about the limits of our own
perspectives in order to enlarge and transform them. It is important for all students to feel
comfortable sharing their ideas and engaging with the contributions of others. I am
committed to the learning of all, and expect students also to be committed to the course.
Please do not hesitate to approach me with any questions you may have during the course.
POLICIES
Attendance: After the first absence, for each additional absence (with the exception of
documented illnesses or medical emergencies) students will lose 3 points from their final
course grade.
Academic Integrity: All work must be your own. If referring to ideas or information from
others, make sure that you cite the source. No credit will be given for work that violates
this principle.
Late Work: Reading Responses will not be accepted if turned in after the deadline. All
other written assignments will lose two points if turned in past the deadline.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc): I will gladly honor your request to
address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING BASIS
Note: Extended guidelines for the following assignments are provided at the end of this
syllabus.
Reading Responses
Each week for which reading is assigned (except for Oct. 8 and Oct. 29) you will turn in a
response starting from a prompt that I provide. This assignment asks you to engage
rigorously with key ideas in the readings. The response should make specific reference to
the text while developing your own analysis. It must address the prompt explicitly. (Enter
your response in the submissions field under Assignments on Canvas.) The reading
responses are due the Monday before class by 11:59pm. No late assignments will be
accepted.
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay you will reflect on your life experience as it relates to the topics and ideas
covered in class. You will describe how your own identity and development have been
influenced by the social and cultural processes in education we are studying, and you will
analyze your experiences to explain their importance and meanings. The Autobiographical
Essay (in hard copy) is due on October 8.


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 3
Service Learning
This course includes a 15-20 hour service learning component which you must
complete in order to receive credit for the class. It is your responsibility to contact one of
the sites on the Service Learning Opportunities list (or an equivalent site) to complete
your volunteer service learning. The supervising staff member at your site will be asked
to sign off on a form certifying that you have completed your required hours. You must
let me know the site you have chosen by Sep. 17; the certification form is due on Dec. 3.
Service Learning Analysis
This assignment consists of five brief reflections on your experiences at your service
learning site. Each of the reflections will focus on a different topic, and in each you will
combine close observation with careful interpretation and analysis. The reflections will
be turned in in two installments. Service Learning Analysis (Part I) is due on Oct.29;
Service Learning Analysis (Part II) is due on Nov. 19.
Group Presentation
In small groups, you will undertake an oral presentation at the beginning of one class session.
This presentation should be related to the topic and reading of the day, but should bring a new
perspective or direction to it. This is an open-ended and creative assignment, which asks you to
take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening the discussion of it.
Final Reflective Essay
In this essay you will reflect on what you have learned during the course, and how it has
affected your thinking about teaching, learning, and/or schooling. While you will engage
with specific course concepts and readings that have made a difference to you, the
assignment is subjective in nature, and asks you to describe, from your own perspective, your
intellectual and emotional growth in relation to this material. The Final Reflective Essay (in
hard copy) is due on Dec. 6.
Participation
Attendance and participation in class is important to facilitate your own learning and that of
others. Our discussion depends on all voices being shared and heard. In order to engage in
an informed way in class discussions, it is important that you carefully read all assigned
readings prior to class, and that you bring the readings with you to class.
Assignment                                               Points
Reading Responses                                        20
Autobiographical Essay                                   15
Service Learning Analysis                                20
Group Presentation                                       10
Final Reflective Essay                                   20
Participation                                            15
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 4
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F
UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of
the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code
which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because
we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning
or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies
to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of
resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if
you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only
do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
(video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/


                                                                ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 5
Counseling and Mental Health Center
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is
often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life
events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops,
private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more
than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your
call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust
your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation come from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.
 • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
      occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
      entering the building.
 • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
      during the first week of class.
 • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
      Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
      Prevention Services office.
 • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
      procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 6
and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
    or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title
IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title
IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before
talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be
sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone
for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.


                                                         ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 7
  SCHEDULE
Date    Topic                   Reading                                   Due
Sep. 3  Introduction to Course
Sep. 10 Race, Racism, and        • Tara Yosso: “Whose Culture Has
        Deficit Thinking            Capital?” (R 1-24)
                                 • Lois Weiner: “Challenging Deficit
                                    Thinking” (R 25-28)
Sep. 17 Race, Poverty, and       • Pedro Noguera: selection from City     Service
        Social Reproduction         Schools and the American Dream        Learning
                                    (R 29-59)                             Site
                                 • Adrienne Dixson, Kristen Buras,        Selection;
                                    & Elizabeth Jeffers: “The Color of    Group
                                    Reform” (R 61-72)                     Presentat-
                                                                          ion
Sep. 24 Power and Ideology       • Peter McLaren: Selection from Life     Group
                                    in Schools (R 73-88)                  Presentat-
                                                                          ion
Oct. 1  Class, Corporatization,  • Jean Anyon: “Social Class and the      Group
        and Education              Hidden Curriculum of Work” (R 89-      Presentat-
                                   114)                                   ion
                                 • David Hursh: “Assessing No Child
                                   Left Behind and the Rise of
                                   Neoliberal Education Policies” (R
                                   115-140)
Oct. 8  Critical Pedagogy        • Paulo Freire: “On the Indispensable    Autobio-
                                    Qualities of Progressive Teachers     graphical
                                    for their Better Performance” (R      Essay
                                    141-148)
Oct. 15 Gender Bias and          • American Association of
        Service Learning De-        University Women (AAUW):
        Briefing                    “How Schools Shortchange Girls”
                                    (R 149-171)
Oct. 22 Gender, Sexuality, and   • Claudia Cervantes-Soon: “Mujeres       Group
        Discrimination              Truchas: Urban Girls Redefining       Presentat-
                                    Smartness in a Dystopic Global        ion
                                    South” (R 173-186)
                                 • Cris Mayo: “The Tolerance that
                                    Dare Not Speak Its Name” (R 187-
                                    200)


                                                        ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 8
Oct. 29 Culture, Language, and   • Valenzuela, Chapter 2: pp. 33-60;     Service
        Education                   Chapter 3 (partial): pp. 61-75       Learning
                                                                         Analysis I;
                                                                         Group
                                                                         Presentat-
                                                                         ion
Nov. 5  Cultural Difference and  • Valenzuela, Chapter 3 (partial): pp.
        Marginalization             75-113; Chapter 5 (partial) pp. 161-
                                    181
Nov. 12 Culture and Resistance   • Valenzuela, Chapter 6 (partial): pp.  Group
                                    227-245                              Presentat-
                                 • Daniel Solórzano & Dolores            ion
                                    Delgado Bernal: “Examining
                                    transformational resistance” (R
                                    201-206)
Nov. 19 Teaching, Curriculum     • Ladson-Billings, Chapters 2-4: pp.    Service
        and Social Context          17-84                                Learning
                                                                         Analysis II
Nov. 26 Culturally Relevant      • Ladson-Billings, Chapters 5-7: pp.    Group
        Teaching                    85-156                               Presentat-
                                                                         Ion
Dec. 3  Revising Final Essay and                                         Service
        Summing Up                                                       Learning
                                                                         Comp.
                                                                         Form;
                                                                         Final
                                                                         Reflective
                                                                         Essay Due
                                                                         Dec. 6 at
                                                                         12pm


                                                               ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 9
Reading Responses
Each week for which reading is assigned (except for Sep. 10 and Oct. 29) you will turn in
a response starting from a prompt that I provide. This assignment asks you to engage
rigorously with key ideas in the readings. The response should make specific reference to
the text while developing your own analysis. It must address the prompt explicitly. (Enter
your response in the submissions field under Assignments on Canvas.) The reading
responses are due on the Monday before class by 11:59pm. No late assignments will be
accepted.
Additional Notes:
    •   Responses should be 300-400 words.
    •   If you are having technical difficulties with Canvas, email your response directly.
        Responses must be posted or received by 11:59pm on Monday to receive credit.
    •   The response should directly address the prompt; it asks you to develop your own
        analysis, with close reference to the reading.
    •   Your response should focus on key ideas in the text, rather than on general
        speculations. Be specific in your writing.
    •   Ten reading responses will be due during the course; each is worth 2 points.


                                                              ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 10
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay (4-5 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on your own life
experience as it relates to the topics and ideas we have been considering in class. The
question for you to respond to in this assignment is:
    •    Who are you, and how has your identity been influenced by, and constructed
         in relationship to your educational experiences?
“Educational experiences” includes school, but can also include other educational
experiences in your family, with peers, or in other contexts. This essay is concerned with
how your development is connected to the educational, social, and cultural context you
have come from. Along the way you should consider how some of the racial, class,
cultural, and gender understandings, differences, and processes that we have
discussed have affected you (and also, if you want, how you have responded). You
should provide specific descriptions of experiences to make your essay more vivid, and
should analyze these experiences to explain their importance and meanings. (You do
not need to tell your whole life story.)
For this assignment, it is important to connect your description to the topics and ideas we
have been concerned with in class; however, you do not have to cite specific pages in the
texts or lectures.
The Autobiographical Essay (in hard copy) is due on October 8 at the beginning of class.
Evaluation
This essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1) specific discussion of
personal experience and identity, 2) depth of analysis and insights, 3) connections drawn
to ideas and topics considered in the course.


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 11
Group Presentation
In small groups, you will undertake an oral presentation at the beginning of one class session.
This presentation should be related to the topic and reading of the day, but should bring a new
perspective or direction to it. This is an open-ended and creative assignment, which asks you to
take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening the discussion of it.
The presentation must relate to topic for the day; it may or may not deal with specific
parts of the text or texts. It is great to engage with the text, but do not summarize it. This
is not a report, but rather an analysis and discussion. Plan your presentation carefully for
about 15 minutes; if you reach 20 minutes you will be stopped.
Key guidelines: 1) do not summarize the text; 2) plan for 15 minutes.
Some ways to approach the presentation (there are other possibilities):
    • Identification of a key idea or two from the reading and discussion of its meaning
        and implications
    • Consideration of a possible application of one of the ideas in a school or other
        context
    • Description of a particular context, event, organization, or institution for which
        the topic of the day is relevant or dramatized
    • Discussion of current event and how it can be understood with reference to the
        topic/reading
    • Contextualization of reading/author in broader tradition, social movement, school
        of thought, etc.
Notes:
    • You will come up to the front of the class for the presentation.
    • Powerpoint/Prezi is good, but not required; however, it helps to have some kind
        of visual aid.
    • Do not leave time in your presentation for discussion, since I have already
        planned discussion time after each presentation.
    • If you invite interaction from the class, make sure it is for no more than 5 minutes
        (it should be well-structured and relevant).
    • Avoid video clips, unless absolutely necessary.
Evaluation
Presentations will be evaluated on: 1) depth of analysis and creativity of presentation; 2)
quality of planning and collaboration among presenters; 3) insights offered on topic
and/or reading of the day.


                                                                ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 12
Service Learning Analysis
This assignment consists of five brief reflections (1 full single-spaced page for each) on
your experiences at your service learning site, in which you will explore aspects of the
work you are involved in, the organization itself, and your own responses and
accomplishments. Each of the reflections will focus on a different topic, and in each you
should include the following two elements:
1) Description: Provide specific and detailed description of what you see, hear, and
learn. Try to create a vivid picture in the reader’s mind of the place or actions you are
observing.
2) Interpretation: Reflect upon the meanings of the events and processes you have
described. Using the questions provided as a guide, suggest what you think might be
some of the reasons for what you have described, as well as its effects and significance.
Your descriptive and interpretive comments do not necessarily have to be separated in
different sections, but both should be present in each reflection.
Service Learning Analysis Part I (reflections 1-3) is due on Oct. 29; Service Learning
Analysis Part II (reflections 4-5) is due on Nov. 19.
Reflection 1: Organization Context
Describe the context and mission of the organization you are working with, and your own
thoughts about it. Consider the communities served by the site, the range of participants,
the needs it aims to address, the mission or values of the organization, and its structure
and setup. You can draw from conversations with staff, observations, organization
literature, etc.
     Ø Interpretation questions: Why has this organization chosen to focus on their
         particular mission? What are some of the key challenges associated with the
         central projects that this organization has taken on? What are your initial
         impressions of the structure and relationships at the site?
Reflection 2: Your Role and Relationships
Document the specific role and tasks you have at the organization, your relationship to
participants and staff, and your feelings about your service learning at this early stage.
Describe specific responsibilities, interactions, events, or projects that give texture to
your individual experience as a volunteer, rather than focusing on the organization as a
whole.
     Ø Interpretation questions: How does it feel to you so far to be engaged in this
         project? What is exciting about your experience? What is difficult? How are
         you negotiating the relationships you are involved in with participants?
Reflection 3: Asset-Based Description
In class we have emphasized the importance of an asset-based perspective on students
and communities (as opposed to a deficit perspective). Focusing on the
students/participants you have been working with, describe the strengths and resources
that they bring from their experience, families, and/or communities, including the specific
interactions that demonstrate these assets.


                                                              ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 13
    Ø Interpretation questions: What strengths and resources allow this person(s) to
        persist and progress in their lives and/or learning? What understandings have you
        gained from working with them? How can the assets they bring with them from
        their family/community help to challenge deficit perspectives that might be
        applied to them or to their community?
Reflection 4: An Accomplishment
Describe one accomplishment or achievement, however large or small, that you were
either responsible for yourself, or that you have been involved in, with regard to serving
participants of the organization. (This could be a student making progress in one area,
leading a dialogue or conversation, establishing a curriculum or plan of action, etc.)
    Ø Interpretation questions: What were the essential factors that made this
        accomplishment possible? How can this achievement be sustained and deepened?
        What can be learned from this experience that could be applied to other similar
        situations?
Reflection 5: Social Justice Commitment
Consider in what ways the site at which you are participating is committed to a project of
social justice that aims to broadly transform social conditions for the communities it
serves. Describe whether the staff and participants see the work they are involved in as
reaching beyond the amelioration of individual cases to broader change, and the ways in
which they enact this commitment.
    Ø Interpretation questions: What does social justice mean to this organization? In
        your view, does the work of this site move toward this goal? Has your
        participation altered your own understandings and views of social justice?
Evaluation
The Service Learning Analysis will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1)
carefulness and specificity of descriptions of site and experiences, 2) depth and interest of
interpretive comments, 3) evidence provided of engagement with service learning
organization, 4) clarity and coherence of writing.


                                                                ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 14
 Final Reflective Essay
In this essay (5-7 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on what you have learned
during the course and its various assignments, and how it has affected your thinking
about teaching, learning, and/or schooling. In the course of your discussion, you should
engage specifically with course concepts and readings that have made a difference to
you. The assignment is subjective in nature; in this essay, you should coherently describe,
from your own perspective, your intellectual and emotional growth in relation to this
material. (Some questions that might spur your thinking for this assignment: How did
the course, and connected field experiences, challenge or change your thinking? How did
it confirm or extend your own insights or experiences? How did it feel to you to work
through the arguments presented? What remains as an important problem or gap for
you?)
In referring to course texts, make sure you use specific references, including
quotations (provide page numbers). Do not summarize the texts; instead, they will serve
as tools to help you work through your ideas. You can also refer to your own life
experience to help you develop your narrative if you wish; however, this is not an
autobiographical essay but rather a narrative of your own response to the course content.
The Final Reflective Essay (in hard copy) is due Dec 6 at 12pm in SZB 528. (Assignments
turned in late will be lowered two points.)
Evaluation
The final reflective essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1) depth
and interest of reflections, analysis, and ideas, 2) specific engagement with course
readings and concepts, and 3) organization and coherence of overall argument/narrative.
