                                             Experimental Storytelling
                                              (06190 | 06320 | 06640)
                                                     Spring 2020
Class Meets: Thursdays | 9:30 – 12:30 | BMC 4.206 classroom AND CMA 6.154 lab
 Instructor: Prof. Erin Reilly                                       Office: BMC 4.368
 Email: ebreilly@utexas.edu                                  Erin’s Office hours: By Appointment.
 Phone: 207-251-1617                                         To avoid the back and forth of finding a time to
                                                             meet. (https://calendly.com/ebreilly)
 TA: Jeongmin Ham                                            Jeongmin’s Office: BMC 4th floor
 Email: jham112@utexas.edu                                   Office hours: By appointment
 Lab TA: Jesse Easdon                                        Lab: CMA 6.154
 Email: easdonj@utexas.edu
                                                             Lab is open the following hours:
 Undergraduate Lab Manager: Joshua Ramirez                       Mon: 11:30 AM – 2:00 PM
                                                                 Wed: 11:30 AM – 4:00 PM
 Email: joshramirez@utexas.edu
                                                                 Tues / Thurs: 6:30 - 9:00 PM
                                                                 Fridays 11:00 AM – 4:00 PM
 Jeongmin Ham is my TA who is your first point of contact for questions about assignments or your grades.
 Jesse Easdon is my TA who is working on TXI Client projects and responsible for my lab. He is here to help you
 learn any of the tools necessary to be successful in immersive.
 Joshua Ramirez is my Undergraduate Lab Manager who organizes the monthly Moody Meetups and is an
 approachable, near-peer mentor whose purpose is to help you learn during and outside of class. Joshua will often
 be the first person you contact if you have questions about demo / lab assignments. I encourage you to take
 advantage of his time during Lab hours (Mon-Thurs above).
                                            Course Description
As the media landscape becomes populated with more and more screens—from television and computer screens
to mobile displays, but also virtual reality headsets, other wearable devices, and a rapidly growing Internet of
Things—we have quite literally a whole world of possibilities for creating experimental storytelling experiences.
These technologies offer unique potential for creating new and different kinds of experiences, including ones that
respond with increasing precision to people’s behavior and input. So how might these screens (and the ecosystem
within which they function) change the stories we share, but also how we share them? What might be the next
step beyond the screen?
This course aims to introduce students to experimental storytelling that explores our senses, the physical and
virtual world to create an immersive story experience. Using design thinking and human computer interaction,
students will ideate, synthesize concepts, create user scenarios based on the story’s audience and develop a POC
(proof of concept) for feedback and entry into becoming new creators.
Course Learning Outcomes
     ● Expose students to new affordances of emerging media.
     ● Introduce students to different models of storytelling
     ● Encourage students to test out multiple forms of storytelling through their mobile device and computer.
                                                             1


What will I learn?
Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
    • Positive attitude
    • Team collaboration
    • Thinking skills (develop observation skills, divergent thinking and identifying patterns)
    • Self-management
Learning Outcomes
    1. Expose students to the future of the media & entertainment industry
    2. Introduce students to different ways to enter a story
    3. Understand how to leverage the affordances of media
    4. Construct experimental stories that explore game mechanics, location-based stories and public
         interactives
    5. Learn how to activate fans through unique content strategies
How will I learn?
    • Writing Assignments                                            •   Group Activities
    • Guest Lectures                                                 •   Real World Client Projects
    • Demos
Pre-requisites for the course: N/A
How to succeed in this course:
My role is to be a “guide on the side”… to help you acquire the skills needed to succeed as a Creative Director /
Experience Designer / Project Manager / Engagement Strategist.
Your role is to show up, be present, have a willingness to learn, do good work and accept constructive feedback
from myself and your peers.
                      Overall, let’s have some fun …we’re talking about our passions after all!
                                                            2


                                            Course Requirements
 Recommended Texts
      •    Jane McGonigal, Reality is Broken (New York: The Penguin Press, 2011)
      •    Carolyn Handler Miller. Digital Storytelling 4th Edition: A creator’s guide to interactive entertainment (New
           York: Taylor & Francis Group CRS Press, 2020)
      •    Matt Madden, 99 Ways to Tell a Story (London: Penguin Books, Ltd, 2005)
      •    Don Norman, Design of Every Day Things (New York: Basic Books, 2013)
 I may periodically post additional required readings to the class website at Canvas. These readings will be short
 articles in mainstream publications, such as newspapers and magazines, that help shed contemporary light on issues
 discussed in this course.
 Required Device
 Mobile SMART phone, Computer and ability to record, edit and publish photos and videos.
Classroom Expectations
Class attendance
We meet only once a week. Attendance is required at all class, presentation, client and team meetings. There will
be no excused absences. Failure to attend any of these meetings will affect your grade and could reduce your
final grade by as much as two letter grades. Attendance means showing up to the class or meeting on time.
Habitual lateness will affect your grade.
Class participation
Teamwork: This course is primarily structured around teamwork. You will apply for your team role for each
project, and the bulk of your work in the course will be carried out and evaluated based on these teams. Teams
will consist of varying personalities, skills and interests and you must find a way to manage these differences. The
ability to cooperate, to communicate and to work effectively is essential to creating successful strategies and
creative briefs, both in this class and in the real world. Once students have been assigned to teams, I will not
adjust the membership of these teams. Although I don’t anticipate any problems, if issues do arise I expect you to
resolve them yourselves, just as you would in a real-world job situation.
Deadlines: This class simulates the real world, and in the real world, deadlines are non-negotiable. All
assignments must be handed in on time. Late assignments or projects will not be accepted and you will not earn
any points (i.e. you will receive a grade of 0) for that assignment. The usual litany of excuses (I slept through my
alarm, I missed the bus, I have a cold) won’t work. In the real world, failure to meet a deadline could result in you
losing your job. Now is the time to practice time management and adherence to deadlines.
Time management: This course is very demanding on your time. Your teammates in this class will judge you on
how much, and the quality of, work you contribute to your class project. Do not lose track of what is most
important.
Communication: The primary way I will communicate with you outside of class is through canvas. You are
responsible for making sure you get any messages from me and you are responsible for the content of those
announcements. I may notify you via canvas about a change in meeting times or assignment deadlines. Failure to


   check your canvas does not excuse you from meeting the responsibilities outlined in the message. At a minimum,
   you should check your canvas once every day.
   Plagiarism: Everything you produce in this class must be your original work. If you have help from anyone outside
   this class it will be considered a breach of UT’s policy on Scholastic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
   Assignments
   Attendance (Activities / Readings / Videos / Quizzes) | 10% | 400 Pts
   Weekly activities and discussions in the classroom as well as on canvas will be graded with a pass or fail (10 pts
   each class). This means, you participated and completed the work – pass; you didn’t -- fail. I expect you to “Lean
   In” to this course. It’s not a course you can sit back and just pass.
   This grade is for informal activities and discussions during class. They are some of the most valuable and
   interactive aspects of our course and offers us an opportunity to share diverse insights, reflect and collaborate on
   the course concepts. This is an outlet for exploratory learning and expressing ideas and perspectives beyond the
   projects.
   In discussions, you should avoid merely a compliment (e.g. "Interesting post...") or support (e.g. "I agree with
   you...") of another student's work. You will not be given credit for activity or discussions that do not meaningfully
   contribute to or expand the conversation, as determined by the instructor’s assessment.
   Lastly, the following are required readings and videos that will support your learning in this field.
     •   Digital Storytelling, 4th Edition by Carolyn Handler Miller 2020
             •    Chapter 1: Storytelling, Old and New & QUIZ! (100 pts)
             •    Chapter 9: Guidelines: Creating a New Project (25 pts – based on use of it in Guest Experience)
             •    Chapter 18: Immersive Narratives and Immersive Spaces (25 Pts – reference in last Demo
                  Recommendation)
     •   Watch Gunther Kress videos on Concepts in Multimodality and take QUIZ! (100 pts)
   Social Media Experiment - @48moods | 20%
   In numerology the number 48 resonates with creative expression, so nothing better than having Experimental
   Storytelling be a culmination of creative expression made through a collective story together. Stories are
   complex, yet simple; participatory, yet controlled; and unequivocally are visceral, can trigger behavior and over
   time are reflective of our individual agency, our shared moment in time and the culture that we live in. The
   syllabus has 2 themes per week with specific days (Sunday and Tuesday) scheduled to post and your reflection on
   your peers due by day of class (Thursday). Using 99 Ways to Tell a Story as inspiration, your goal with each
   assignment is to compose an original photo and haiku that best represents your personal take on the theme
   proposed, then post it to @48moods on Instagram.
   Haiku is a traditional form of Japanese poetry. Haiku poems consist of 3 lines. The first and last lines of a Haiku
   have 5 syllables and the middle line has 7 syllables. The lines rarely rhyme. Many people consider Haikus as
   unfinished poems, a poem that the reader finishes in his or her mind. Often keeping a journal is encouraged in
   creative classes, a place to write down ideas, draw images, and jot down potential projects. In a digital-first
   world, my choice for using @48moods as a form of journaling is for you to learn to get a nugget of a story idea
   down quickly, to practice being creative “in public” – giving way to better understanding how to pitch an idea in
   its simplest form and have a chance for public to react immediately. When writing your own haiku, it’s best to
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                        4


   check the syllables with this site: http://www.haikusyllablecounter.com/ I’ve also made suggestions each week
   on ways to try different ways to consider the image and its relationship to the haiku.
   Over the course of the semester, sharing and commenting on each other’s work… the posts that evoke a visceral,
   behavioral or reflective moment for you individually is encouraged. You can critique anyone in the class.
   However, please do not critique the same person each week. We will be checking to make sure you’re critiquing
   different people each week. However, if you love a peer’s work, by all means …comment, heart it as often as you
   want. Be ready to share your comments on your own work as well as your peers… students will randomly be
   called on each class to reflect on @48moods. For examples, see @erinbreilly.
   ** NOTE: Grad Students are required to do an extra project to complete their grade for this project. Starting
   Week 7, Grad Students will work together to propose an experimental book curating the collective story into a
   sellable product. The goal is to reimagine what a book can be and explore some of the core lessons taught
   throughout this course. Week 10, Grad Students will have all material in hand to curate and edit completing it by
   Week 13 to go to the printers and be ready to sell to peers and guests during Week 15 showcase. **
   TXI – New Recruit Story Kit” | 15%
   The first 6 weeks of class will train you how to work in teams and develop an idea from story concept to
   completion. The entire class will be broken into unique teams that build on your core expertise to hone in on
   skills you are best at contributing within a team project. The class will work on the same concept together to
   complete the final product. Our goal is to revise and expand upon a developed interactive story experience that is
   the current “Acceptance Letter” to welcome the first cohort of 48 students into the new specialization, Texas
   Immersive. (You’re a wizard, Harry)
   So, what is Texas Immersive?
   Interactive, intimate, experiential …the top three words that describe “Immersive” today. From Disney putting
   guests at the center of their own Star Wars world to Meow Wolf’s mantra of subverting reality… never before has
   there been more attention fixated on media that surrounds and envelopes its audiences, allowing them fully
   embodied experiences. Immersive connects multiple disciplines from theater to themed attractions to museums,
   retail, and public spaces. Each experience created has a strong ability to affect the audience on a deep level of
   engagement, and often use a variety of mixed media blending physical and digital interactions that connect the
   senses.
   This convergence of disciplines will form the foundation of Texas Immersive.
   Texas Immersive is an interdisciplinary specialization focused on four key areas: Audience – Story – Technology –
   Innovation. Developing these competencies will foster deep emotional connections, create lasting impact and
   prepare our students to take on real-world challenges. Overall, students will learn to become Experience
   Designers… those who understand how to target and build stronger relationships with audiences; tell stories
   and drive meaningful interactions in a connected environment; and create strong franchises using audience-
   centric activation models.
   Overall, this initial project will teach you how to design a captivating story and use game mechanics and different
   forms of engagement to help the “new recruits” push the story forward. Teams will shop for supplies, design all
   the assets and build out the story challenges. We will play test the 1st prototype and iterate if need be to ready it
   for mass production (after all up to 48 new UT students will receive this in May).
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                        5


   Sandbox Demos/Analysis! @CMA 6.154 | 15%
   The best way to understand the future of storytelling is to experience it; to immerse yourself. Though I
   encourage you to make use of the Experience Lab as often as you can (See ULA Lab Hours above), you are
   required to visit it 3x throughout the semester on the specific dates noted in the schedule above.
   Your grade will be a combination of your 3 visits. You will need to Sign up to use the lab ahead of time and choose
   a demo from the recommended list for the first 2 Demo/Analysis requests, the 3rd analysis is your choice. All 3
   experiences need to be play tested in the Imagine Lab. You can recommend another demo but it must be
   approved by the Professor first. Take a look at the Lab Demo library for ideas.
   Each time, you are required to watch it / play with it and then offer an analysis (1-2 pages) of the experience. The
   analysis should incorporate at least two ideas or concepts from Professor Reilly’s lectures. It’s also encouraged to
   incorporate relevant material from other classes and outside experience, in addition to the readings assigned or
   the books recommended in this course. Keep in mind, this is a scholarly research analysis. Though a certain
   informality in tone is permissible, even desirable, student writing should be well-written, coherently organized,
   and thought-provoking. Your analysis should make the students want to demo this experience.
   Final Project: Real-World Client Project
   Public Interactive Experience | 30%
   We communicate to connect with other human beings. We communicate to express our feelings or to share a
   story. We communicate to create a better world. Throughout our existence, humans have developed new ways
   to communicate from grunts and groans to language to the printing press and the internet. Every day students
   and faculty at UT are discovering new ways to communicate, new ways to make the human experience better.
   Our real-world client for this semester will be the UT Pop Up Institute on Sexual and Gender Diversity (link). They
   would like us to build out an immersive experience for participants to experience and understand their core
   themes of the Pop Up during the scheduled June event they plan to hold.
   Each student will submit an Individual Poster and participate in the Brainstorm Session (10% of Grade). Through a
   democratic process, the class and client will work towards combining some of these ideas into an overall
   experience targeted to the client’s needs. This project will be led by a Producer and Creative Director with team
   leaders running different sections of development to collectively work as an experience design team. Goals of the
   project include developing a guest experience treatment, pitching ideas to the client, and developing a prototype
   in the form of a location-based story or a visitor center interactive experience, or possible combination. This
   story experiences should consider the audience and offer both a lean-back and lean-in experiences. They will
   develop across multiple mediums ensuring that the team has thoughtfully considered the audience and how they
   learn about it, the actual immersive experience and what participants receive or leave with to carry the idea
   forward. Teams will need to use a variety of tools to schedule tasks (i.e.:Trello), to communicate across teams
   (i.e.: Discord) and a shared Google Drive as means to collaborate on production assets (with set versioning
   standards) and show works in progress. With feedback, the team will develop a working prototype with a video
   showcase (up to 3 minutes) and presentation to share with the public Week 15.
   Sandbox Recommendation! @CMA 6.154 | 10%
   Based on class lectures and readings, you will be asked to make 2 recommendations of a new demo. The goal of
   to involve you in active processes of learning beyond the classroom and understand the wider community
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                       6


   participating in experimental stories. You need to select an individual platform or experience and identify it’s
   unique affordances.
   Grades
   The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to which you
   have done so.
   Assignments                                             Points possible                    Percent of Total Grade
   Social Media Experiment - @48moods                              400 (undergrad)                       20%
   Grad Students will curate / edit book                        400+100 for 500 (grad)
   TXI – New Recruit Story Kit” Class Project              100 – Team Work / Peer Review                 15%
                                                            100 – Participation in Activities
                                                                100 – Completed Final
                                                                      300 TOTAL
   Imagine Lab Experience @CMA 6.154                              30 – 3 Demo Visits                     15%
   3 visits to demo Immersive Experiences and write an         300 – 3 Analysis Papers
   analysis on each.                                                  330 TOTAL
   Final Project with Real-World Client                                                                  30%
   10% of the grade is based on your individual                 100 – Individual Poster
   assignment during the poster session brainstorm.        100 – Team Work / Peer Review
   20% is based on your work / effort in developing the         100 – Completed Final
   client project.                                                    300 TOTAL
   Staying Abreast of the Immersive Field                     30 – 2 Recommendations                     10%
   Recommend 2 NEW Demos to include in the library                     60 TOTAL
   @CMA 6.154
   Activities / In Class Participation / Readings + Videos              400 pts                          10%
   + Quizzes
   Extra Credit                                                            2                           Extra
   Attend Imagine Moody MeetUp (2nd Wednesday of
   every month | 6-8PM | @CMA 6.154)
                                                                         1790+                          100%
   Course Schedule: A Weekly Breakdown
   All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
   https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
   Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
   note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
   much advanced notice as possible).
   Week 1 | Jan 23, 2020
   Review Course: Experimental Storytelling (45 Minutes)
        • Discuss Projects: @48Moods, TXI Acceptance, Real-World Client
        • Review Course Expectations
        • Importance of Imagine Lab (CMA 6.154)
        • Identify and establish tools used in team projects (Discord / Google Drive / Trello)
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                        7


   Activity: Personality Test & Trading Cards (75 minutes)
    • Goal of these two activities are to have students better understand themselves and their peers. Experimental
         Storytelling is based on teams collaborating to complete projects and its important for each of us to
         understand how our peers perceive the world and make decisions giving us insight in how to connect, relate
         with each other and work better together.
   What is Experimental Storytelling? Presentation (30 minutes)
   Homework
    • Test out Texas Immersive Acceptance Experience
              o If you haven’t tried out the Texas Immersive Acceptance experience, do this for homework so the
                  entire class is up to speed on the 1 st project we will work on.
              o Review Content Bible (google doc) of last semester’s class to see some of their behind the scenes
                  work.
    •    Sandbox Demo/Analysis #1!
              o Need help, sign up for Josh’s help in the lab: https://calendly.com/imaginelab
              o You have the choice of one of the following demos:
                       ▪ 1 of the Escape Room Games in the Imagine Lab (CMA 6.154) -- play with your peers
                       ▪ 1 of the Interactive Books from the Demo Library (i.e.: Cathy’s Book, JJ Abrams “S”)
                       ▪ Go as a group to an Escape Room experience here in Austin (i.e.: Maze Rooms in Austin) and
                            show that you went (i.e.: ticket, receipt).
              o After completing the demo, write an analysis (1-2 pages). Consider what it is, what it had you do, if it
                  impacted you and if so in what ways, what was missing or could have been done better and its relation to
                  other similar experiences.
    •    @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
              o Suggestions: In the Imagine Lab (CMA 6.154 is 99 Ways to Tell a Story by Matt Madden, in the Imagine Lab
                  (CMA 6.154) for inspiration on style, POV.
              o THEME 1: #Who Am I? (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
              o THEME 2: #Diversity (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM))
              o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 2 | Jan 30, 2020
   DUE: @48Moods Theme 1 & 2 and peer comments; Sandbox Demo/Analysis #1, completed TXI acceptance kit
   What is Storytelling? Presentation (45 minutes)
   Activity: Spectrum Mapping (75 minutes)
   Goal of this activity is to have students reveal the diverse perspectives and options around improving the TXI
   Acceptance kit for the next cohort of Explorers.
   Review Roles for TXI Acceptance Kit (30 minutes)
   To complete this project, we will need to build the team into different departments each contributing to the larger
   project. In order for this to run smoothly, the team will be led by:
        • Producer (1) -- plan and coordinate various aspects of your group’s production, such as finalizing the content;
             coordinating writing, directing, and editing; and arranging financing.
        • Creative Director (1) -- oversee the creative process and give guidance to the overall look and feel of the experience.
   The Producer and the Creative Director should be joined at the hip and have a shared vision as to what the end product will
   look like. Preference is given to graduate students if they so choose to take on this role.
   Underneath this leadership are the following teams. Each team will have a Team Lead reporting to the Producer / Creative
   Director and who will make sure assignments are distributed equally and completed on time. Each team is required to have
   at least 3 people. You will peer review your entire team as part of your grade for this project.
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                                8


   Teams are:
       • Writers: This is the team who will ensure the story narrative, character development and all copy for any
            media asset is complete.
       • Game Designers: This is the team who will refine or build any new story challenges and ensure that the
            experience is interactive and offers participatory avenues for the user to lean in and make choices in the
            story experience.
       • Builders: This is the team that will build any physical assets needed as artifacts in the story experience. These
            artifacts should be used to push the story forward and offer a way for the users to use more of their senses
            than just sight and sound.
       • Multimedia Artists: This is the team that will build any media assets needed whether it’s how to enter the
            story, move the story along or offers some sort of resolution to close out the experience.
       • Developers: This is the team who will write, debug and execute code to make this an interactive experience.
   Activity: Build Teams (45 minutes)
   Goal of this activity is to have students consider which role and team they’d like to be on and apply.
   Have each student apply for one of the roles / teams. In their submission, include:
       • Name / Personality Type
       • What role is of interest, and why?
       • What hard / soft skills are you bringing to the table?
       • What do you hope to learn from joining this team?
       • If you are choosing a leadership role, share why you think you have the skills needed to lead the group?
            What do you hope to accomplish? How will you proceed? How will you manage pitfalls?
   Homework:
   • Submit your TXI Acceptance Kit Team Application to Canvas by Saturday at 11:59 PM
   •   Read Chapter 1: Storytelling, Old and New (Digital Storytelling, 4 th Edition by Carolyn Handler Miller 2020) and
       take QUIZ!
   •   @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
            o Suggestions: Check out the book, 99 Ways to Tell a Story by Matt Madden, in the Imagine Lab (CMA 6.154) for
                 inspiration on style, POV.
            o THEME 3: #Mystery (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
            o THEME 4: #Wonder (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
            o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 3 | Feb 6, 2020
   DUE: @48Moods Theme 3 & 4 w peer comments; Reading and Quiz complete
   Defining & Designing Character Presentation (45 minutes)
   Activity: Teams Assigned – Begin development (90 minutes)
   Goal of this activity is to begin – ensure that the story and character development is strong. Get to know your team,
   what each one can and wants to contribute and brainstorm action items based on last week’s activ ity: Spectrum
   Mapping.
       • Producer / Creative Director should establish tools and invite team members; as well as develop a 7 Ps
            Framework and schedule (see Activity)
       • Affinity mapping could be a useful tool for each team to use to workshop ideas and get organized (see
            Activity)
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                          9


   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello.
       • Note: SCRUM will be our weekly short sprint developmental check-in for each team to review week’s
            assignments and stay on target for completion. It is often a standing-only 10-minutes max meeting for each
            team member to highlight success (GREEN), work-in-progress (YELLOW), and anything that’s preventing
            work to be done (RED).
   Homework:
   • TXI Acceptance Kit team assignments
   •   Sandbox Demo/Analysis #2!
            o Need help, sign up for Josh’s help in the lab: https://calendly.com/imaginelab
            o You have the choice of one of the following demos (all available in the Imagine Lab):
                     ▪ CoCo VR                                                          ▪ Job Simulator
                     ▪ Spider Man Far From Home                                         ▪ Vader Immortal
                     ▪ Mindshow                                                         ▪ Wolves in the Wall
                     ▪ Lone Echo                                                        ▪ Fragments
                     ▪ Dead and Buried                                                  ▪ Pearl
                     ▪ Eve                                                              ▪ Help
            o After completing the demo, write an analysis (1-2 pages). Consider the presentations given in class so far.
                Story, its structure and how the characters were developed, designed and how you interacted with them or
                didn’t. Did the experience impact you, and if so in what ways? What was missing or could have been done
                better and its relation to other similar experiences?
   •   @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
            o Suggestions: Check out the book, 99 Ways to Tell a Story by Matt Madden, in the Imagine Lab (CMA 6.154) for
                inspiration on style, POV.
            o THEME 5: #Place (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
            o THEME 6: #Object (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
            o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 4 | Feb 13, 2020
   DUE: @48Moods Theme 5 & 6 w peer comments; Sandbox Demo/Analysis #2, TXI team work
   Affordances, Constraints & Conventions Presentation (45 minutes)
   Activity: Enter the Story (75 minutes)
   Goal of this activity is to work in teams and brainstorm ways to enter stories in non -traditional ways and consider
   how this can be applied to the TXI Acceptance Kit project.
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello. (20 minutes)
       • Story beats should be solid. Any revised interaction should be done by EOD.
       • You should be full-on into production.
       • Any items needing to be purchased should be complete by EOD to be here by next week.
   Homework:
   • TXI Acceptance Kit team assignments
   •   Watch Gunther Kress videos on Concepts in Multimodality and take QUIZ!
   •   Sandbox Demo Recommendation #1!
       Based on themes from Week 2, 3 & 4 presentations in class, make a recommendation of a new demo and submit it here:
       https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1bXcjoDsLQZqclvMeMK855FyHbf7wxBxyqVwxVH6SLHw/edit?ts=5e263c13
   •   Bring your favorite tangible object to class next week!
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                          10


   •    @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
             o Suggestions: Consider developing a series of images to offer different ways of shaping your simple story.
             o THEME 7: #Sound (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
             o THEME 8: #Character (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
             o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 5 | Feb 20, 2020
   DUE: @48Moods Theme 7 & 8 w peer comments; Sandbox Demo Recommendation #1, TXI team work; ; bring your
   favorite tangible object to class!
   Tangible Storytelling with New Screens Presentation (45 minutes)
   Activity: Object Brainstorm (45 minutes)
   Goal is to help externalize the thought process, just as sketching or role play does, but often in a more immediate and
   concrete way. Because objects suggest stories about how they might be used, they make a great starting point for free
   association and exploration.
   TXI Acceptance Kit Production (60 minutes)
   Goal is to have a unique way of entering the experience and that nothing is gimmicky and has thoughtfully been
   designed based on the affordances of each media used.
        • Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team and update sched ule
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week to play test experience? Update
   Trello.
   Homework
   • TXI Acceptance Kit team assignments
   •    @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
             o Suggestions: Consider developing a series of images to offer different ways of shaping your simple story.
             o THEME 9: #Reaction (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
             o THEME 10: #Connection (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
             o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 6 | Feb 27, 2020
   DUE: @48Moods Theme 9 & 10 w peer comments; TXI Acceptance Kit ready for play test!
   TXI Acceptance Kit Production (90 minutes)
   Goal is to finish.
        • Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to fix to make final based on play test experience? Update
   Trello.
   Play Test – A few guests will be invited in at 11 AM to try it out. (60 minutes)
        • This should be a 30 minute experience so the guests will have time to offer feedback by end of class.
        • You will have to Week 8 / March 12 th to make any revisions and submit project.
   Homework:
   • TXI Acceptance Kit team assignments
   •    @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                           11


           o    Suggestions: Consider developing a series of images to offer different ways of shaping your simple story.
           o    THEME 11: #Memory (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
           o    THEME 12: #Touch (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
           o    Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 7 | March 5, 2020
   DUE: @48Moods Theme 11 & 12 w peer comments
   Guest Speaker! (depending on where we are in production) (60 minutes)
   Introduce Final Project (60 minutes)
    • Review Client Brief (PRIDE Pop Up Institute)
    • Conversation with Client, ask questions!
    • Who’s Your Audience? (Understand wants, needs, emotions, motivations / Consider empathy map)
   SCRUM Project Check In (30 minutes) – what does each team need to fix to make final based on play test
   experience? Update Trello. (Any last issues to address to turn in TXI Acceptance Kit final next week)
   Homework
   • Client Brief Individual Poster Brainstorm
       Create a poster to showcase in next week’s class. This poster needs to explain your proposed immersive experience to
       address the Client’s Brief. There are two constraints:
        1. Your poster must be self-explanatory. If you gave it to a person without walking her through it, would she
            understand?
        2. Your poster must be visual. Words and labels are good, but text alone will not be enough to get people’s
            attention, or help them understand.
       When creating your poster, consider these 3 kinds of explanation:
              1. Before and After: Describe “why” someone should care in terms of drawing the today and tomorrow of the
                  idea.
                      • What is the simple story?
                      • Who are the characters?
              2. System: Describe the “what” of an idea in terms of its parts and their relationships.
                      • What are the proposed media, its affordances and how it relates to the story?
                      •    What story structure do you propose?
              3. Process: Describe the “how” of an idea in terms of a sequence of events.
                      • In what ways do we enter the story?
                      • What do we do?
                      • What are we left with?
   •   TXI Acceptance Kit team assignments – finish, final due next week!!
   •   @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
           o Suggestions: Consider developing a video (3-4 seconds mp4) to offer different ways of shaping your simple
                story.
           o THEME 13: #Agency (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
           o THEME 14: #Behavior (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
           o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   •   Grad Students required to schedule meeting with Prof Reilly to discuss @48Moods Curation
           o Proposed Re-Imagine a Book idea due 4/2 with completed project due 4/23 to send to printers
           o Consider pushing beyond the traditional page in curating this experience.
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                            12


   Week 8 | March 12, 2020
   DUE: Client Brief Individual Poster Brainstorm; @48Moods Theme 13 & 14 w peer comments; Final TXI Acceptance Kit
   (with any revisions needed from Play Test)
   Activity: Poster Session Gallery Walk with Dot Voting (75 minutes)
   Goal is to ensure every student suggests an idea for the final project ensuring all voices are considered in the
   development. It forces each student to visually think about the client project and im agine ways to explain an
   experience to others. The gallery walk and dot voting offers a democratic process to see a variety of ideas and offer
   different contributions that will make the final project stronger.
        • Client will be invited to participate.
        • Our goal is to work towards an Overall Concept by end of activity
   Review Roles for Final Project (30 minutes)
   To complete this project, we will need to build the team into different departments each contributing to the larger
   project. In order for this to run smoothly, the team will be led by:
        • Producer (1) -- plan and coordinate various aspects of your group’s production, such as finalizing the content;
             coordinating writing, directing, and editing; and arranging financing.
        • Creative Director (1) -- oversee the creative process and give guidance to the overall look and feel of the experience.
   The Producer and the Creative Director cannot be the same people from the previous project. These two roles should be
   joined at the hip and have a shared vision as to what the end product will look like. Preference is given to graduate students
   if they so choose to take on this role.
   Underneath this leadership are Project Teams that connect to the vision of the immersive experience. These will be
   determined after the Poster Session activity.
   Within these Project teams, there will be a Team Lead reporting to the Producer / Creative Director and who will make sure
   assignments are distributed equally and completed on time. Each team is required to have at least 3 people. Project Teams
   will most likely have similar roles as the previous project but this will be determined based on proposed project. You will
   peer review your entire team as part of your grade for this project.
   Activity: Build Teams (45 minutes)
   Goal of this activity is to have students consider which role and team they’d like to be on and apply.
   Have each student apply for one of the roles / teams. In their submission, include:
        • Name / Personality Type
        • What role is of interest, and why?
        • What hard / soft skills are you bringing to the table?
        • What do you hope to learn from joining this team?
        • If you are choosing a leadership role, share why you think you have the skills needed to lead the group?
             What do you hope to accomplish? How will you proceed? How will you manage pitfalls?
   Homework: Enjoy Spring Break!
   • Producer / Creative Director
             o Establish tools and invite team members
             o Refine overall concept document
             o Check in with Each Team and approve Team Leader
   •    Go for a Walk with your Team!
             o Literally or figuratively, you need to connect with your team at least once and put together a 7 Ps
                 framework (See Activity) on how you all will work together. Determine who will lead your team and be
                 the direct point of contact to the Producer / Creative Director. Be prepared to share your plan when we
                 return.
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                               13


   •   @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
            o Suggestions: Consider developing a video (3-4 seconds mp4) to offer different ways of shaping your simple
                story.
            o THEME 15: #Nostalgia (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
            o THEME 16: #Emotion (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
            o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 9 | March 26, 2020
   DUE: Producer / Director Concept Paper; Each Team’s 7 Ps Framework / plan; @48Moods Theme 15 & 16 w peer
   comments
   Building a Guest Experience Presentation (45 minutes)
       • 10-Step Development Checklist
       • Mapping flow and interaction
       • Examples of Guest Experience Treatments
   Activity: Teams begin development (85 minutes)
   Goal of this activity is to begin – ensure that the story and character development is strong. Get to know your team,
   what each one can and wants to contribute and begin development.
       • Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team and review the 7 Ps Framework and schedule
       • Each Team Leader should work with their team towards developing their part of the Guest Experience PDF
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello. (20 minutes)
   Homework:
   • Finalize Project Guest Experience PDF to present to client next week
            o Reference Chapter 9: Guidelines: Creating a New Project (Digital Storytelling, 4 th Edition by Carolyn
                Handler Miller 2020)
   •   @48Moods Weekly Creative Journaling:
            o Suggestions: Consider developing a video (3-4 seconds mp4) to offer different ways of shaping your simple
                story.
            o THEME 17: #Best_of_Me (post by Saturday at 11:59 PM)
            o THEME 18: #The_End (post by Tuesday at 11:59 PM)
            o Peer Comments (post by Thursday at 9:00 AM)
   Week 10 | April 2, 2020
   DUE: @48Moods Theme 17 & 18 w peer comments; Final Guest Experience PDF to present to client; Grad Students:
   Proposed @48moods book project
   Client Check-In (45 minutes)
       • Producer & Creative Director presents Guest Experience PDF (20 minutes max)
       • Teams get feedback, take notes
   Final Project Production (90 minutes)
   Goal is to use Guest Experience to guide development.
       • Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team and update schedule
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello.
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                         14


   GRAD Students share Proposed Re-Imagined @48Moods Book (15 minutes)
   Homework:
   • Collective Story Experiment - @48moods | CURATION
         o Curate your best 3 posts and put them in order (1-5, 1 being the best)
         o Curate the overall best 3 posts from the class and put them in order (1-5, 1 being the best)
         o Identify your favorite #theme
         o Write 500 words on what you learned / your feelings towards @48moods collective storytelling project
   Week 11 | Apr 9, 2020
   DUE: @48moods | CURATION; Money to purchase @48Moods DUE! (VENMO PROFESSOR REILLY @EBREILLY)
   Final Project Production (130 minutes)
   Goal is to use Guest Experience to guide development.
       • Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team and update schedule
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello. (20 minutes)
   Homework:
   • Grad Students: Edit @48moods book!
   •   Sandbox Demo/Analysis #3!
            o Need help, sign up for Josh’s help in the lab: https://calendly.com/imaginelab
            o Choose any demo available in the Imagine Lab.
            o After completing the demo, write an analysis (1-2 pages). Consider the presentations given in class so far.
                Story, its structure and how the characters were developed, designed and how you interacted with them or
                didn’t. Did the experience impact you, and if so in what ways? What was missing or could have been done
                better and its relation to other similar experiences?
   Week 12 | Apr 16, 2020
   DUE: @48moods | CURATION; Sandbox Demo/Analysis #3
   Imagine Success and Work Backward Presentation (45 minutes)
       • Design Fictions, Beautiful Corner, Vertical Slice
       • Know what you can do and do it well (smoke & mirrors)
   Final Project Production (90 minutes)
   Goal is to use Guest Experience to guide development.
       • Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team and update schedule.
       • By this time, any documentation, flow charts, storyboards and concept artwork should be completed.
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello. (15 minutes)
   Homework:
   • Grad Students: Finish editing @48moods book!
   Week 13 | Apr 23, 2020
   Final Project Production (100 minutes)
   Goal is to use Guest Experience to guide development.
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                          15


         •   Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team and update schedule
         •   Client Check-In (any needs for Week 15 presentation showcase – set up of room, AV needs, etc)
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello. (20 minutes)
   Grad Students review final @48moods book w class (30 minutes)
   Homework:
   • Grad Students: @48moods book sent to printer!
   • Read Chapter 18: Immersive Narratives and Immersive Spaces (Digital Storytelling, 4 th Edition by Carolyn
         Handler Miller 2020) and offer a Sandbox Demo Recommendation #2!
         Offer a recommendation of a new immersive experience that’s not referenced in the chapter and submit it here:
         https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1bXcjoDsLQZqclvMeMK855FyHbf7wxBxyqVwxVH6SLHw/edit?ts=5e263c13
   Week 14 | Apr 30, 2020
   Final Project Production (130 minutes)
   Goal is to use Guest Experience to guide development.
         • Producer / Creative Director should check in with each team and update schedule
         • Edit and compile …get ready to finish!
   SCRUM Project Check In – what does each team need to accomplish by next week? Update Trello. (20 minutes)
   Homework:
   • Complete project. Be ready to showcase to public.
   Week 15 | May 7, 2020
   Team presents Final Project with hands-on experience to Client
                                                        Policies
     Classroom Policies
     Statement on Learning Success
     Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently.
     If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
     possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also
     encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but
     I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
    Attendance and Professionalism
    Attendance at all classes and meetings is required. It is also assumed that students will be active participants in
    class. Simply being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be engaged and involved scholars.
    Participation – not just attendance – is integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to you earning a high grade.
    Active participation means contributing to the discussion, listening to what your colleagues have to say and
    engaging with the readings and in-class activities. It means showing up on time, not checking Facebook or email
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                       16


 on your computer, not texting on your phone. NOTE that if you do not participate in class discussions, you will
 not earn full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
 Peer Evaluations
 You will be asked to provide an assessment of your and your teammates' contributions to the different group
 projects. They will be taken into account in assignment of grades.
 Grading System:
 This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s provost office
 (http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/). Advertising and PR majors are required to have a
 minimum grade of C in all communication courses and in all required and elective courses in order to continue
 in the program.
                                                    NOTES on Grading:
     •   Late work is not accepted.
     •   I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6% that translates into a B+
         and will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
     •   Any questions or comments about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7) days after the
         grade is announced or posted.
When I grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the work and the accuracy,
appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100 points and then lose them based on mistakes you
make. Your final points represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away” for
errors or omissions.
                                                         Absences
 The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating circumstances
 due to an emergency. You will be given attendance/participation credit for any session that you miss that is
 documented to the teaching team in writing by a medical doctor’s statement, or an official statement from a
 UT faculty member about an ensemble or other organization’s off-campus commitment. NO OTHER ABSENCES
 WILL BE EXCUSED.
                                            Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •   You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •   You have a right to respect.
     •   You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •   You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •   You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •   You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
     •   You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
         excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
         teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                        17


     •   You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your
         experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
         energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     •   You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
         excluded.
     •   You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
         standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                                              Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class
rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address
you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise
me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
                                                    University Policies
                                                    Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you
have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the            University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
                                                       Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while
you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                            University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently.
If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There
are also a range of resources on campus:
                                           Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to
share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me
know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you
discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If
appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video
phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                     18


      Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
      alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
      with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
      depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
      http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
          The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
      year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
      Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
      tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
      visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the B
ehavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-
5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
 assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutio
ns. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all it
s forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
          • Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
          • Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or h
               ave become involved in a Title IX investigation.
          • Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Repo
rters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a
Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussi
on, or one-onone.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies with
out making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information ab
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                    19


out reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.ut
exas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such
misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin,
sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender
identity, and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will
report it.
     •   Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
         The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual
         misconduct and discrimination.
              o    File a report of discrimination via online form
              o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
     •   Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
         The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing federal
         civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal financial
         assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call
         the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
     •   Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
         The Equal Emplloyment Opportunityy Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that
         make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected class,
         including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-
         669-4000.
Experimental Storytelling Syllabus | Spring 2020                                                                  20
