Course: ADV370J/PR367 Integrated Communications Management Semester: Fall 2019
Meeting:​ Tuesdays 5:00 PM to 8:00 PM ​Classroom:​ BMC 4.212
Texts & Reference Resources, Media & Social:
1. Integrated Brand Promotion Management: Text, Cases, and Exercises, Murphy, Cunningham, and
Stavchansky Lewis, Kendall Hunt Publishing, 2011 at the UT COOP and on Amazon.
2. Regular reading of key trade magazines to keep up to date on industry events (i.e. AdAge, AdWeek,
PR Week, MediaPost)
3. Engagement or perusal of social media channels for brand research (i.e. Instagram, Facebook, Twitter,
SnapChat, TikTok, etc.)
Instructor:​ Audrey Ponzio, 512.653.4640, ponzioan@mail.utexas.edu
Office Hours:​ Tuesdays, 4:00PM to 5:00PM
ABOUT THIS CLASS
This course requires you to:
1. assess problems, isolate key facts, and rank-order salient management issues,
2. make decisions and create action plans appropriate to the situation under consideration,
3. efficiently and persuasively write up your analysis and sell your recommendations, then
4. present and defend your case against criticism from your peers and others.
Come to class prepared for ​discussion​.
This is a writing class. The format will change for each assignment but please be prepared to write,
clearly articulating your thoughts, ideas and recommendations.
Objectives: ​The course has several objectives.
1. To present you with a wide range of interconnected advertising and public relations management
decisions that are similar to what you will encounter in the business.
2. To present you with a structured, field-tested approach to decision-making that is a practical and useful
method for addressing a variety of communications management issues.
Assumptions:
Participants in this class have successfully completed all prerequisite courses and have a solid


foundation in the fundamentals of marketing as well as the various advertising and public relations
functional areas. Given the wide range of academic experiences in prerequisite courses, students are
required to quickly identify and resolve any gross conflicts, fundamental inconsistencies, or background
voids that exist. Because the course requires a common advertising and public relations foundation,
students are responsible for timely background leveling. Advertising and public relations management
teams form the basis for a significant portion of the course. The ability to work effectively and efficiently
within a small group is essential to successfully completing this course.
Strategy:
1. Utilize class discussions of the text, cases, outside readings, and current events as a common
framework for the study of advertising and public relations management.
2. Utilize individual case analyses and individual assignments to demonstrate your writing skills and
communication problem solving abilities.
3. Utilize the management team case analysis and class presentation to closely approximate the work
environment of a management position on the client side or from within an agency.
Tactics:
1. Measure individual performance with a subjective evaluation of participation and preparedness.
The narrative portions of the Murphy, Cunningham, and Stavchansky Lewis text are very short and to the
point, reflective of the fact that this course integrates information and concepts presented in depth by
prerequisite courses. Class discussions will require your total command of the text material. A
demonstrated command of the material coupled with a clear, concise, active presentation style is required
to score above average on this dimension.
Significant emphasis ​is placed on class participation, especially questions, comments, and discussion
among peers. You must strike a balance between passive, silent listening and dominating the discussion
with ill conceived or trivial remarks. Neither of these two extreme positions is acceptable. Neither earns
you many participation points. Come prepared; take a stand. A lively discussion among peers is the
objective.
Thorough preparation and concise expression are valued. Quality outweighs quantity. Enthusiasm counts.
Contribute, don’t disrupt. Ask questions. ​There are no dumb or wrong questions.​ Throughout your
academic career you’ve heard this phrase. But in ADV370/PR367, it is imperative that you believe it. This
course is filled with uncertainty, inadequate information and not enough time. If you refrain from asking
questions, you limit your exposure to fresh insights from others.
2. Measure individual group participation with a structured peer evaluation system.
Learning to write peer evaluations is a key management skill. Early in your career you will be on the
receiving end of many such evaluations. Later, you will be required to assess the professional
performance of subordinates in measurable, precisely articulated, easily understood terms. You will begin
your understanding of this difficult management task with this required assignment.


3. Measure individual resourcefulness, organization, and writing skills with unannounced crash projects.
4. Measure individual problem solving and writing skills with case brief assignments. The core of this
course revolves around case brief analyses. A premium is placed on the development of quantitative
dimensions in support of case solutions.
5. Measure management team performance based on major management team analyses and
presentations.
Course Schedule:
September 3: First day of class
    ●   Class Introductions
    ●   Overview of Course Materials & Expectations
    ●   Textbook: Chapters 1 & 2 Review (In Class)
September 10:
    ●   Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
    ●   Textbook: Chapter 3 & 4 Review
    ●   Cases
September 17:
    ●   Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
    ●   Textbook: Chapter 5 Review
    ●   Team Assignments Given
    ●   Cases
September 24:
    ●   Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
    ●   Textbook: Chapter 6 Review
    ●   Cases
October 1:
    ●   Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
    ●   Textbook: Chapter 7 Review
    ●   Cases
    ●   Assignment One Due
October 8:
    ●   Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
    ●   Textbook: Chapter 8 Review
    ●   Assignment Two Given


October 15:
   ●  Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
   ●  Textbook: Chapters 9 & 10 Review
   ●  Cases
October 22:
   ●  Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
   ●  Textbook: Chapter 11 Review
   ●  Assignment Two Due
October 29:
   ●  Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
   ●  Textbook: Chapter 12 Review
   ●  Cases
   ●  Assignment Three Given
November 5:
   ●  Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
   ●  Textbook: Chapter 13 Review
   ●  Cases
November 12:
   ●  Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
   ●  Textbook: Chapter 14 Review
   ●  Assignment Three Due
November 19:
   ●  Current Campaigns/Class Discussion
   ●  Textbook: Chapter 15 & 16 Review
   ●  Assignment Four Given
November 26:​ No class
   ●  Happy Thanksgiving!
December 3: Last day of class
   ●  Textbook: Chapter 17 Review
   ●  Final Assignment Due
   ●  Class Evaluation


Evaluation:
Course participation = 20%
Assignment 1 = 20%
Assignment 2 = 20%
Assignment 3 = 20%
Assignment 4 = 15%
Peer Evaluation Assignment 4 = 5%
Total = 100%
Course Participation Grade:​ Your participation in this course is worth 20% of your grade – two letter
grades. The 20% will be divided up as follows:
10%: ​Attendance ​will be taken ten (10) random times during the semester. If you’re
here 10 of those times, you earn 100%.
Note:​ Attendance is taken at a ​random t​ ime during class as well.
10%: ​Case and lecture discussion
+/- System UT at Austin has implemented +/- grading system for undergraduate students.
The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
A = 93.5 to 100 A- = 89.5 to 93.4
B+ = 86.5 to 89.4 B = 83.5 to 86.4 B- = 79.5 to 83.4
C+ = 76.5 to 79.4 C = 73.5 to 76.4 C- = 69.5 to 73.4
D+ = 66.5 to 69.4 D = 63.5 to 66.4 D- = 59.5 to 63.4
F = 59.4 or below
Note:​ you must earn a ‘C’ or higher to move forward to IC Campaigns – a “C-“ will require that you take
this course over again.
Deadlines & Standards:
1. All reading assignments are to be completed prior to class discussion.
2. Materials are often shared in class.


3. Attendance is required at all class, presentation, and account team meetings. Given the nature of the
class, wherein marketing communication account teams make up an essential portion of the course,
significant absence from class, team, and other meetings can reduce your final grade in the course by up
to ​two letter grades (see participation grade).
4. Everything produced for this class is to be your original work. Enlisting aid from anyone outside the
class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
5. Team presentations are to be presented using Microsoft Office’s PowerPoint or another professional
presentation program.
6. ​E-mail Policy​: I will return your e-mail within 24 hours of receiving it on weekdays or by Monday
evening if I receive it on the weekend.
7. Any questions regarding grades are to be asked after 24 hours of learning your grade – including
attendance (attendance is part of participation). ​Any protest must be within 8 days, submitted in
writing with justification, preferable referring to the grading criteria or rubric.
8. The schedule of events is tentative and can change. Students are responsible for changes to the
schedule as announced in class.
Class Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through
UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or center if you would
like.
Grace Policy: Time-bank options
Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate any
unexpected, unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not have to
utilize this policy, but if you find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to
contact me as soon as possible to notify me that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy
one of two ways (please choose, and let me know):
      •   You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
      •   You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
Absences
If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with the
necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with your
team members; you are responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a
class.


Excused Absence:​ The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a
religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check
with us for details or arrangements.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely​. Ask your team and other classmates to get a
run-down and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were
gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email
specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is
not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     • You have a right to respect.
     • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
         learning environment.
     • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
         isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     •   You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
         teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     •   You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. •
         Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
         and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     •   You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
         excluded.
     •   You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
         these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this
preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” ​Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT​. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not
your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be


guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s ​Standards of Conduct​ and ​Academic Integrity principles​.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a ​Q drop​ before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution.
Religious Holy Days
Please notify me at least fourteen days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If you
must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to
maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact ​Services for Students with
Disabilities​, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support at the ​Counseling and Mental Health Center​.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the ​Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please call
512-471-3614 or drop in for a visit at JES A332.


BeVocal
BeVocal​ is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce
harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to:
wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Additional Services for Students
University Writing Center
Libraries
ITS
Student Emergency Services
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. You can also submit a report online at the ​BCAL web site​. Your
report can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and
share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the ​Campus Safety and Security​.
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
          week of class.
     •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter
          a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
          Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
          found at:
The office of ​Emergency Preparedness​ provides information on safety apps for your mobile device,
emergency preparedness manual, and a guide for surviving an active shooter situation.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
          become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.


Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing,
discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX
related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu​. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit the ​Title
IX Office​ web site or contact them by email at ​titleix@austin.utexas.edu​.
