Note: The information on this syllabus is available to students on the official Course Canvas Page in a
more mobile-friendly and reader-friendly format
Fall 2019
ADVERTISING RESEARCH ADV 344k
Unique 06000
Meets in BMC 2.106
T/Th 11 - 12:15
PROFESSOR - LEE ANN KAHLOR, PH.D.
OFFICE HOURS: Th 12:30-1:30 p.m. and by appt.
OFFICE: BMC 4.370
512-791-5726 (this is my cell so call or text only 9 am -7 pm when you need immediate response,
otherwise email me at Kahlor@austin.utexas.edu
TEXTBOOK & INTERNET ACCESS
Burns, Veeck & Bush (2017). Marketing Research, 8th Ed. Pearson. Buy at the Coop or online, bound
copy, eBook, value or international edition – wherever you can get it and in whatever form you
desire, just be sure to get the 8th edition only. You will need the text for weekly quizzes.
Also required – you must have a way to access Canvas and the Internet in class – a phone or laptop
will work.
COURSE FORMAT
Lectures provide the course content and supplement the readings, quizzes ensure concepts from
readings are learned weekly, in-class polls and discussion posts provide opportunities for in-class
engagement, assignments apply course concepts in practical ways, and exams offer assessments of
learning progress at key checkpoints.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course builds on Adv/PR 309 (or Stats 306, etc.) to further explore the research methods
commonly used in Advertising and PR. This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. This
course is foundational for your future courses (especially media, management and campaigns), your
career, and for your lifetime role as a consumer of research.
DESCRIPTION OF COURSE REQUIREMENTS, POLICY
IN-CLASS POLLS – 5%
We use Qualtrics Surveys for polling in class. These are NOT announced ahead of time and record
geo-location, meaning you have to be in-class to get credit for participating. Participating in these
when not in class constitutes academic dishonesty. The purpose is to build an in-class community
and share ideas. I will drop the two lowest scores – this includes sick days, emergencies or technical
failures.
DISCUSSION POSTS – 5%


Periodically we will post on Canvas discussion prompts to which you must respond within a given
time-frame.
I will drop one – this includes sick days, emergencies or technical failures.
QUIZZES – 8%
Quizzes are administered online via Canvas. The quizzes focus only on the book and each consists
of 8 questions answered in 10 minutes. Note that quizzes are due by class time on the days noted on
the class schedule below. Add the due dates to your personal calendar. You have one week from the
day a grade is posted to resolve dispute about the grade. I will drop your lowest quiz grade – this
includes missed quizzes, sick days, emergencies or technical failures. Complete the readings for the
week, take notes and then take the quiz. You usually have more than 72 hours to access a quiz, but
once you start it, you must finish it in 10 minutes. NOTE: Sometimes Canvas crashes or freezes and I
often am not available the few hours right before class.
EXAMS – 40%
There will be three in-class multiple-choice exams and an optional final during finals week. See
Calendar for the scheduled dates. Exams will cover materials presented in class and readings. You
are responsible for readings, even if content is not reiterated in class. A study guide will be provided
prior to each in-class exam. After the exams are graded and the grades are posted, you have ONE
WEEK to look over the exam questions during Prof. Kahlor's office hours. Any grade concerns MUST
be resolved then. An optional comprehensive make-up examination will be offered at our
designated final exam time; it is a make-up option for anyone who has missed one of the in-class
exams or for anyone who wants to try to improve her/his course grade. This exam will replace the
lowest regular in-class examination only if it is higher. Otherwise, it will not be counted. This is the
only make-up opportunity if any test was missed for any reason – this includes sick days, travel or
emergencies. It is the same format and length as an in-class exam and you will be given the same
amount of time as you are given for in-class exams, so show up at the starting time.
ASSIGNMENTS- 40%
See the assignments module for details.
RESEARCH AND PROFESSIONALISM - 2%
RESEARCH PARTICIPATION
You must earn 2 research credits via studies that will become available throughout the semester
here: https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.). I do not honor
research points from other departments or schools. Do not take a study more than once (e.g., to
meet another class’ requirements) or the credit will be voided. You will not receive extra credit in
this class for participating in more than 2 studies, although you may have additional research
requirements in other classes.
PROFESSIONALISM
Please be respectful with the teaching team and your peers. Remain attentive and engaged in
lecture. Arrive on time, do not pack up early, and stay for the entire class period. Please refrain from
distracting behaviors like watching movies in class or surfing the web.
GRADING BREAKDOWN
In-class polls 5%


Discussion Posts 5%
Weekly online quizzes 8%
Exams 40%
Assignments 40%
Professionalism and research participation 2%
FINAL GRADES are NOT rounded up or down. For example, a B- is inclusive of all scores 80.000
through 83.999%. NOTE: You must have a minimum grade of C in this class.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
Note: I do not respond the way you hope when you email me at the end of the semester about your
need for an extra .2 point to get a certain grade. Cutoffs are listed so you can work from day 1 to
ensure you are not on the edge by the end.
ABSENCES
Students are responsible for any information missed during an absence. Lecture notes from
previous days are not available from the professor. You do not need to send doctors’ notes (or the
like) to us when absent. We have built into the course structure ways to either make up or drop
work regardless of circumstance.
We drop 2 in-class "polls"
We drop 1 discussion post
We drop 1 quiz grade
We offer an optional final if an in-class exam is missed
We allow 1 assignment re-write (or make-up)
OPTIONAL FINAL
An optional comprehensive make-up examination will be offered at our designated final exam time;
it is a make-up option for anyone who has missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who
wants to try to improve her/his course grade. This exam will replace the lowest regular in-class
examination only if it is higher. Otherwise, it will not be counted. This is the only make-up
opportunity if any test was missed for any reason – this includes sick days, travel or emergencies. It
is the same format and length as an in-class exam and you will be given the same amount of time as
you are given for in-class exams, so show up at the starting time.
THE DATE IS Thursday, December 12, 2:00 pm
Location TBA


RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
Notify us of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of a religious holy day,
especially if you must miss class, an exam, assignment, or project.
STUDENTS WITH ACCOMMODATIONS
The University provides academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
If accommodations include extended testing time and control of distractions, please arrange to take
your exams in the SSD facility.
Remind me to send the exam there before the scheduled exam date, and have them email the exam
back to me for grading.
For other accommodations, please work with your TA and I to ensure your needs are met. If we are
not meeting your needs, please contact us so that we can do so. We want to help!
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
Core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
Academic dishonesty is cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic
records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially
the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. These
are the course guidelines and you must adhere to them. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Please read at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php. (Links to an external site.)
Among the activities that fit with the above policies are: participating in an in-class poll while not in
class (unless you have prior written approval from the professor) and looking at peers exams
during exam time.
THE MOODY COLLEGE WRITING SUPPORT PROGRAM
The program, located in BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students
seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have specialists in
Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen
core writing skills in each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book
half-hour appointments on our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing
process. https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting
IDENTITY, DISCRIMINATION, HARASSMENT, PERSONAL SAFETY
I am the Stan Richards School's Minority Liaison and I work extensively with minority and LGBTQI
students. Please lean on me as needed.


I have experience helping students navigating identity- and safety-related challenges, including
racism, sexual harassment and sexual assault.
To see some of the work we are doing in SRS, please visit
https://advertising.utexas.edu/about/diversity-commitment (Links to an external site.)
For other UT supports, visit:
Gender and sexuality support: https://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/ (Links to an
external site.)
Facing Asian Stereotypes: https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/modelminority.html (Links to an external
site.)
Where to report discrimination or harassment: https://equity.utexas.edu/investigations/faq/
(Links to an external site.)
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
COUNSELING, MENTAL HEALTH
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there is
support!
For immediate support:
Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW CMA 4.134 | 512-
471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable
Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
RESEARCH PARTICIPATION
You must earn 2 research credits via studies that will become available throughout the semester at
https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.). I do not honor research
points from other departments or schools. Do not take a study more than once (e.g., to meet another
class’ requirements) or the credit will be voided. You will not receive extra credit in this class for
participating in more than 2 studies, although you may have additional research requirements in
other classes. https://advertising.utexas.edu/research/pool (Links to an external site.)
WEEK/DATE         TOPIC                       READING          QUIZ       KEY DATES
1      8-29       Intro to Research           Ch. 1-2
2      9-3        Process, Problem,           Ch. 3
       9-5        Objectives                                     1
3      9-10       Secondary data, SWOT        Ch. 5              2
       9-12                                                               SWOT due 9/13 5 p.m.
4      9-17       Qualitative research        Ch. 6              3


   9-19
5  9-24  Photovoice                           Post a photo 9/24 5 p.m.
   9-26  “Media Research”                     Photovoice due 9/27 5 p.m.
6  10-1  Exam                                 Exam 1 (10/1)
   10-3  In-class exercise                    Social Listening Worksheet
                                              10/3
7  10-8  Research design         Ch. 4      4
   10-10
8  10-15 Content analysis
   10-17
9  10-22 Experiments, biometrics
   10-24
10 10-29 Exam                                 Exam 2 (10/29)
   10-31 Survey                  Ch. 7, 11  5
11 11-5  Measurement             Ch. 8      6
   11-7  In-class exercise                    In-class Index 11/7
12 11-12 Sampling                Ch.9-10    7 Take our Survey 11/12 in
   11-14                                      class
13 11-19 Descriptive analysis    Ch. 12     8
   11-21 Difference tests        Ch. 13
14 11-26 Association tests       Ch. 14     9
         U.S. Thanksgiving
15 12-3  Research reports        Ch. 16    10 Quant due 12/3 by class start
   12-5  Exam                                 Exam 3 (12/5)
