University of Texas at Austin, School of Human Ecology
Division of Textiles and Apparel                                              Professor Eve Nicols
Apparel, Functional and Technical Design Track
                          TXA 365 VIRTUAL INTERNSHIP COURSE
Instructor: Eve Nicols
Email: karuna@mail.utexas.edu
Office hours: via zoom or by phone, email to arrange an appointment, email any questions.
Introduction
The internship experience facilitates learning through the blending of theory and practice. It is
an opportunity to bring academic knowledge gained in classroom setting into the real life
professional industry environment. Recent computer systems improvements have made it
possible for professionals working in design, production and a range of careers in the apparel
design industry to be undertaken digitally, from remote locations. Design directors can set
assignments for their teams; the teams upload themes, inspiration, ideation pages, drafts of
designs, proposed fabrics, style illustrations, technical or artistic flats, and technical packets.
Meetings and discussions can be held via zoom both in groups and individually. The Apparel
Design Industry in 2020 has changed exponentially. It is now possible to fulfill the academic
course requirements of internship programs and future industry career positions through online
communication. This may indeed be the way of the future.
The purpose of the virtual internship course is to provide students with a realistic view of the
professional environment of the apparel design industry. Through actual work experience in a
virtual internship, students develop skills and abilities that lead to building cognitive
understanding and effective learning. This virtual internship experience leads students to
develop fundamental changes in attitude, work habits and maturity level. These changes will
benefit them when seeking careers after graduation.
Pre-requisite TXA 355C Computer Aided Design
The program is a cooperative effort involving three major participants: student, sponsoring firm
of the site supervisor, and faculty course leader.
Two basic conditions are of importance to a virtual internship program:
    1. The students will document their activities, this enables the students to analyze the
         successes or otherwise of a range of tasks and understand fully, the actions that lead to
         successful outcomes.
    2. The activities assigned to the students are inline with industry practices and relate to
         the goals of both the educational program and the sponsoring company.
Upon the Completion of the course
    • Students will develop an understanding of the techniques, principles, and procedure
         used in apparel design industry, from a virtual perspective.
    • Students will improve digital professional practices, including communication skills.
    • Students will gain knowledge of the standards expected by professionals in apparel
         design industry careers


Course requirements (154 Internship Hours Required)
     • Experience at an internship, with an established company, in a virtual environment will
         be evaluated and accepted by the faculty course leader.
     • One hundred and fifty four hours of virtual activity is required, these hours may be
         scheduled throughout the whole summer semester, or brought closer together to allow
         the students flexibility, allowing for registration in one, two, or three more summer
         courses, or registration for TXA 365 courses, The Paris Study Visit or UT in NYC.
     • All assignments are required to be uploaded by the assigned deadlines, however, early
         submissions when requested and discussed, will be accepted.
     • Weekly reports outlining the student’s activities, observations and progress. Students
         will identify skills and new techniques experienced and include learning outcomes.
     • A Power Point on the company the student is virtually interning with, including the
         student’s tasks, activities, and experiences and learning outcomes.
Required Assignments (154 Internship Hours Required)
     • Eight weekly reports, students will include learning outcomes and visual imagery.
     • A Power Point on the company providing the internship, including the students learning
         outcomes and experiences (10 slides minimum).
     • Two pages (8 x11) of Visual Imagery, highlights of the Virtual Internship.
     • Internship supervisor evaluation.
     • Students will evaluate the virtual internship.
     • All course assignment requirements are to be submitted online.
Grade Determination and Deadlines, all Requirement to be submitted online.
Six reports, students will include learning outcomes and visual imagery.                   300
Delivered via email every two weeks after internship begins.
Assignment completed by August 4
A Power Point of the company, including the student’s activities and learning
experiences (8 slides minimum)                                                             250
Partial completion July 24, completed Assignment August 3
2 Pages (8x11) to include the company name/logo and photographs of the students
experiences, these can be of digital assignments, that have been cleared by the
company to share.                                                                          150
Partial completion July 15, completed Assignment August 5
Internship site supervisor evaluation Returned by August 7                                 300
                                                                   Total Points            1000
Completion of student’s evaluation of the internship site.
Determination of Course Grade
A = 950-1000points                  C+= 700-749points
A- = 900-949points                  C = 650-699points
B+ = 850-899 points                 C- = 600-649 points
B = 800-849points                   D+ = 550-599 points
B- = 750-799points                  D = 500-549points


If you receive above the points for the letter grade you will move into the next category for
example 850 points would be B+ grade.
PARTICIPATION:
Students will turn in all assignments by the due dates indicated in the syllabus and announced
on Canvas and through email. Unless there is the University approved excuse, late assignments
will result in a 10-point reduction for every late class day from the total score of each
assignment.
PROFESSIONALISM:
Students will be responsible for checking their UT email and canvas to communicate with the
instructor.
Academic honesty is expected at all times. All these aspects of the UT policy apply: Policy on
Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the
Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the General
Information Catalog to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
This course follows UT’s guidelines for accommodating students with disabilities: The University
of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at
471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Accommodations for religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending
absence at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss a virtual internship assignment, in order to observe a religious holy day, you will
be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement (DDCE), Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability.
Please be advised that the syllabus may change at any time based on the instructor's discretion.
