Updated 1/15/2020
             ALD 320: COGNITION, HUMAN LEARNING, AND MOTIVATION
                                  Spring 2020, Unique # 09435
                   Tuesdays and Thursdays, 11:00AM-12:30PM, SZB 435
                                The University of Texas at Austin
Instructor: Katie Muenks (she/her/hers)                         Office hours​: Thursdays,
Office: SZB 506F                                                12:30-1:30pm
Email: ​kmuenks@utexas.edu
Teaching assistant: Taylor Payne (she/her/hers)                 Office hours​: Mondays,
Office: SZB 506G                                                11:00-12:00
Email: ​tpayne@utexas.edu
Teaching assistant: Kristen Mosley (she/her/hers)               Office hours​: Wednesdays,
Office: SZB 506G                                                1:30-2:30pm
Email: ​k.mosley@utexas.edu
                                       Course Objectives
The purpose of this course is to give you a solid foundation in theories of learning and
motivation that inform learning and teaching strategies. When you have completed the
course, you should be able to:
    1.   discuss and apply various theoretical perspectives of learning and motivation
    2.   recognize examples of the theory in everyday instructional practice
    3.   relate them to yourself as a learner through examples and scenarios
    4.   relate them to your future professional work even if it’s not in education
The semester will be divided into three units:
         Unit 1 – Cognition: learning and memory
         Unit 2 – Critical thinking, assessment, and socially-based learning
         Unit 3 – Motivation
Each unit will be evaluated on a separate test and have a set of activities associated
with it. You will work individually and in groups throughout the semester.
                                                1


Updated 1/15/2020
                                Website and Communication
This course has a Canvas site associated with it (​http://canvas.utexas.edu​/). Canvas will
be used to post announcements, course documents, assignments, supplementary
materials, and lecture slides. Canvas allows me to email the whole class and to have
announcements and assignment reminders posted to your page, so be on the lookout
for messages from us on occasion. Please check which email address is being used by
the University for you. ​If you have problems with computer access, please let me know
immediately so we can make other arrangements​.
The best way to reach me outside of class is via email. In the email subject title, make
sure to include “ALD320”. I would be happy to meet with you individually, so please
come talk to me during office hours or make an appointment for another time.
                                     Course Overview
Learning is an active process. I passionately believe that the topics we cover in this
class are meaningful and relevant beyond this course, and hence, the course and its
structure are set up to promote long-term learning.
On Tuesdays, we will cover the week’s content with an interactive lecture, with activities
interspersed throughout. To make sure that you come to class prepared and that you
can maximize your learning in class time, it is expected that readings will be completed
before the class in which lecture on the topic is scheduled.
On Thursdays, we will complete in-class activities that will expand on the basics from
the readings and lectures, giving students the opportunity to think deeply about, to
practice and to apply course concepts in groups. Some of your most valuable resources
in college are your peers. Working through activities and problems with your peers will
allow you to learn from people with different perspectives, from different backgrounds,
and work through misconceptions. As such, this class includes many components of
peer learning. For each unit, you will be assigned to groups based on your personal
interests, preferences and goals.
There will also be two assignments (an Application Assignment and
Design-a-Class/Guide) to be completed outside of class for credit. These writing
assignments allow you to apply what you have learned.
                                            Text
No textbook will be required in this course. Instead of a textbook, all of the assigned
readings will be taken from various sources and posted in the “Readings” folder on
Canvas.
                                             2


Updated 1/15/2020
If you are interested in the topics we cover in this course, however, here are some
books intended for a general audience that we love:
     Why Don’t Students Like School? A Cognitive Scientist Answers Questions
     About How The Mind Works and What it Means for the Classroom​. By
     Daniel Willingham. Jossey-Bass.
     Make It Stick: The Science of Successful Learning. ​By Peter C. Brown,
     Henry L. Roediger III, and Mark A. McDaniel. Harvard University Press.
     Helping Children Succeed: What Works and Why. ​By Paul Tough.
     Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
     How Learning Works: 7 Research-Based Principles for Smart Teaching. B     ​ y
     Susan A. Ambrose, Michael W. Bridges, Michele DiPietro, Marsha C.
     Lovett, and Marie K. Norman. Jossey-Bass.
                                              3


Updated 1/15/2020
                                  OUTLINE OF COURSE
   Week                 Tuesday                   Thursday             Assignments
                                                                           Due
      1         Introduction and
                                         What is learning?
 1/21, 1/23     overview
      2         Memory 1: Encoding
                                         Activities: Memory 1        RR1 due (Tue)
 1/28, 1/30     and working memory
      3         Memory 2: Long-term
  2/4, 2/6      memory & learning        Activities: Memory 2        RR2 due (Tue)
                strategies
      4
                Expertise                Activities: Expertise       RR3 due (Tue)
 2/11, 2/13
      5         Setting habits & Unit
                                         Unit 1 Exam
 2/18, 2/20     1 review
      6         Critical thinking &      Reflection & activities: CT
 2/25, 2/27                                                          RR4 due (Tue)
                conceptual change        & CC
      7                                                              RR5 due (Tue)
                Assessment &             Reflection & activities:
  3/3, 3/5                                                           Application
                transfer                 Assessment & transfer
                                                                     assignment (Thu)
      8                                  Reflection & activities:
                Peer learning                                        RR6 due (Tue)
 3/10, 3/12                              Peer Learning
      9
                                      SPRING BREAK - NO CLASS
 3/17, 3/19
     10         Activities: Check-in,
 3/24, 3/26     feedback, and writing    Unit 2 Exam
                assignments clinic
     11                                  Reflection & activities:    RR7 due (Tue)
                Needs & goals
  3/31, 4/2                              Needs & Goals
     12                                  Reflection & activities:    RR8 due (Tue)
                Self-efficacy & value
  4/7, 4/9                               Self-efficacy & value       Design-a-X (Thu)
     13         Attributions &           Reflection & activities:    RR9 due (Tue)
 4/14, 4/16     mindsets                 Attributions & mindsets
     14
                [NO CLASS]               Unit 3 Exam
 4/21, 4/23
     15                                  Final reflection &
                Metacognition                                        RR10 due (Thu)
 4/28, 4/30                              activities: Metacognition
     16         Final wrap-up &
                                         Final Exam
  5/5, 5/7      review
*RR = Reading Response
Note: This syllabus is subject to change.
                                              4


Updated 1/15/2020
                                         Evaluation
You can demonstrate your efforts and learning in the class and earn credits toward your
final grade on a variety of assignments. A total of 400 points will be available throughout
the course.
Grades will be distributed according to the following scale:
A:      92.5-100%    370-400 points
A-:     89.5-92%     358-369.5 points
B+:     86.5-89%     346-357.5 points
B:      82.5-86%     330-345.5 points
B-:     79.5-82%     318-329.5 points
C+:     76.5-79%     306-317.5 points
C:      72.5-76%     290-305.5 points
C-:     69.5-72%     278-289.5 points
D:      59.5-69%     238-277.5 points
F:      <59.5%       <237.5 points
IMPORTANT​: If you wish to contest the grading of any item, you will be asked to fill out
an Item Review Form, which is provided on the course Canvas site.
Please check your point status after each exam or assignment. Please keep your
records up to date because ​late assignments will not be accepted​. I also recommend
that you keep a copy of all group work so that we have a way to verify your work, if
there are discrepancies.
Reading Responses (5%).
In each week, there will be several assigned readings. You are expected to read the
assigned articles for each week before lecture. In addition to reading them, each week,
you will also be asked to write a reading response about the content of the articles.
These reading responses will be due before the lecture, by 9am each Tuesday. Each of
the 10 reading responses will be worth 2 pts, for a total of 20 pts.
There is not a mandatory reading response for the first week, but we will send out a
pre-semester survey for you to complete.
                        Why do I have to write reading responses?
    1. You will come to class better aware of what you do or don’t understand and can
        be ready to ask questions.
    2. You will become an active participant in your learning rather than a passive,
        empty vessel waiting to be filled.
    3. You will be ready to do extension activities in class, and so will learn more and
        better remember the applications.
                                             5


Updated 1/15/2020
Weekly Habit Log and Reflections (2.5%)
In week 5, we will each set a study habit goal, based on what we have learned about
effective learning in Unit 1. From week 6 to week 13, we will begin our Thursday classes
with an individual habit log and reflection. The purpose of this activity is to challenge you
to integrate some of the course content into your daily lives, in order to improve your
own studying practices.
Each habit log entry will be worth 1 pt. In week 15, we will start our Thursday class with
a final reflection which will be worth 4 points. These weekly habit log and reflections will
be worth a total of 10 pts.
These weekly logs and reflections are due by 11:59pm on Thursdays. We will provide
time in class to complete these, but if you are unable to attend for any reason or if you
do not have time to complete them during class, then please make sure they are
submitted by the end of the day.
In-Class Activities (12.5%).
There will be 11 in-class activity opportunities (on Thursday classes). Comparing,
self-generating examples, and active practice are all excellent ways to learn new
material. To help you do this, we will have small in-class groups in which you can work
cooperatively on activities to submit for credit. These in-class activities assignments
should be uploaded to Canvas within 30 minutes of the end of each Thursday class.
There will be no make-ups for missed in-class activities. However, the lowest in-class
activity score will be dropped, so the in-class activities will be worth a total of 50 points.
Unit Exams (45%).
After each unit, there will be a unit exam. Exams will consist of a mix of multiple-choice
items and short-answer items. There will be three unit exams (Feb 20, March 26, and
April 23), worth 60 points each, for a total of 180 points.
There are no make-ups for unit exams. However, if your final exam score is higher than
your lowest unit exam score, then your final exam score will replace that lowest unit
exam score.
Application Assignment (10%).
There will be one application assignment to be completed individually. The application
assignment is designed for you to demonstrate whether you can apply the concepts
taught in the course to evaluating and analyzing various learning scenarios. Specific
instructions for the application assignment will be made available at least three weeks in
advance of the due date. The application assignment is worth 40 points. It is due
Thursday March 5th and should be submitted to Canvas by 11:59pm.
Design-a-Class/Guide (aka Design-a-X) (10%).
                                               6


Updated 1/15/2020
There will be one Design-a-Class/Guide assignment to be completed individually, to
apply what you have learned throughout the course. You have the option of either
designing a class based on a TEK or designing a guide for incoming freshmen. Specific
instructions for the Design-a-Class/Guide assignment will be made available at least
three weeks in advance of the due date. The Design-a-Class/Guide assignment is worth
40 points. It is due Thursday April 9th and should be submitted to Canvas by 11:59pm.
Final Exam (15%).
A cumulative final exam will be held in our final class: May 7th. The final exam will be
worth 60 points -- it will be the same length as the unit exams. There will be no make up
for the final exam. If you know that you will not be able to make it to the final exam,
please let the instructor know as soon as possible, and at least fourteen days prior to
the scheduled exam.
If you have to miss the final exam due to unforeseen circumstances, please let the
instructor know as soon as you can and provide written proof (e.g., medical note, police
report). In this case, you may be assigned an Incomplete for the course at the
instructor’s discretion and if it meets the university criteria for an incomplete. The
instructor will determine the exact procedures by which a student will make up the work.
                                 Guidelines for Assignments
Every component of the course, except for the unit exams and final exam will be turned
in via Canvas. In other words, the weekly reading responses, in-class activities, habit
reflections, application assignment, and Design-a-X, will all need to be submitted to
Canvas. Note that everything uploaded to Canvas will also be automatically checked
against Turnitin.com for plagiarism.
Late assignments will not be accepted​. I also recommend that you keep a copy of all
group work so that we have a way to verify your work, if there are discrepancies.
If you cite sources in any of your assignments, please use APA style. For guidance, see
https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/purdue_owl.html
                            Classroom and University Policies
Statement on Learning Success:​ Your success in this class is important to me. We
will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of
this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon
as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources
available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you
with a person or Center if you would like.
                                               7


Updated 1/15/2020
Services for Students with Disabilities:​ The university is committed to creating an
accessible and inclusive learning environment consistent with university policy and
federal and state law. Please let me know if you experience any barriers to learning so I
can work with you to ensure you have equal opportunity to participate fully in this
course. If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and
need accommodations please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD).
Please refer to SSD’s website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/​. If you are already registered with SSD, please
deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the semester so we
can discuss your approved accommodations and needs in this course.
The twelfth class day is February 5th​, which is the last day to possibly get a refund if
you drop a class.
Religious Holy Day Observance:​ Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class
and examination schedules. If you miss a work assignment or other project due to the
observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work
missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of
Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior
to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
Non-medical Absences:​ If you are going to miss class due to an involvement in
university activities at the request of University officials (e.g., athletic events), you must
notify your instructor at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you
will be absent and provide documentation. You will be given an opportunity to complete
the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence.
The University of Texas Honor Code:​ The core values of The University of Texas at
Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Dishonesty and Plagiarism:​ The University defines academic dishonesty
as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and
any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information
to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student’s learning
experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For
more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services
Web site at ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
                                                 8


Updated 1/15/2020
Personal Pronoun Use:​ Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important
with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion,
politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are
provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request
to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this
preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my
records.
                                    University Resources
The Sanger Learning Center​: Did you know that more than one-third of UT
undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their
academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614​ (JES
A332).
CARE Counseling​: CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health
Center. It is common to need support when dealing with feelings and problems that
seem beyond your control. CARE Counselors are available to help with a variety of
issues that may serve as a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in
the College of Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT. Her office is in the George I.
Sanchez Building, SZB 212E. To schedule an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask
to schedule a CARE appointment. If you leave a voicemail, please include your name,
EID, and contact number. Walk-in hours are also available on Mondays and
Wednesdays from 1 - 2 PM in JES A115 and Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 ​– 2 PM in
SZB 216. You will check–in at the Front Desk, and they will let Danie know you're
waiting. All services are confidential. None of your information will be shared without
your written consent. Come by and see us, we are here to listen.
Title IX Reporting​: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic
violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all
its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
        harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees”
or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of
Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. ​I am a Responsible Employee and must report
any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or
                                               9


Updated 1/15/2020
one-on-one​. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX
related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to
speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email ​advocate@austin.utexas.edu​. For more information about reporting
options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu​.
Safety information​: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin
campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm
activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize
yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless given instructions by The University of Texas at Austin Police
Department or Fire Prevention Services office. Other important Emergency Information:
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Student Safety and Resources
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050;
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
UT Counseling & Mental Health Center: 512-471-3515; 24/7 Crisis Line 512-471-2255;
https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu
SURE Walk: provides walking companions on campus from the hours of 7PM - 2AM,
Monday-Sunday, (512) 232-9255; http://utsg.org/projects/sure-walk
UT Student Safety website: ​https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/
                                             10
