            Syllabus: Technology Advertising and Marketing
                          ADV 332 (05950), PR 332 (06480)
Day & Time Thursday: 4:00 – 7:00 p.m.
Location          UTC 2.112A.
Professor         Mark Bunting
                  markb@skytv.net (Office hours in BMC 4.310 – appointment only)
Teaching Assistants
    •    Greg Song (Yong Whi Song)
         ywsong@utexas.edu | (612) 325 - 6253
    •    Laura Sliker
         lauragsliker@utexas.edu | (585) 245 - 3731
PLEASE CONTACT ASSISTANTS FOR ANY QUESTIONS CONCERNING ATTENDANCE, GRADES, ET. Do
not contact Professor Bunting directly for attendance and grading questions.
Enrollment Course is designed as an elective for students in the schools of
Business, Engineering, Liberal Arts and Communications and is an open elective to
any student who has attained status as a upperclassman (Junior / Senior)
Facebook          UT AdTech https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech
The Course One of the biggest challenges we face in the technology & consumer
electronic industry is that the bright minds that develop digital products and highly
complex technologies generally are less qualified at marketing and communication
skills. Likewise, those gifted with great communication acumen, rarely possess the
technical understanding of the products they must market. Every discipline within
the high-tech industry is ultimately dependent on engineers augmenting their
developments to make them more marketable, and marketing experts need to grasp
the challenges of taking new (and sometimes rarely understood) new technologies
to the consumer and B-to-B market. By exploring actual case histories, interviews
with leading technology advertising and marketing executives and a review of some
of the more topical trends in technology communications – we will bring real-life
experience/exposure for those who hope to enter this important arena. In addition,
we will explore the latest trends in digital advertising from mobile to social and its
impact across marketing segments and industries. Entrepreneurialism in new media
will also be covered, as will the exploration of career opportunities involving all of
the aforementioned. We will also spend 2 weeks with online modules regarding


Entrepreneurship as we work thru case studies.
Summary
        - Extensive Look at Advertising & Marketing Within the Technology Industry.
        - Review Newer Technologies in Communication (Social/Mobile).
        - Entrepreneurialism across “Technology” and “Media.”
        - Career Opportunities in Social/Mobile/Tech Client Side & PR/ADV/MKT.
   Taking a cue from Inside the Actors Studio, this weekly 3-hour class will include
guest speakers from some of the industry’s biggest names. We will explore a myriad
    of topics involving the marketing and advertising of technology products and
   services. Professor Mark Bunting is the former television host of many popular
 computer programs from CNBC, The Discovery Channel and The Learning Channel.
                     https://www.linkedin.com/in/markbunting/
As a serial entrepreneur in both technology and media, Professor Bunting will
expose students to a broad spectrum of topics within the technology
advertising/marketing arena. A few of the topics will include:
       Emerging Media Technologies – Augmented Reality * B2B/B2C Technology
     Industry Advertising * Marketing Technology to Consumers * Agency and Client
          Relationship * Social Networking and The Changing Media Landscape *
         Entrepreneurialism * PR’s Role in the Communication Mix * Marketing’s
      Influence in the Product Development Cycle Out of Home/Alternative Media *
                 Mobile and Social * Fundamentals of Entrepreneurship *
Guest Speakers have included a number of key executives from leading technology
and media enterprises. They will share their experiences through- out the semester.
Students will also have an opportunity to meet each guest and “network” with these
highly influential leaders.
Materials - Entrepreneurship Modules by G51 EDU ($99 online). You can sign up at
the URL below. If you have previously purchased an older version of G51 you will
receive ½ (50%) off. Please contact your Teaching assistant. Spring 2020 includes
newer material not previously published. Students enrolled in both classes will be
required to purchase a separate license per course (different material).
https://g51edu.com/courses/technology-marketing-and-advertising/
Students must complete each module before their assigned classes, this includes
watching all 4 videos and reviewing all lesson slides. A completion report with the
time spent on each module will be sent to the Teaching Assistants at 6am CST the
morning after their due date. Incomplete or uncompleted work after the deadline
will not be accepted. Students are expected to be familiar with the content


before the class so they can contribute to the dialogue and ask the guest speakers
relevant questions. The material covered will be included in one or both exams.
Grading Policy
Attendance - 50%
Students are allowed ONE excused absence for the semester without penalty. Being
absent for classes will result in a significant reduction of your grade for the course.
If a student misses a class for any reason, it is the student’s responsibility to be
informed of the materials covered during the class. Absences beyond the 1 excused
allotted will affect your final grade as follows:
# of Absences          Reduction of Final Average
        2                      -3
        3                      -15
        4                      (failed)
Example: You start with a 100 for attendance grade. If your final average in the class
at semesters end was a 91 / (A). (2 exams + Entrepreneurship modules + 100 for
attendance). That final grade would be reduced by 3 points to an 89 (B+) due to
having missed 2 classes. If you had 3 absences – that number would drop to by 12
points to a 79 (C+).
This is a lecture and heavy guest speaker experience – your attendance is
mandatory and ONLY excused is accompanied by verification via SSD (Student
Services) letter. No exceptions.
Exams - 35%
There will be two closed-book exams during the semester according to the following
tentative schedule: Exam 1: March 26th
                      Exam 2: May 7th
Each exam accounts for 17.5% of your class grade. The exams will be completed on a
laptop through Canvas and will consist of true/false and/or multiple-choice questions
and/or short answer questions based on course material covered prior to the exam
date.
Entrepreneurship Modules - 15% Both modules must be completed by their
respective deadline and date/time stamped accordingly. No exceptions. Projects
completed on time score 100. Projects completed after the due date score at 50.
Enrollment Deadline: February 6, 2020
Complete Module 1: 6 Tenets of Entrepreneurship 11:59pm CST 2/12/2020
Complete Module 2: Unique Value Propositions 11:59pm CST 2/19/2020


                                      Grading:
A = 90-100%, B = 80-89%, C = 70-79%, D = 60-69 %, F = below 60%. Fractions of
points will be rounded: .50 or higher upwards, .49 or lower downwards.
Plus/minus will not be assigned to the letter grades.
Course Procedures:
   1. Canvas (http://courses.utexas.edu): Canvas and classroom
       announcements will serve as communication vehicles for this course. Please
       check Canvas or the Facebook page below for PowerPoint slides for a class
       session, as well as for other session-related materials. In order to ensure that
       you receive all information sent out through Canvas, please update your
       email address on UTDirect (www.utdirect.utexas.edu). Tests will also be
       administered via Canvas, so please bring laptops to class on test days.
   2. Facebook: Please like the UT ADTECH Facebook Page:
       www.facebook.com/UtAdTech. This source will list additional information
       such as blog posts, articles and other content which may be relevant to in-
       class discussion. Video content from class lectures as well as PowerPoint
       slides will also be posted on this site.
   3. In Class Conduct: Use of laptop computers, cell phones, mobile tablets and
       other electronic devices during class session is prohibited. NOISE DURING
       LECTURES AND SPEAKERS IS HIGHLY DISRUPTIVE. Quiet is required!
   4. Academic Dishonesty: All students are expected to act within and
       uphold the UT Honor Code fully. You may access the General Information
       Catalog to review specific University policies on scholastic dishonesty or
       refer to Student Judicial Services website
       http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/. Any students caught cheating on
       exams or attendance will be dismissed from class under the authority of the
       Academic Dishonesty policies.
A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
