                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                             UNITED STATES FOREIGN POLICY
                                        Government F312L
                                               81785
                                   Professor Patrick J. McDonald
                                            Summer 2019
CLASS MEETING PLACE: On-demand streaming through Canvas:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251971
INSTRUCTOR CONTACT INFORMATION
email: pjmcdonald@austin.utexas.edu
office: BAT 4.136
office hours (in person and over skype): Tuesday 10-1 (please sign up via google doc on
Canvas)
Skype address: gov312mcdonald
TEACHING ASSISTANT                                 OFFICE HOURS
Ross Buchanan
TA email address: onlinegov312usfpta@austin.utexas.edu.
For general administrative questions, please direct your inquiry to the TA email address. Please
see a professor or the TA over office hours with individual questions about grades. Substantive
questions can be directed to the TA or Professor McDonald.
Office Hours for the TA will be located in 1.118 Batts Hall.
Contact technical support outside of class at: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu.
TEXTBOOK
McDonald, Patrick J., Robert Moser, and Terrence L. Chapman. 2020. Opening a Global
System: An Introduction to International Relations. Pearson.
Note: This book is not yet published nor available for purchase. We will make draft chapters
and interactive figures available to you through our Canvas page.
                                                                                                 1


I. COURSE OVERVIEW
Since its founding, the United States has played a central role in shaping the larger international
political order. American victories in World War I, World War II, and the Cold War coupled
with its support for democracy and open global markets stand at the heart of this legacy. At the
same time, external pressures in the form of war, globalization, and the spread of transnational
ideological movements have stressed American institutions and shaped an evolving American
national identity. This course explores this mutually interactive relationship between the United
States and the broader international system by examining the making of American foreign policy
over the past two centuries more broadly. It explores such topics as the role of Congress in
foreign policy making, the construction of the national security state in the twentieth century,
competing partisan conceptions of America’s national interest, nuclear deterrence and
proliferation, territorial expansion, trade liberalization, nation building, humanitarian
intervention, and more recent challenges like terrorism.
This course fulfills the second half of the legislative requirement for government. It may be taken
for credit only once.
The class is designed to accommodate 800 or more students. The course meets online. Students
are encouraged to visit http://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html to test their computer and
network connection and learn about the course structure.
II. ONLINE COURSE FORMAT
This is a digital course—unlike almost all other courses offered at the University of Texas, you
will be viewing this class online (from the comfort of your own home, a library, or a coffee joint)
rather than in-person. You are expected to “attend” class by logging into the course to watch
recorded lectures that have already been posted to Canvas. Every daily class period you will be
expected to view the assigned lecture module. You will also complete a series of quizzes that are
assigned as part of every module.
You are strongly encouraged to follow the schedule outline in the syllabus, watching the
lecture on or just prior to the day it is assigned. In order to assist you in staying on schedule
we will provide access to modules and quizzes gradually. You may work ahead several days if
you would like. For example, at the beginning of the course (which starts on Thursday, June 6)
students will have access to Modules 0-7 and their associated quizzes, which are covered on the
first midterm exam. After the first midterm, students will have access to all modules and quizzes
for the upcoming week. Students should watch the module videos by the date assigned and take
the associated quizzes by the deadline posted in the syllabus. Students will not have access to
quizzes after their deadlines have passed. Any missed quiz will result in a zero for that quiz.
Questions and participation in class—We rely primarily on announcements sent through Canvas
(all of which can be found through the Announcements tab on our Canvas home page). Any
questions can be directed to us through email or asked in person during office hours for those
students taking the course in Austin.
                                                                                                    2


III. TECHNICAL AND COMMUNICATION LOGISTICS
CLASS WEBSITE. To get to everything associated with the class, simply go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1251971
You can enter directly from the internet or through Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To
log into Canvas and the class website, you will need your UT EID and password. Once you reach
the class website, you can navigate your way to other areas. Some of the most important include:
         1. Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the technical
             requirements and test stream webpage, information regarding technical questions, as
             well as contact information for the instructors and teaching assistants. On the left-
             hand side of each page of the Canvas course site are navigation tabs to all parts of the
             website, including the Syllabus.
         2. Modules – The Modules page includes links to the daily Reading Assignments,
             Lecture video archives, and other course documents.
         3. Other Pages – Occasionally new links will be posted on the homepage including the
             FAQ page.
Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Modules tabs.
         ●   Required internet-enabled device. All students are required to have access to an
             internet-enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not
             supported. Your computer should have enough battery life to last an entire class
             period and meet the following requirements:
                  o 2 GB RAM/memory (most computers purchased in the last five years will
                      have this)
                  o Modern and updated operating system (Windows or macOS)
                  o Updated web browser: Chrome (recommended), Safari, Firefox
                  o 5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
You should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting the test
stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html.
There are multiple computer labs on campus for your use if you do not have a personal computer
or laptop. (You can find a listing of these labs by clicking on the “Campus Computer Labs” link
found on this page https://it.utexas.edu/students.) If you do not have an internet-enabled device,
some inexpensive ones are available at local stores or on the internet, some for as little as $100.
         ● Bandwidth limitations: No use of high bandwidth programs. Because the
             streaming video is bandwidth intensive, you are not allowed to access YouTube,
             Skype, Gmail video chat or other online video system, or any other program that is
             bandwidth-demanding. During the class session, you should be watching the lecture
             and nothing else!
         ● Course Communication – Outside of the video lectures, any student communication
             initiated by professors and teaching assistants will be conducted via the
             Announcements page on our course website, so please make sure you check the
             Announcements page on a daily basis. If students wish to contact professors, they
             may do so either via email or by visiting office hours. If students wish to contact
             teaching assistants, they may do so either in person during office hours or via the TA
             email: onlinegov312usfpta@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                                                                    3


          ●  Honor system for quizzes. By taking this class, you agree to abide by the
             University of Texas regulations concerning cheating. During the quizzes, you cannot
             receive help from others or discuss your assignments with other students. If you
             observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact the TAs or instructors.
          ●  Information and data security. All exercises, quizzes, writing assignments, and
             online interactions over the TOWER system will be saved and stored. All
             information will be kept for educational and general academic research. Any
             research or data sharing with other researchers will involve de-identifying the data,
             including the removal of names, UT EIDs, email addresses, or other information. To
             further ensure that your information is secure, please do not include identifying
             information in your online interactions with others.
Also, remember that all information is stored on secure UT-Austin computer servers. In online
interactions with others, instructors and TAs will have access to all information.
IV. COURSE EVALUATION
There will be two primary requirements for the course. First, you will be expected to attend class
by viewing the pre-recorded lecture modules, keep up with the assigned readings, and complete
module quizzes. Second, you will take three exams (75 minutes each) on June 18, June 28, and
July 11. Please note that the exams will be held during the evening from 7 pm to 8:15 pm on
the assigned dates. These requirements will provide the following components of the final
grade:
Quizzes                           15%               Due:   recurring deadlines
First exam                        25%               Due:   Tuesday, June 18
Second exam                       30%               Due:   Friday, June 28
Third exam                        30%               Due:   Thursday, July 11
Students will need to complete all of the exams to receive credit for the course. This point is
critical. Even if you have enough points for, say, a C in the course, you need to complete each of
the exams to pass. Failure to do so will result in a failing grade.
Exams
The three midterm exams are NOT cumulative. The first exam will cover the reading and lecture
material for modules 0 through 7. The second exam will cover the readings and lecture material
from modules 8 through 14. The third exam will cover the reading and lecture material from
modules 15 through 21. Please note the dates and times of these exams and make sure that you
are able to attend all exams. Exams will consist of multiple choice and true/false questions.
More information on the format and content of the exams will be provided at a later date.
For students taking the course in Austin, the exams will be taken in-person in a classroom on
UT campus on the designated days and times:
Exam 1: Tuesday, June 18, FAC 21, 7 pm to 8:15 pm (please arrive by 6:45 pm)
Exam 2: Friday, June 28, FAC 21, 7 pm to 8:15 pm (please arrive by 6:45 pm)
Exam 3: Thursday, July 11, FAC 21, 7 pm to 8:15 pm (please arrive by 6:45 pm)
Please contact us as soon as possible if you are enrolled in another web-based course at UT and
our exam time conflicts with an exam in that course.
                                                                                                   4


Instructions for confirming that you will take the exams in Austin are included in the Pre-class
Activities module. You must confirm your plans to take the exam in-person by 5:00 PM on
Tuesday, June 11. You will not be able to access Module 4 of the course content until you do so.
For students taking the course outside of Austin, the exams will be administered online, in
Canvas, and proctored by a testing company, ProctorU. These exams will be taken online
on the same day and time as the in-person exams.
The online exams will have the same format of multiple choice and true/false questions. ProctorU
is a testing service that confirms your identity and monitors your computer and work space while
you are taking the exam to ensure that you complete it without any assistance from study
resources, like notes, slides, or other students in the class. You will need a webcam, a
microphone, and a high-speed Internet connection, as well as a quiet, secure, and distraction-free
setting. You cannot, for example, take the exam while riding in a car or a bus (yes, we have been
asked this before). In order to take the exams, students will need to create an account with
ProctorU (a link will be provided on the course Canvas page). Once students have created a
ProctorU account, they will need to schedule and pay for all three exam proctoring sessions.
Instructions for creating an account and scheduling exam sessions are included in the Pre-class
Activities module.
It is required that you schedule and pay for all three exam proctoring sessions by 5:00 PM
on Tuesday, June 11. You will not be able to access Module 4 of the course content until you
schedule and pay for all three exam sessions.
WARNING! Late registrations are subject to availability. You may receive a zero credit for an
exam if you are unable to take a test on the required date because you did not make an
appointment before the due date of June 11. If you will be taking the exams on the UT-Austin
campus, you do NOT need to sign-up with ProctorU.
Makeup exams will only be granted under extreme and unavoidable circumstances. You must
have documentation of this emergency and must secure approval from the instructors in advance.
The format of the makeup will differ significantly, including some identification terms and short
essay questions. Note: if you expect now to be unavailable or traveling on the day(s) of the exam
(evidence of this might be a nonrefundable plane ticket), you will not be granted a makeup exam
for these anticipated travel plans. Take the course in another semester. Your decision to remain
in the course after the first day of class reflects acknowledgment of this policy.
Quizzes
Quizzes will be administered after every module. These quizzes will have regular deadlines that
are listed in the course schedule. Quizzes are due by 11 PM central daylight time of the day
listed on the syllabus. After 11 PM, you will no longer be able to receive credit for those
quizzes AND you will no longer have access to the quiz questions. Because material will be
available in advance of due dates and you are free to complete these activities on your own
timeline, you will NOT be able to make up any points because of a missed deadline.
Quizzes will also be multiple-choice and true/false format and administered online through the
Canvas portal. You are expected to complete the quizzes on your own. We will monitor this via
cheating detection software. Quizzes will generally be comprised of about five questions. They
are designed to reinforce the material you have just learned and help your grade so long as you
                                                                                                  5


keep up with the material throughout the session. You will be free to access lecture material,
lecture slides, and your readings as you complete these activities.
The material for a quiz will be based on the lecture modules listed on the course schedule as well
as the readings associated with those lecture modules.
Your quiz grades will count toward 15% of your final course grade. The two lowest quiz grades
will be dropped, no questions asked. This policy is designed to accommodate any potential
conflicts that arise for you. There are no makeups for missed quizzes.
Grades
Final grades for the course will be based on the following scale. Please note that rounding is
already being taken into account and so the thresholds for each grade level will be strictly
enforced. In other words, we will NOT bump up final course grades that fall just below each
threshold:
Grading scale:
92.5%-100%        A
89.5%-92.49%      A-
86.5%-89.49%      B+
82.5%-86.49%      B
79.5%-82.49%      B-
76.5%-79.49%      C+
72.5%-76.49%      C
69.5%-72.49%      C-
66.5%-69.49%      D+
62.5%-66.49%      D
59.5%-62.49%      D-
0%-59.49%         F
Please note that incomplete grades are highly discouraged and will only be given in the direst of
circumstances.
                                                                                                  6


Readings
The course readings can be accessed through our Canvas page. You should have read these
assignments before the class for which they are assigned. Your comprehension of material from
all readings will be assessed in quizzes and in tests.
Note that the readings and links may change up to about a week before the listed date. For the
most up-to-date assignment, check the module for that day.
V. POLICY & PROCEDURES
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at (512) 471-6259, (512) 410-6644 (video phone). If you have approved
accommodations for exams, please contact us through the TA email address to arrange them.
Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the
Student Judicial Services website: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/index.php. Refer to
the Dean of Students Student Judicial Services website or call 471-2841 for the official university
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
The online course format allows for multiple methods of identity verification, collusion,
collaboration and plagiarism monitoring and detection. A violation of the course policy may
include (but is not limited to) the following:
         Providing your UT EID to any other person
         Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the material on any
         activity, assessment or assignment, before, during and/or after any activity, assessment or
         assignment
         Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format
         The public (such that it can be viewed by more than one person) posting of any form of a
         test bank or group of questions from any assignment
The University of Texas at Austin Academic Integrity Principles call for students to avoid
engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
student. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/index.php
Grade-related penalties are routinely assessed. The severity of these penalties will be determined
at the Instructor’s discretion and will generally not be less than a zero on one of the four
components of a student’s final grade (three midterm exams, in-class quizzes) in which the
violation occurred. If you cheat, copy, or share any of the questions on any exam, expect to get
an F in the course. Students can also be suspended or even permanently expelled from the
University for academic misconduct
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php).
                                                                                                     7


Students often join social media platforms, like Facebook, where work product is shared among
many students. While we do not prohibit you from joining such groups, we will hold ALL
members of a social media group responsible for any form of academic dishonesty that occurs
within such a group irrespective of its size. In other words, if any group of two or more students
engages in any form of academic dishonesty on the site (or Facebook page), ALL members of
that site or page will also be treated as having engaged in the same form of academic dishonesty
because they can observe it and benefit from it. Quite simply, be very careful about joining such
groups.
Religious Holidays
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time
after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
          have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. We are Responsible Employees and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with us, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                                                                    8


VI. CLASS SCHEDULE
Note: The dates associated with module are due dates. You must complete the associated
quiz for a module by 11 pm on the day in which the module is assigned.
I. Introduction
Thursday, June 6
Module 0: Course Introduction
Friday, June 7
Module 1: Introduction to International Politics
Readings: Opening the Global System, Chapter 2: The International System
(Available at https://revelpreview.pearson.com/?book=epubs/pearson_mcdonald-ir-
1e&page=1)
Quiz over Module 1 (Due at 11 pm)
II. Foreign Policy and Grand Strategy
Monday, June 10
Module 2: The US Foreign Policy Apparatus and the National Interest
Readings: George W. Bush. 2002. National Security Strategy of the United States. Available
at: http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/63562.pdf.
Quiz over Module 2 (Due at 11 pm)
Tuesday, June 11
Module 3: Grand Strategy I: Introduction and Isolationism
Readings: Barack Obama. 2014. Commencement Speech at West Point. Available at:
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/05/28/remarks-president-united-states-military-
academy-commencement-ceremony.
Barry R. Posen. 2013. Pull Back. Foreign Affairs 92(1): 116-128.
Quiz over Module 3 (Due at 11 pm)
                                                                                              9


Wednesday, June 12
Module 4: Grand Strategy II: Selective Engagement, Liberal Internationalism, and Primacy
Readings: John J. Mearsheimer and Stephen M. Walt. 2016. The Case for Offshore Balancing.
Foreign Affairs 95(4): 70-83.
Randall Schweller. 2018. Three Cheers for Trump’s Foreign Policy: What the Establishment
Misses. Foreign Affairs 97(5): 133-143.
Quiz over Module 4 (Due at 11 pm)
III. Foreign Policy Making in the United States
Thursday, June 13
Module 5: The President in Foreign Policy
Readings: Robert Golan-Vilella. 2014. A Tale of Two AUMFs. The National Interest 133: 59-
66.
James Goldgeier and Elizabeth N. Saunders. 2018. The Unconstrained Presidency: Checks and
Balances Eroded Long Before Trump. Foreign Affairs 97(5): 144-156.
Quiz over Module 5 (Due at 11 pm)
Friday, June 14
Module 6: Congress in Foreign Policy
Readings: Stephen R. Weissman. 2017. Congress and War. Foreign Affairs 96(1): 132-145.
Brian McKeon and Caroline Tess. 2019. How Congress Can Take Back Foreign Policy: A
Playbook for Capitol Hill. Foreign Affairs 98(1): 76-87.
Quiz over Module 6 (Due at 11 pm)
Monday, June 17
Module 7: The American Public and US Foreign Policy
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 18: Domestic Politics and International Relations
Quiz over Module 7 (Due at 11 pm)
                                                                                           10


Tuesday, June 18
EXAM #1 IN THE EVENING, FROM 7 TO 8:15 PM
(Exam will cover all course content from Introduction through Module 7.)
IV. CONTEMPORARY CHALLENGES FOR US FOREIGN POLICY
Wednesday, June 19
Module 8: Violence and the International Political Order
Reading: Opening a Global System, Chapter 16, Sections 16.1, 16.2, 16.3
Quiz over Module 8 (due at 11 pm)
Thursday, June 20
Module 9: Great Powers, the United States, and the International Political Order
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 16, Section 16.4
Opening a Global System, Chapter 20, Sections 20.1, 20.2
Michael McFaul. 2018. Russia as It Is: A Grand Strategy for Confronting Putin. Foreign
Affairs 97(4): 82-91.
Quiz over Module 9 (due at 11 pm)
Friday, June 21
Module 10: Civil War and the Challenges of Intervention
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 12: Civil War and International Relations
Quiz over Module 10 (due at 11 pm)
Monday, June 24
Module 11: Nuclear Weapons and US Foreign Policy I
Reading: Opening a Global System, Chapter 13: Nuclear Weapons and Nuclear Deterrence
Quiz over Module 11 (due at 11 pm)
                                                                                       11


Tuesday, June 25
Module 12: Nuclear Weapons and US Foreign Policy II
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 14: Threats to Nuclear Deterrence: Credibility,
Missile Defense, and Nuclear Proliferation
Quiz over Module 12 (due at 11 pm)
Wednesday, June 26
Module 13: Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 15: Terrorism and Counterterrorism
Robert Malley and Jon Finer. 2018. The Long Shadow of 9/11: How Counterterrorism Warps
U.S. Foreign Policy. Foreign Affairs 97(4): 58-69.
Quiz over Module 13 (due at 11 pm)
Thursday, June 27
Module 14: Great Power Politics II: Hegemony, Power Transition Theory, and US-China
Relations
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 20, Sections, 20.3, 20.4, 20.5
Oriana Skylar Mastro. 2019. The Stealth Superpower: How China Hid Its Global Ambitions.
Foreign Affairs 98(1): 31-39.
Quiz over Module 14 (due at 11 pm)
Friday, June 28
EXAM #2 IN THE EVENING, FROM 7 TO 8:15 PM
(Exam will cover all course content from Module 8 through Module 14.)
Monday, July 1
Module 15: The United States and International Organizations
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 21: Global Governance
Quiz over Module 15 (due at 11 pm)
                                                                                           12


Tuesday, July 2
Module 16: Democracy Promotion in US Foreign Policy
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 19: Democracy in International Relations
Michael Chertoff and Anders Fogh Rasmussen. 2019. The Unhackable Election: What It Takes
to Defend Democracy. Foreign Affairs 95(3): 10-17.
Quiz over Module 16 (due at 11 pm)
Wednesday, July 3
Module 17: Globalization and US Trade Policy
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 26: Globalization
Quiz over Module 17 (due at 11 pm)
Thursday, July 4
July 4th holiday: no class assignments
Friday, July 5
Module 18: Finance and US Foreign Policy
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 28: The International Politics of Exchange Rates
Quiz over Module 18 (Due at 11 pm)
Monday, July 8
Module 19: The United States and the Bretton Woods Institutions
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 30: International Organizations in the Global
Economy
Quiz over Module 19 (due at 11 pm)
                                                                                          13


Tuesday, July 9
Module 20: The Environment and US Foreign Policy
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 32: Environmental Politics
Johannes Urpelainen, Here’s what political science can tell us about the Paris climate deal,
Monkey Cage, Washington Post, December 14, 2015.
https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2015/12/14/heres-what-political-
science-can-tell-us-about-the-paris-climate-deal/
Quiz over Module 20 (due at 11 pm)
Wednesday, July 10
Module 21: International Migration
Readings: Opening a Global System, Chapter 31: International Migration
Thursday, July 11
EXAM #3 IN THE EVENING, FROM 7 TO 8:15 PM
(Exam will cover all course content from Module 15 through Module 21.)
                                                                                             14
