HDO 320 Syllabus                            Summer 2020
Multidisciplinary Methods for Exploring Organizations (77923)
Lecture: M/W/F from 11:30 am – 1:00 pm
Zoom Link: https://utexas.zoom.us/j/96903267936
Instructor Information
Professor             Email                 Office Location & Hours
Dr. Evan Stein        estein@utexas.edu     Schedule an appointment here:
                                            https://calendly.com/esteinutexas/office-hours?month=2020-06
General Information
Description
    •   HDO320 is a general introduction to social research methods and how it can be applied to study
        organizations
    •   We will cover research ethics, project management, qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
    •   You will learn how to generate a research question & hypothesis, design a research study, and how
        to collect and analyze data through hands-on assignments and in-class exercises
    •   Conducting research is a skill that is refined through experience and practice
    •   This course emphasizes the practical application of research and a “learn by doing” approach.
Course Objectives
At the end of the course, we expect you to be able to do the following:
    •   Identify potential ethical issues in research
    •   Formulate a focused research question
    •   Design a study using the appropriate research methods
    •   Collect data using the techniques learned in class
    •   Analyze both qualitative and quantitative data
    •   Critically evaluate your own and others’ research
    •   Plan and execute projects
These skills will help you evaluate organizations using a qualitative, quantitative, or a mixed methodology
approach. These research skills will be improved on and applied to studying local Austin organizations in HDO
379: Applying HDO.
                                           *** IMPORTANT ***
You are responsible for your own learning, asking questions to clarify confusion, staying up to date on your
work, and keeping track of and submitting your assignments.
The instructional staff is here to support you and facilitate learning. Please take advantages of
opportunities such as visiting office hours and asking questions about class material and/or assignments
before it is due.
   Proactivity and communication are crucial for success in and outside of this class.
                                                                                     HDO 320 Syllabus Page 1


Learning Objectives
Career
    •   Demonstrate personal accountability (punctuality) and efficient work habits; manage a large project
        (recommendation report project) from start to finish; work with external organizations to achieve a
        mutually rewarding outcome. Establishing a vision for career; participating in professional
        development exercises; applying cognitive science in the workplace; applying knowledge.
Collaboration
    •   Team problem-solving, team writing, understanding of teamwork dynamics; foreseeing team
        challenges and developing preemptive solutions. Learning to work with organizations and colleagues
        of various backgrounds. Organizing and assessing people in teams; using empathetic skills to guide
        and motivate team members; understanding relationships within your own team and the
        organizations at UT Austin.
Communication
    •   Written and verbal clarity; active listening; professional writing; understanding and interpreting
        data; ability to use stories/narrative to argue points; interpersonal skills.
Creativity
    •   Unique multidisciplinary approach to human-centered problems; creative problem solving,
        interdisciplinary thinking, multidisciplinary research, design thinking.
Critical Thinking
    •   Knowledge-driven decision making; measuring human behavior to inform decisions; analogical
        thinking; analyzing organizational problems from a holistic standpoint; understanding and applying
        elements of human motivation. Learning management and leadership practices that place humans
        at the center of an organization.
Course Flags
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester,
complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your
writing. You may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications
objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
                                                                                      HDO 320 Syllabus Page 2


Course Materials
Required Text
    •   Spinuzzi, Clay (2018). Topsight 2.0: A guide to studying, diagnosing, and fixing information flow in
        organizations. Austin, TX: Urso Press.
    •   Wolfe, Joanna (2017). Team writing: A guide to working in groups. Macmillan Higher Education.
MMEO Website
This course has a website that provides information to supplement your learning of the material we cover in
class. You will be assigned readings from the website throughout the course.
    •   http://mmeo.hdo.utexas.edu
Optional Materials
We also recommend the following books:
    •   Markman, Art (2019). Bring your brain to work: Using cognitive science to get a job, do it well, and
        advance your career. Harvard Business Review Press.
Assignments and Grading
Assignments
Attendance (10%)
Attendance to class is MANDATORY because we will be doing a lot of hands-on activities. I will give you a
writing prompt and you will free write for 2-3 mins on the topic. You will submit your response through
Canvas.
A more detailed explanation of our attendance policy is detailed in the Course Policies section. This will be
graded as complete or incomplete.
Team In-class presentations (10%)
There are 2 team presentations that involve applying knowledge and techniques learned in class to address
practical problem. Teams will present for 3-mins. Each team is responsible for delegating and negotiating
roles. Each team is required to have equal speaking roles. This will be graded as complete or incomplete.
Research Assignments (15%)
There are 5 assignments throughout the semester that will be used to help you understand and practice your
research skills. This will be graded using the grading policy detailed below.
    •   Research Ethics IRB Certification
    •   What is HDO?
    •   Notes from Recorded Interview + Thematic Analysis
    •   Preparing for LACS
    •   Creating a survey + Taking surveys
Video/Reading Checks (20%)
There will be 10 video/reading checks. You are responsible for reading and taking notes on the required
materials. Please post your notes to Canvas under the appropriate assignment. I accept pictures of written
notes (please be legible) and typed up notes. This will be graded as complete or incomplete.
                                                                                     HDO 320 Syllabus Page 3


Career Development Tasks (20%)
There are 4 tasks at the end of the semester that are research-based activities designed to help you think
critically about your career path. These 4 tasks will help you understanding your career path and with your
final pitch. This will be graded using the grading policy detailed below.
Final Individual Pitch (25%)
At the end of the semester, you will be responsible for pitching (i.e., presenting) your findings from your
research this semester. In 3-min recorded Zoom video, using a slide deck (i.e., PowerPoint), you will have to
answer:
     •   What is the definition of HDO and what are the critical skills learned?
     •   What are your career goals?
     •   How does HDO help you with your career?
You will have to submit both your recorded video and your slide deck.
This will be graded using the grading policy detailed below.
There will be no resubmissions for the final pitches.
Late final pitches will not be accepted.
Policy on Late Work
You MUST submit your work on time.
All assignments and exams will be penalized 10% of the grade per day late.
After 5 days, you will receive a 0.
Late reading checks will receive 0. See section Exam and Assignment Schedule for more information.
Please communicate with the Instructor if you are unable to keep up with the schedule. It is better to
talk through your problems rather than ignore them.
Grading policy
I will use the following grading scheme for Research Assignments, Career Development Tasks, and Final
Pitches:
                                         Exceeds Expectations (95 pts)
                                          Meets Expectations (88 pts)
                                Below Expectations – Revise/Resubmit (75 pts)
                                             Unacceptable (65 pts)
                                               Incomplete (0 pts)
See Canvas → Pages → Grading Rubric for more information.
If you received a meets expectation, below expectations, unacceptable grade, you have 2 days (by 11:59 pm
of that day) to revise and resubmit your assignment for a grade change from the date you receive your grade.
You can only resubmit the assignment only once.
If you receive an incomplete, you will receive a 0. If you want to have a chance to potentially submit this
assignment, you must schedule an office hours appointment with me to discuss a strategy on how to move
forward. You can only do this 2 times a semester. This policy excludes the final HDO pitch.
All grades are final and are set in stone within 5 days after you receive a grade.
If you are disappointed in your score, please talk with the instructor and TA about how you can improve
your performance on future assignments.
                                                                                    HDO 320 Syllabus Page 4


Final Grades
Grades are determined by performance and level of effort and may not be argued. Borderline grades must
stay as borderline. I will not respond to emails requesting a higher grade, extra points, revised cut-offs,
or “bump” up of any kind. The letter grade cut-offs are set in stone and are as follows:
                                 A   92.50 - 100%        C   73.00 – 76.99%
                                 A-  89.50 – 92.49%      C-  70.00 – 72.99%
                                 B+ 86.50 – 89.49%       D+ 67.00 – 69.99%
                                 B   83.50 – 86.49%      D   63.00 – 66.00%
                                 B-  80.00 – 83.49%      D-  60.00 – 62.99%
                                 C+ 77.00 – 79.99%       F   00.00 – 59.00%
Class Policies
Office hours
My office hours are listed on Canvas.
Please schedule an appointment using my Calendly link: https://calendly.com/esteinutexas/office-
hours?month=2020-06
The goal of office hours is to help you learn and grow as a student. I am willing to help you with course
related material and future career plans.
Email notifications
Please download the Canvas app to your phone. This will send you a notification when we send you an email
via Canvas.
We will be sending all communications via Canvas. It is your responsibility to keep up with the email we send
you throughout the semester.
Attendance
Attendance is MANDATORY. You are expected to attend class on-time and participate in class activities and
discussion.
We will take attendance each day using a non-graded, in-class quiz 15 minutes into class. If you are late,
please come into class as quietly as possible to avoid disrupting other students. If you are more than 15
minutes late, you will be considered absent for the day.
If you are absent for a legitimate reason (with evidence), please contact the instructor and TA as soon as
possible within 48 hours to see if you can be excused.
If you miss class or have any questions regarding any class material, ask your teammates, classmates, TA, or
Instructor to help you.
It is your responsibility to keep in communication with the teaching team and your team members. You
are responsible for letting all of us know if you are unable to attend class.
                                                                                      HDO 320 Syllabus Page 5


Teamwork makes the dream work
This class will involve a lot of teamwork and participation. Everyone is expected to participate in teamwork
assignments. Remember, attendance is mandatory – it is important that you attend each class, especially if
we are working on lab assignments to help support your team.
If you cannot attend for a legitimate reason, please notify your teammates and work something out with
them.
I will handle imbalances in work on a case-by-case basis. Please see me ASAP if you and your teammate are
not communicating or getting the work done.
Grades
There will be no lobbying for grades. For example, if your final grade is a 91.4, please do not send an email
(or via any other communication) trying to explain why you deserve an A.
If there is a simple error in calculating your grade, please see the Instructor or TA after class or send us an
email.
Assignment Schedule
Assignments must be submitted before the deadline listed in this syllabus.
There will be no make-up reading checks in this class.
If there are any conflicts (e.g., religious holidays, athletic events for UT athletes, important events, etc.)
please contact the instructor prior to the date to arrange an alternative deadline for any assignment.
Please try to inform us at least 5 days prior or ASAP to best help you.
It is your responsibility to check the calendar and inform us PRIOR to assignment deadline. We will not
accept conflicts after an assignment deadline.
Emergencies will be handled on a case-by-case basis. Please email the Instructor or come to office hours to
discuss the best way for us to move forward.
Assigned readings
To get the most out of this class, I expect you to at least skim the assigned reading before class and to
thoroughly read the assigned work as soon as you can after class. This strategy will help you better
understand concepts learned in class.
Technology in the classroom
Please use your laptop or other computing device for class-related activities. Please do not use for checking
social media, messaging friends, working on other class assignments, etc.
This can distract you and other students from learning and participating in class activities.
Zoom Requirements
You are not required to have your camera on if you are not comfortable with it.
Please mute yourself and use the space bar to unmute yourself to talk.
Please pay attention!! I will occasionally call on people during our Zoom class, so be ready to respond.
                                                                                      HDO 320 Syllabus Page 6


Classroom etiquette
As the instructor, I am committed and responsible for upholding the University Code of Conduct to create
and support a productive and interactive learning environment for ALL STUDENTS. I expect that we all:
       •  Treat each other and the classroom with respect
              o Listen and be patient with each other
              o Be kind and courteous
              o Be polite
              o Do not discriminate for ANY reason
              o No hate speech or offense language is not tolerated
       •  Avoiding in-class distractions
              o Cell phone use/sounds
              o Private conversations
              o Sleeping
              o Online shopping
              o Smoking e-cigarettes
              o Checking email, etc.
To ensure success in this class, please show up to class on-time and be ready to go! Please treat others with
respect and do not distract others from learning and engaging in class activities.
If you are not respectful and/or distract others, you will first receive a warning. Further disrespectful and
disruptive behavior may result in being removed from class and a) deduction of 5 points from your final grade
for each infraction, and/or b) referral to Student Judicial Services.
Student responsibilities
You are responsible for:
     •   Taking care of yourself (mental and physical health)
     •   Managing your time
     •   Communicating with the teaching team if things become overwhelming/uncontrollable
     •   Respecting others and behaving appropriately
     •   Bringing enthusiasm and energy to the class
     •   Creating and fostering a supportive and inclusive environment
     •   Speaking up for others if they are being excluded or discriminated against
     •   Holding yourself accountable for your actions
     •   Holding others (including the teaching team) accountable
Basic Needs Security
Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and believes this may affect their
performance in the course is urged to contact the Dean of Students for support. Furthermore, please notify
the professor if you are comfortable in doing so. This will enable them to provide any resources that they
may possess.
Pronoun/Name Preference
Class rosters include the student’s legal name. If you would like me to address you otherwise, please advise
me as soon as you can so that I can make the appropriate changes. I will honor and respect any pronouns you
use.
                                                                                     HDO 320 Syllabus Page 7


University Policies
Academic integrity
You are expected to uphold and reflect the University Code of Conduct and the Student Honor Code in this
course:
Student Honor Code
    •    “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
         and upload academic integrity”
University Code of Conduct
    •    “The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
         individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
         values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community”
Cheating and Plagiarism
Cheating and plagiarism are serious offenses and will not be tolerated. These offenses can lead you to be
suspended or expelled from the University for scholastic dishonesty. It also undermines your ability to learn
and critically think. Cheating includes copying another student’s answer on a test or assignment.
Plagiarism includes:
    •    Copying passages verbatim from another writer’s or student’s work and representing it as your own
         work
    •    Any use of another person’s work submitted as one’s own work without giving the author sufficient
         credit (e.g., lack of citation)
    •    Submitting answers or papers written by another student
    •    Using someone else’s main ideas or parts of their answers/writing into your own answer/writing.
It   is    your    responsibility     to know      what     plagiarism    is,  and     how    to    avoid    it:
https://legacy.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/avoidplagiarism.html
Cases of cheating and plagiarism will be referred to the Honor Code Council. For more information about
academic integrity, please see this website:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
Q-Drop Policy
To drop a class after the 12th class day, you will need to follow procedure outlined here:
https://ugs.utexas.edu/vick/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require accommodations need to provide the instructor and TA with an official
letter that documents their accommodations from the Services for Students with Disabilities are of the Office
of the Dean of Students (512-471-6259) or 471-4641 TTY for students who are deaf or hard of hearing). You
must provide this letter to be accommodated. Please provide this letter to the instructor and TA at the
beginning of the semester. We want to work with the students to provide a comfortable and productive
learning environment.
                                                                                       HDO 320 Syllabus Page 8


Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects university personnel (students, faculty, and staff at a federally funded
education institution) against:
      •   Sex and gender-based discrimination
      •   Sexual harassment
      •   Sexual assault
      •   Dating/domestic violence
      •   Stalking
UT Austin is committed to upholding this law to provide all university personnel with a discrimination and
harassment free learning and working environment.
When sexual harassment occurs at UT Austin, the university can:
      •   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating
      •   Provide support and remedies to those who have experienced harm or have become involved in a
          Title IX investigation
      •   Investigate violations of any of the relevant university policies
      •   Discipline those who are found to violate university policies
To speak to someone for support without making and official report to the university, please contact:
advocate@austin.utexas.edu.
For more information about reporting resources and options, please visit http://titleix.utexas.edu or contact
the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Emergency procedures
The occupants of any UT Austin building are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated.
Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Please familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building that you are in. Important: the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used to enter the building. Students requiring assistance in case of
an evacuation must inform the instructor in writing during the first week of class. In case of an evacuation,
follow the instruction of the faculty member or class instructors. Do no re-enter the building unless given
instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department,
or Fire Prevention Services office.
University Emergency – Up-to-date emergency status
     •   http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
Student Emergency Services
     •   Phone: 512-471-5017
     •   http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
              o Provides students at UT Austin with resources and support during times of personal, family
                  crisis, or emergency.
                                                                                       HDO 320 Syllabus Page 9


Resources
I highly recommend you take advantage of the resources that UT Austin provides you. These resources can
help you figure out and/or reach your personal goals for this course or your academic career.
HDO Office
     •   Office: IC^2 3rd Floor
     •   Phone: 512-232-7343
     •   Undergraduate advising: 512-471-4410
     •   https://hdo.utexas.edu/ba/
Liberal Arts Career Services (LACS)
     •   Phone: 512-471-7900
     •   https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/lacs/
Liberal Arts Instructional Technology Services (LAITS)
     •   Phone: 512-471-5000
     •   https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/laits/
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC)
     •   24/7, 365 Counseling: Call 512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255
     •   http://cmhc.utexas.edu
The university counseling center provides individuals, groups, telephone, or crisis counseling to all UT Austin
students currently enrolled in class. I strongly encourage calling or visiting if you are feeling stressed out,
depressed, etc.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
To get advice or report concerns about an individual (fellow students, TAs, and/or Professors):
     •   Emergency: call 911
     •   Non-emergency: call 512-232-5050
     •   http://utexas.edu/safety/bcal
University Libraries
Provides services to help you find resources, avoid plagiarism, and using specific formats
     •   Phone: 512-475-4250
     •   http://lib.utexas.edu
Sanger Learning and Career Center
The Sanger Learning Center provides classes and workshops, private specialized appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for over 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.
     •   Office: JES A332
     •   Phone: 512-471-3614
     •   Career center: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/career
     •   Learning center: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
                                                                                     HDO 320 Syllabus Page 10


University Writing Center (UWC)
The UWC provides a free, individualized assistance with writing. You must schedule and appointment to
receive feedback on your writing assignments.
    •   Location: PCL 2.330
    •   Phone: 512-471-6222
    •   http://uwc.utexas.edu
Office of the Dean of Students
    •   Location: SSB 4.400
    •   Phone: 512-471-5017
    •   https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu
                                                                              HDO 320 Syllabus Page 11
