                                                                                                           1
                                       Readings in Modern Japanese I
                                     JPN 320K (#78910) Summer 2020
Instructor of record: Yukie Aida, Ph.D. (相⽥幸江)                 e-mail: aiday@austin.utexas.edu
Classroom:            Zoom online MTWTHF 10:00-11:30am
                      You must have a camera to be viewed in each Zoom classroom.
Office hours:         MTWTHF 11:30-12:06pm or by appointment
Prerequisite
You must have finished JPN 317D with a passing grade of D- or an equivalent.
Important Web Sites:
    1) University Code of Conduct:
        The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
        individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
        these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
        https://catalog.utexas.edu/law/academic-policies-and-procedures/honor-system/
    2) UT Japanese Language program: http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese
    3) JOSHU: http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese/joshu/index.htm
    4) Canvas: https://canvas.utexas.edu
Course Materials
Textbook:           An Integrated Approach To Intermediate Japanese by Akira Miura and Naomi McGloin,
                        The Japan Times, 2008.
Kanji Workbook: To purchase the workbook, please follow the link below:
https://secure-web.cisco.com/1KPvzG8fnMGbx8QqihM87hlc6pNvDdurOx7fkrCIutrLcd7PY_-
PePRwuAtblfd13evsfXEJuMsz6a5QZyAE-4Bylqb2zF8Yl-
OTH1uKwWvNVMmz1oowY_kD9rHpuWt7hBY1QsJHArQvVBgBxgHvlEt5uHyGmMR2HWFn6II
vO-9qUsqNPC7mjc1OBIlc77oZ3lC3U_S0r_RVcTcbicO9MRFaPLrGSUStbOpG-
JPbUYr68llMilQytYGfi2Huf10o0QRXRQdvglI6JxJ_lNO5ztLyZe7Pcafhmq6Mp4FaH936jhDM54aJ
fP7fRIc990cwAO4ZhJIO0Iy3mBilxJeZOz0RGvqSRbE4NP4EW2L4s9P47xd3Xjfyg8Gow0GRMhrQ
uA4SWCiLcA3dn_nIYnjxJCHk-
YGGo6RJJ7rS3jziCvSUa8ERPhPu2Zhc5s2x24PAizu2RBKtxQM20UOoZWoaxdKTxK06S0UIu0n0
Qjt9vcJw20SAG-Zth6FYyVfZGlfCy7B_8LIIJavWDEqnJ5JwEi2BWhk-
eGLsXd95B_H5TOHQKDNZVJt6EGrXQ7g33nDv_7gzNdiYIQwSkE6GVJxK85LV15ISFpiA_LXJ5
WH13Oevz0qhj_tzBxBbKfK-8foH1-
DirNz5d7rR2EeN2nXbDug/https%3A%2F%2Fstore.cognella.com%2F80525-1C-PF-034
If you experience any difficulties, please email orders@cognella.com or call 858-552-1120 ext. 503.
1 Course Description
This course focuses on reading and writing skills at the intermediate to advanced level. We will discuss


                                                                                                                 2
what we read after each reading session in order to expand oral and aural skills as well.
Goals: To acquire basic skills to utilize your Japanese skills in your own fields.
    1. Reading skills
            To build vocabulary and command of Kanji
            To become familiar with long, complicated sentences
            To become familiar with Japanese discourse styles
            To become better at using Kanji and Japanese-English dictionaries
    2. Writing skills
            To become able to express your own ideas in Japanese
            To become able to write a resume and letters in Japanese
            To improve your handwriting as well as word processing skills
    3. To become a self-directed learner
            Needless to say, learning a language a time-consuming process. You have to study Japanese by
            yourself sometimes. Always monitor your progress and learning methods. Find out the most
            effective and efficient (in terms of cost and time) ways for you to study Japanese.
Schedule (Tentative): The following is the pattern of classroom activities. For homework assignment dues
            and quiz days, see the schedule.
          Day 1          Learning of new Kanji and discussion on Culture Notes
          Day 2          Grammar and new vocabulary
          Day 3 & 4      Reading (読み物／速読)
          Day 5          Review, & extra reading or writing
          Day 6          Lesson quiz
Assignments and Course Requirements:
1) Attendance and Class Participation
    ･Please join the class meeting via Zoom. 1) Click UT Canvas; 2) Click Courses and select Su20 –
    Readings in Modern Japanese I; and 3) Click Zoom and join the meeting.
    ･It is essential that students attend all classes and keep up with course work on a daily basis. When you
    have the perfect attendance record at the end of the semester, you will receive extra 1% added to your
    course grade. If you miss classes 2 times or less, you will receive extra 0.5% added to your course
    grade. Missing class more than 2 times will not get you any extra points.
    ･Join the Zoom meeting ON TIME at 10am. Remember that all the quizzes will be given at the
    beginning of each class. Two days of tardiness (coming late or leaving early) counts as one absence.
    Also, please refrain from reading a newspaper, sleeping, or studying another subject during class.
    ･It is the policy of the UT that the student must notify the instructor at least 14 days prior to the classes
    scheduled on dates s/he will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
    ･NO FOOD, NO CHEWING-GUM!! NO TEXT MESSASING! NO CELL PHONE!
    ･I would like to maintain civility in the classroom. Please respect each other and show consideration
    towards your classmates and instructor.
    ･Your active participation in class activities will greatly enhance your progress in Japanese. Please do
    not be afraid of making mistakes/errors in the classroom.
    ･In the classroom, even before and after class, you should always try to speak ⽇本語 with the
    instructor and classmates.
2) 宿題（しゅくだい） (20%)
    There are several types of homework assignments. The description of each homework will be given in
    class. You will upload your homework to Canvas by the set deadline. If you miss the deadline, you will
    not be able to submit your work online. Homework will be given a grade of A (10 pts.), A- (9 pts.), B (8
    pts.), C (7 pts.), D (6 pts.) or F (zero). The criteria for grading are completion, clear writing, use of


                                                                                                              3
   kanji, correct spelling, effort to use correct grammar patterns, etc. I will not accept homework late by
   more than 1 days. Late homework will receive a considerablely lower score. Please know that some
   homework (bordered ones) will not be accepted if they are late. Under a certain circumstance, you may
   turn in a HW assignment early with the instructor’s permission in advance.
[Examples]
    -Three grades down (e.g., 10 -> 7 or 9 -> 6) if you turn your HW at the next class meeting (e.g., due on
    Monday, and you turn in on Tues., or you turn in on Monday the HW due on Friday) No HW will be
    accepted after that.
   -Two grades down if you turn your HW in anytime after the class and before 3pm.
   The Types of HW:
   ア） Read the Culture Notes section of each chapter for a culture quiz.
   イ） Read and pre-study the Grammar Notes section of each chapter (not graded). Specific grammar
         items are indicated in the schedule.
   ウ） Kanji Exercise -- (1) Trace and practice each Kanji introduced in the Kanji Workbook. (2) Trace and
         practice each Kanji compound (marked with a ★) presented in the 書く漢字 sections of the Kanji
         Workbook (at least once) and its reading. Please use the “漢字の練習 (trace and practice)” section of the
         workbook.
   エ） Kanji Reading quizzes (JOSHU: submission on-line)
   オ） Read the main reading of each chapter and answer the questions about the content of the reading.
         The questions are given in the Canvas quizzes.
          ･ You must do your homework on your own. Do not study together with classmates to
          complete the homework. Do not discuss any portion of the homework with classmates.
          Unauthorized collaboration on homework and/or copying someone's homework and turning it in
          as your own will be considered as cheating and will result in a severe penalty. Allowing other
          students to use your homework is also considered as scholastic dishonesty. (Please read the UT’s
          policies on students’ academic integrity in online learning:
          https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/studentonlineintegrity.php
   カ） Read the 速読 texts and complete the T/F questions. You must translate the T/F statements into English
          before you decide if each of the statements is true or false. Please write double-spaced.
3) カルチャークイズ (5%) -- The lowest score will be dropped.
   ･On the first day of each lesson, you will have a culture notes quiz. This quiz assesses your
   understanding of cultural information presented in that chapter. The format is True-False. The questions
   are given in English.
   ･No make-up/early quizzes under any circumstances.
4) 単語クイズ (13%) -- The lowest score will be dropped.
   ･You will have one vocabulary quiz on the 単語—読み物 list of each lesson. Each vocabulary quiz will include
         a. JapaneseàEnglish (Provide an English equivalent for a Japanese word)
         b. EnglishàJapanese (Reading an English definition and writing an appropriate word in Japanese)
   ･No make-up/early quizzes under any circumstances.
5) 漢字クイズ (13%)
   ･You will have two Kanji quizzes (書く漢字と読む漢字のクイズ) for each lesson.
   書く漢字クイズ includes the writing and meanings of the “書く漢字”. 読む漢字クイズ includes the
   recognition and meaning of the “読む漢字”.
   ･The two lowest scores (one 書く漢字 and one 読む漢字) will be dropped.


                                                                                                                  4
6) ポッブクイズ (4%): -- No make-up/early quizzes under any circumstances.
   ･You will have a pop quiz at the end of each lesson. Pop quizzes deal with either, Katakana writing,
   Kanji writing, adjective conjugation, verb conjugation, or vocabulary.
7) レッスンクイズ (30%) -- No dropping
   ･You will have three grammar and reading tests (L1&2, L3&4, L5&6) to evaluate your understanding
   of the grammars and expressions introduced in class.
   ･Only in rare cases, will students be allowed to make up the tests missed during their absences. We will
   abide by this rule quite strictly. The instructor reserves the right to judge whether to allow work to be
   made up.
8) 読み物サマリー (15%)
   • Select 2 readings in Japanese, each of which must be a different type.
   The reading could be:
        - a newspaper article or magazine article
        - a part of a novel or short story
        - an essay or editorial
        - a company / product description
        - a city guide / a travel guide
        - and etc.
        **Do not select any folktales, anime/manga scripts, or children’s books.
   • Each reading should be 1000+ characters long. Check with me if the article you selected is
   acceptable. You must provide the web address if you found the reading online.
   • Your task is to read the Japanese text (or the English version) and write your reaction, thought, idea in
   English (150-200 words or so). Then, you create/build a proof of your own work and learning (e.g., a
   list of new vocabulary and meanings, grammar notes, kanji list with hiragana readings and definitions,
   etc.) You can use an online dictionary or translation tools.
   • Submit your reaction and the list to Canvas.
   • At the end of the semester, you will do a short oral presentation with PowerPoint (in Japanese, 3 min
   or so) on one of the readings you did. It should include a synopsis, your reaction, new vocabulary or
   kanji compounds, etc.
Grading                Lesson quizzes (3)                  30%         Kanji quizzes (12-2)                  13%
                       Homework                            20%         Vocabulary quizzes (6-1)              13%
                       Reading summary (2)                             Culture Notes quizzes (6-1)           5%
                              + oral presentation          15%         Pop quizzes                           4%
Your grade will be determined by the plus/minus system shown below.                 There will be NO grading on a
curve. The course grades are NOT NEGOTIABLE.
                   A               (4.0)               92.0~
                   A-              (3.67)              89.0~91.99
                   B+              (3.33)              86.0~88.99
                   B               (3.0)               82.0~85.99
                   B-              (2.67)              79.0~81.99
                   C+              (2.33)              76.0~78.99
                   C               (2.0)               72.0~75.99
                   ------------------------------------------------------
                   You may not advance to a next level.


                                                                                                            5
                   C-           (1.67)            69.0~71.99
                   D+           (1.33)            66.0~68.99
                   D            (1.0)             62.0~65.99
                   D-           (0.67)            59.0~61.99
                   F            (0.0)             58.9 or less
Policies on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonest will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Judicial Services web
site at https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/student-affairs/policies-and-procedures/academic-dishonesty.php
. The Office of the Dean of Students: https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
The following are some examples of behaviors regarded as "scholastic dishonesty".
           *Copying other students’ homework/exam answers.
           *Showing your homework/exam answers to other students.
           *Copying other peoples' work or phrases without citing.
           *Having someone else write a paper/composition for you.
           *Seeking and Receiving extensive help from a native speaker of Japanese for doing homework or
           writing a composition.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability (physical, cognitive, or psychological) who requires academic
accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259 as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
