HIS317L/AAS312/MAS319                                                                                                         Spring 2020
Instructor: Madeline Hsu                                                                                                 TA: Kirtan Patel
                                                 Immigration and Ethnicity
Description: Widely considered a wellspring for U.S. greatness, immigration has also been an abiding site of
our deepest conflicts. The republican foundations of the United States with its promises of democracy and
equality for all seem to strain against ever increasing numbers of immigrants from parts of the world barely
conceived of by the Founding Fathers, much less as sources of new citizens. What is the breaking point for the
assimilating powers of U.S. democracy and how much does national vitality rely upon continued influxes of a
diversity of immigrants with their strenuous ambitions and resourcefulness? Today we remain embattled by
such competing beliefs about how immigration shapes our nation’s well-being and to what ends we should
constrain whom we admit and in what numbers.
This course emphasizes the following themes: the changing population of the United States from colonial
times; ethnic cultures, communities, and cuisines; ideologies concerning eligibility for citizenship and for
restricting immigration; the development of immigration law as an aspect of sovereign authority; the
entwining of immigration policy with international relations; and the evolution of institutions for immigration
enforcement.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the university core curriculum and addresses the
following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking
skills, personal responsibility, and social responsibility.
This course also carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with the variety and richness of American cultural experiences. A substantial portion of your grade stems from
assignments concerning the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
marginalization.
Texts/Readings: *main texts are on 2-hour reserve at PCL
*Roger Daniels, Coming to America: A History of Immigration and Ethnicity in American Life (Harper Perennial, 2002
edition)
*Ilan Stavans, ed. Becoming Americans: Immigrants Tell Their Stories from Jamestown to Today (Penguin 2009)
Supplemental readings are available on Canvas or through links to UT libraries
Grade Distribution: Final grades will be allocated as follows: A 93-100; A- 90-92; B+ 88-89; B 83-87; B- 80-82; C+ 78-79;
C 73-77; C- 70-72 and so forth
           Family Immigration Narrative: 10%; 2-page essay [You may choose to write about a friend’s family]
           Midterm: 20% bluebook exam; short essay IDs (March 11)
           Final: 30% bluebook exam; short essay IDs (May 16, 2 - 5 pm)
           Attendance and class participation: 15%
           Timeline report and presentation: 25%
Lecture and Reading Assignment Schedule (Subject to Change)
Week 1: Introduction
Week 2: Revolutionary Origins
Week 3: Racial Irreconcilability
Week 4: The Civil War and Citizenship
Week 5: Foundations of Immigration Restriction
Week 6: Imperial America
Week 7: The Closed Gate: National Origins Quotas
Week 8: Midterm
                                                  SPRING BREAK March 14-22
Week 9: Isolationist America
                                                                      1


Week 10: World War II
Week 11: The Cold War and Racial Liberalism
Week 12: 1965 Immigration Act
Week 13: Crisis of Hemispheric Migration
Week 14: Immigration in the Aga of IRCA
Week 15: After 9-11
Final exam: Tuesday, May 21, 9:00 am-12:00 noon. You will need two bluebooks.
ACADEMIC HONESTY: Academic honesty is integral to UT’s honor code. You are expected to complete your own work. If you
have any questions about academic guidelines you may call my office, 5-9303, or email me. You should follow University
guidelines regarding plagiarism and student conduct. For further information see:
http://uwc.fac.utexas.edu/~virgil/essay/research/plagiarism.html
                                                              2
