                                              SYLLABUS
                                MPA Distinguished Speaker Lyceum
                   ACC 180C (unique # 02610) and ACC 152 (unique #02525)
                                                Fall 2019
                                     Instructor: Stephen T Smith
Golden Rule: Protect your MPA brand through professional behavior—you’re an MPA for life.
Course Description: The MPA Distinguished Speaker Lyceum (hereafter Lyceum), at The University
                    of Texas at Austin is a hallmark of the MPA Program. Its purpose is to develop
                    leading professionals by integrating graduate accounting studies with current
                    issues in accounting practice, business, and society.
                    Our guest speakers are highly accomplished, represent diverse areas relevant to
                    professional development, and are just simply nice individuals to graciously give
                    us their time (a privilege most schools could only hope for). We owe them our
                    gratitude and respect.
                    Each of us has a hand in presenting our program in the best light. It is important
                    because it enables us to attract business leaders and because presenters share their
                    UT experience with others . . . they share it with colleagues, professional
                    associates, and friends and family. By our engagement and comportment we can
                    leave an impression of accounting leadership or mediocrity. I choose leadership.
                    What’s your choice?
 Meeting Logistics: Meeting time and location are:
                     5:30 – 7:00 pm on the Tuesdays shown in the course schedule at the back of
                        this syllabus
                     UTC 2.102A
                    To register your Lyceum attendance, please sit in your assigned seat. The TA
                    will take attendance based on assigned seats.
                    If you need to step out of the assembly at any time before its conclusion, please give
                    your UT identity card to the TAs in the hallway and retrieve it upon returning to the
                    assembly.
 Meeting Time:    Details are as follows.
                 5:15 p.m.:            Room opens
                 5:30 p.m.:            Please be seated in your assigned seat and ready to listen to our
                                       presenters. TA will begin taking attendance. You must be sitting
                                       in your assigned seat. NO exceptions.
                 5:30 – 7:00 p.m.:     Presentation. When the general assembly is adjourned please feel
                                       free to approach our presenters with individual questions and
                                       introductions.
                                                                                                        1


           Grading:        This is a pass/fail course. You must satisfy four requirements to pass:
                           1. Canvas Syllabus Quiz. Completion of a syllabus quiz, which will be
                                accessible either on the Canvas Home page or at the Quizzes link within
                                Canvas.
                           2. Speaker Thank-you Note. One speaker thank-you note for an in-class
                                speaker you are assigned as indicated in the course schedule at the end of this
                                syllabus.
                           3. In-class Meetings. Attendance and attentiveness in our in-class meetings.
                           4. Canvas Speaker Evaluation. Submission of a speaker evaluation survey after
                                each speaker.
                           A summary of these course requirements is provided in the following table
                           and details are discussed after the table.
          Requirement                                Comments                                     If not completed
  1. Syllabus Quiz1                      DUE 4:00 pm Tues., Sept. 10              A failing grade in the course
  2. One Thank-You Note                      DUE one week after your              A failing grade in the course
      for an in-class speaker                    assigned speaker^
  3. In-class Meetings                                                            A failing grade in the course if absence is
                                                                                  unexcused
            Attendance
                                                 Up to 1 documented
                and
                                                  excused (must be in
           Attentiveness                           advance) absences
    at our in-class meetings
  4. Speaker Evaluation                  DUE, 11:59 pm, on                        A failing grade in the course
      Survey1                            Wednesday after each speaker
1
   On Canvas
^ If the next speaker is not the next week, please submit your thank you at the next meeting.
   If your speaker is the last speaker, please drop your thank you note off at the MPA Program Office within a week.
                                                                                                                          2


Four Course Requirements--detail: The five course requirements summarized in the table
above are described in more detail below.
1. Syllabus Quiz
   Availability. The Syllabus Quiz will be available by our first day of class through a link at
   the bottom of the Canvas Syllabus Home page, and under the Assignments link within
   Canvas. You may complete the quiz any time before its due date.
      You may refer to your syllabus, classmates, or any other resources to complete the quiz,
       but the final response and submission must be your own.
2. Speaker Thank-You Note. You must write a thank note to one in-class speaker.
      You are assigned an in-class speaker based on your last name as indicated in the course
       schedule at the back of this syllabus.
      It is your responsibility to acquire a note card.
        ― The note card should have a matching envelope and fold open enabling your
             comments on the inside. It should not be an index card or regular paper that is
             folded, cut or otherwise improvised to look like a note card.
        ― The note card and envelope should indicate the in-class speaker’s title and name
             (Mr., Ms., Professor, etc.) as indicated on the “Meeting Schedule” on the last page of
             this syllabus.
      Your note should:
        ― Be three sentences or more, and
        ― Address some positive insight about the in-class speaker’s presentation.
        You must exercise your professional judgment for guidance on what is a good note.
      Hand-in your note one week after your in-class speaker’s presentation.
        ― Insert your note card in its envelope, but do not seal the envelope.
        ― There will be a box at the front of the room in which you can deposit your card the
             week after your in-class speaker’s presentation.
        ― If you are not attending the meeting following your in-class speaker’s session,
             deliver your note to the front desk of the MPA Program Office during the week after
             your in-class speaker’s presentation.
        ― If the next in-class speaker is not the next week, deposit your note to the box at the
             front of the room at the next in-class meeting.
        ― If your in-class speaker is the last in-class speaker
             o Deliver your note to the front desk of the MPA Program Office.
        ― If you are absent (excused in advance) the evening of your assigned in-class speaker,
             write a note for the next in-class speaker or email the TA for approval of another
             future in-class speaker to whom you will write a note.
      Do not mail your note to your in-class speaker — It will be mailed by the MPA
       Program Office. You need not provide a stamp.
3. In-Class Meetings - Attendance and Attentiveness. The central activity in this course is to
   attend and be attentive in our in-class meetings.
   Attendance
      Please sit in your assigned seat. The seating chart is available on Canvas.
                                                                                                  3


   Excused absence(s). You will be excused from class without an extra assignment if there
   is a legitimate documented reason. An excused absence(s) must be for a “legitimate reason.”
   Examples of “legitimate reasons” with documentation include:
       Your illness or injury,
       The illness, injury, or death of a family member,
       The observance of an official religious holiday,
       Your wedding,
       An immediate family member’s wedding,
       The birth of your child, and
       Mandatory University events the scheduling of which you have no control, with the TAs
        approval.
   Examples of activities that are not “legitimate reasons” include, but are not limited to:
    Office visits, employer interviews, and other recruiting events,
    A “tight” exam schedule,
    Preparing for an exam or project in another class,
    Extracurricular activities,
    Family reunions, and
    Attending sports events.
   If your absence is unexcused for any reason after our first meeting, regrettably it is not
   possible to provide a passing grade for the course. Therefore, please withdraw from the
   course or you will receive a failing grade in the course.
   It is perfectly understandable if activities that are external to class dictate a significant
   number of absences. However, you will be missing a significant portion of the course’s
   central activity. Therefore, a passing grade in the course will not be possible.
   Attentiveness
   Non-attentiveness is rude to and shows disrespect toward our speakers and your colleagues.
   If you are observed to be non-attentive in class, it will be treated like an unexcused absence,
   Examples of non-attentiveness include texting, tweeting, web browsing, doing homework,
   studying for an exam, talking with friends, and the like. The stage provides a bird’s eye view
   of the audience so it is easy for a speaker to notice if anyone is disrespectful--I think you’ll
   agree that we don’t want that.
4. Canvas Speaker Evaluation Survey
   You are required to complete an evaluation of each speaker. The survey is due the
   Wednesday following each speaker by 11:59 pm. Non-completion will result in a failing
   grade in the course.
                                                                                                    4


Lyceum Procedures
     1. Attire. Lyceum attire calls for clothing that is comfortable in Texas, yet does not reflect
        poorly on our program. You are asked to use your professional judgment in achieving this
        objective. In the interest of comfort in Texas, casual attire is acceptable and business casual
        attire is not necessary.
        Unacceptable attire during Lyceum will be will be treated like an unexcused absence,
        While it is not possible to list every type of inappropriate clothing, examples of dress items to
        avoid include:
            Ragged or dirty t-shirts and shorts
            Baseball caps worn during Lyceum
            Soiled workout clothes
            Flip-flops
     2. Attendance. Please sit in your assigned seat for the entire semester.
     3. Departing. Please do not rustle belongings or otherwise prepare to leave the Lyceum before
        it is officially adjourned. If you need to step out for a few minutes leave your UT ID with a
        TA at the exit doors and retrieve it when you return to the room.
     5. Promptness. Please be seated and ready to hear our speaker by 5:30 p.m. and please stay
        seated for the entire Lyceum session. If you have ever spoken to groups, you know that a
        few audience members getting up can be very distracting. Your attention reflects the respect
        our speakers deserve.
     6. Food and drinks prohibited. Please, do not bring food or drinks into the Lyceum hall.
Communication: MPA Lyceum correspondence will be communicated via Canvas (emails or
                  postings). It is a challenge to keep up with other addresses so please check your UT
                  address associated with Canvas. It is recommended that you check your e-mail
                  regularly.
                                                                                                        5
