                             THEUNIVERSITYOFTEXASATAUSTIN
                 ACC F383K.4, Fraud Examination (unique no. 71050)
                                            Course Syllabus
                                      Summer 2020 (First Session)
Time:
    Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 8:00 – 10:00 a.m. (synchronously via Zoom)
Instructor
    Mark Bradshaw, J.D., M.P.A., M.B.A.
    Lecturer, McCombs School of Business (2006 - Present)
    KPMG Professor in Residence (2007)
    Of Counsel, Matheson, Keys & Kordzik PLLC
    Office: GSB.5.124E; Ph.: 512-475-8852; E-mail: mark.bradshaw@mccombs.utexas.edu
    Office hours (via Zoom): Mondays from 10:00 – 11:00 a.m. and by appointment.
    Please e-mail if you wish to reach me outside of class and office hours.
Teaching Assistant
    Israel Escudero
    E-mail: isresc2@gmail.com
    Office hours: Please contact Israel if you have questions or concerns regarding a case score.
    Israel will assist with the grading of cases and exams. After graded cases are returned, he will
    be available via email and Zoom, if necessary, to discuss such assignments. Please bring all
    other questions (including questions concerning case preparation and exam-related matters)
    to my attention.
Canvas
    We will use the web-based University of Texas at Austin "Canvas" system extensively. To
    access Canvas, go to http://courses.utexas.edu or follow the links from other University
    websites.
    I will use Canvas to post announcements, class materials and scores. Please check Canvas
    frequently and before every class. You can also use the Canvas discussion feature to post
    comments, questions, and responses to others' posts. If you have a course-related question that is
    not a personal matter, please use Canvas, not e-mail, so that all students can benefit from the
    question and response(s).
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 1


Enhancing the Enjoyment of this Course
    I prefer an informal classroom, as I have found such an environment to be more enjoyable and
    conducive to student attendance, participation and learning. I hope you will let me know
    during class if you have a question, comment or response. In this class, silence is not golden!
    Please assist me in maintaining a positive, productive learning environment by showing
    courtesy and respect for your fellow students (and me). To that end, please make all
    reasonable efforts to be on time to class and exams. When you enter the virtual classroom,
    please do so via Canvas and not from a personal (non-UT) Zoom account, as entering
    from outside of Canvas causes me to have to stop and allow individual access, as well as
    creating a security risk.
    Slides for lectures will be available on Canvas before class. Although only a small portion of
    such slides will be covered in class – they are provided primarily to assist you with exam
    preparation - I recommend that you print out the slides (4 or 6 to a page) before each class, or
    have them available electronically, and take notes as we cover selected material.
    You will have a formal opportunity to provide feedback on the course via the end-of-semester
    Course Instructor Survey, but please contact me during the semester if you wish to discuss any
    aspect of the course in person.
Required Course Materials:
    Course files. As noted above, I will provide slides, cases, supplemental non-textbook readings, and
        other course materials on Canvas. These materials do not substitute for class itself, so it is
        important to attend each class session (or at least watch the recorded class if you are not
        able to attend live).
    A Guide to Forensic Accounting Investigation, 2nd edition, by Skalak, Golden, Clayton & Pill
        (Wiley, 2011), available online at no charge via the UT Library (sign-in needed) at
        https://onlinelibrary-wiley-com.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/doi/book/10.1002/9781119200048.
Course Objectives
At the end of the course, you will have a better understanding of the following:
1. Fraud examination as a profession;
2. Differences between audits and fraud investigations;
3. Independence, legal and other obligations of the auditor and fraud examiner with respect to fraud;
4. Financial reporting fraud, asset misappropriation, bribery and corruption, Ponzi and other fraud
     schemes, their red flags, and their means of detection.
5.   Fraud psychology;
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 2


6. Fraud detection and investigation techniques;
7. The role of management, internal audit and other parties in fraud detection, deterrence and
    investigations;
8. Commencing and conducting a fraud investigation;
9. Working with counsel;
10. Handling anonymous communications and other pre-investigation considerations;
11. Interviewing skills;
12. Investigation reports;
13. Money laundering;
14. Public corruption; and
15. Domestic and international anti-corruption laws.
Grading
        Course grades will be based on a 350-point scale, as follows:
                                                                   Points Possible
 Midterm examination                                                 100 (28.5%)
 Final examination                                                   100 (28.5%)
 Cases (3)                                                           100 (28.5%)
 Class attendance and participation                                   50 (14.5%)
 Total possible points                                             350
     I do not have fixed point or percentage cut-offs in mind regarding letter grades. I will make
     these determinations at the end of the semester based on both relative and absolute
     performance considerations. Historically, my grade distribution in this class has been
     approximately 35% A, 15-20% A-/B+, 40-50% B, with the remainder B- or below.
     However, each class is different and this course’s grade distribution may vary from the
     foregoing.
Each graded component is described below:
Examinations (midterm and final each worth 100 points)
        Examinations will emphasize concepts and issues discussed in class and in the slides, although
any material from assigned readings is "fair game" for testing. The format and time provided for
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                 Page 3


exams (type of questions, and whether “take home” or in class) will be announced, along with
preparation guidance, approximately one week prior to each exam. The most likely scenario is that the
midterm exam will be given synchronously (in class), the final exam will be “take home,” and most exam
questions will be short answer and/or essay.
         The midterm examination will test material covered to that point in the course, as announced.
The final examination will cover the remainder of the material in the course (i.e., it will not be
“cumulative,” as such term is normally used). Of course, as some material in this course builds on
previous concepts, the final examination will be “cumulative” in the broad sense of that term.
Cases (100 points)
         To refine your writing skills and your ability to deal with more realistic problems in fraud
examination, there will be three case exercises based on real-world examples that have been adapted for
teaching purposes.
         Cases will be graded for breadth and depth of analysis, quality of writing and professional
impression. Case questions may, in certain instances, be subjective issues for which there will be no
single “right answer” and multiple views can be defended. It is important to be both complete and
concise in your case analyses. Do not repeat or summarize the case facts, except where needed to
support a position. Your case analyses will be limited to four pages each (unless otherwise
announced) and must be double-spaced, use a font no smaller than 10, and have left and right
margins of at least 1”.
         In the formative stage of a case assignment, you are welcome to discuss the case with other
students in this class (but not others outside of this class), including on Canvas. However, copying or
paraphrasing from another student's draft or final solution, in whole or in part, is scholastic
dishonesty, and will be penalized severely. See "Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty" later in this syllabus
for clarification.
         The assigned cases will be posted on Canvas. Due dates will be as set forth in the “Anticipated
Course Schedule” at the conclusion of this syllabus, unless changed per class announcement. Each
case will be worth 30-40 points, as announced when each case is assigned.
         All cases will be due before class via Canvas upload on the day indicated, unless otherwise
announced. Time permitting, we will discuss the first two cases in class, on or after the due date.
Discussion of cases is an important part of the course, so please be prepared to discuss and defend
your positions in class (see “Class Attendance and Participation,” below).
Class Attendance and Participation (50 points)
         Your consistent attendance (synchronously, if possible) and active participation will make this
course substantially more enjoyable (for you and me) and significantly enhance the clarity of points
discussed in class. To give you an added incentive to attend and participate, 50 points will be based on your
attendance and my largely subjective (but genuine) assessment of your cumulative participation and
contribution in this class. Assessing participation at the conclusion of the course requires my judgment, but
you can trust me to do my best to form a fair assessment of your participation and contribution.
          To earn points for participation and attendance:
      • Ask and answer questions and offer insights in class discussions.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                      Page 4


       • Actively participate in any discussions led by guest speakers.
       • Attend class.
          To earn a high participation score, substantial classroom participation and consistent
attendance is necessary.
          As the summer session is so abbreviated, attendance will be taken most class days. Attendance is
almost certain to be taken, however, on days when we have guest speakers, video presentations and do in-class
group exercises (video presentations and exercises may not be announced in advance), but may be taken any
day in my discretion. Attendance is a material factor in determining your overall participation score. In
addition, any student who is absent 50% or more of the days on which attendance is taken will receive an
attendance and participation score of zero (out of 50) in the course, regardless of any class participation.
          In evaluating course performance, I also reserve the right to take into account any violations of
course policies or any other activities that are disruptive to the class.
          Alternate Policies for Students Residing in Certain International Time Zones
          Although this course will be taught synchronously, I appreciate that some students may be unable to
attend “live” because they live in international time zones that make live attendance highly inconvenient or
impracticable (“Asynchronous Students”). For purposes of this class, I define “inconvenient or impracticable”
to mean that class would begin for you (at your place of residence) after 8:00 p.m. in the evening, or begin prior
to 7:00 a.m. (i.e., class would begin for you between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., inclusive). If you establish that
you live in such a time zone, then a verified viewing of the entirety of a recorded class within 24 hours of its
conclusion will satisfy the attendance requirement for such class. Please note that this policy does not apply to
students who reside in time zones in which class begins between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. (even if you are
traveling) (“Synchronous Students”).
          True class participation will obviously be impossible for Asynchronous Students, as they will be
unable to interact with me, a guest speaker, or the class live. However, in order for Asynchronous Students to
have an opportunity to participate, I will accept questions in advance of class, via email (with a limit of two per
class, please). As with in-class participation, this is optional, not a requirement. Again, this alternate means of
participation is only available to Asynchronous Students.
          If you are an Asynchronous Student, please contact me he first week of class with verification of your
residence for the period covered by the course (June 8 to July 11) and we can discuss the application of the
foregoing policies to you. If you do not contact me in a timely manner, I will presume that you are a
Synchronous Student.
Don’t be Shy!
          As in any course, it is common for some students’ early performance in the course to fall short of
their goals or expectations. Unfortunately, it is also common for such students to not seek input or assistance
in a timely manner, leading to anxiety and diminished opportunities for a particular grade.
          If at any point you have a concern about your performance in the course, please see me – do not
wait until it becomes too late. I will be happy to provide suggestions on how you might improve your
performance.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                         Page 5


Discussion Board
         Along with other features of Canvas, I strongly encourage you to take advantage of the
discussion boards for this course. Postings can relate to class discussions, case issues, exam-related
questions, current events, or any other topics/issues that are relevant to this course (including career-
related matters). I monitor the discussion board periodically, and more frequently approaching case due
dates and exams.
Ground rules for Canvas Discussion:
1. For questions or comments of general interest to the class (i.e., non-personal matters), please
      use a discussion board, not e-mail!
2. Be professional and courteous. Discussion forums of this type are used throughout the business
      world. You do not need to be overly formal, but forums such as this offer a good opportunity to
      practice professional business communication. Please keep in mind that I will read your posts.
3. Do not be a free rider. If you benefit from reading others’ postings, consider adding your own
insights. Also, reply to inquiries from your fellow students.
4. Even if you have nothing to post, please get in the habit of accessing the discussion board
      frequently, and before each case due date and exam. I will often use Canvas to communicate
      important announcements and clarifications.
5.    I will establish a special forum for each exam and case. To maximize the usefulness of your post,
      please use such forums for case- and exam-related questions.
Canvas downtimes and cases:
          As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well
as unanticipated interruptions of the Canvas system. Notification of these disruptions
will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for
turning in a case late or failing to complete other course requirements. However, if there
is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will make an adjustment if
it occurs close to the due date. As downtimes are often unpredictable, I advise you to
print out case materials as soon as they are available.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
         In general, medical emergencies, family emergencies, university-sponsored conflicts and
religious holidays (see below) are the only valid reasons for missing an examination or the due date
of a case. In all such instances, I require some form of supporting documentation, such as a signed note
from a physician or a University official, and ask that you register your situation with the Office of
Student Emergency Services (OSES) consistent with OSES policies, if possible. At that point I will
decide the best make-up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a make-up exam or
recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed component, depending on the circumstances.
Examinations or assignments that are missed or late for reasons other than such emergencies or
university-sponsored conflicts will generally receive no, or substantially reduced, credit. In the case of a
conflict due to a university-sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of the
conflict and before the examination date or assignment due date.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                    Page 6


         Please note that summer travel is not a valid reason for missing an examination or turning in
an exam or a case late. If you anticipate a conflict with an exam or case due date (see “Anticipated
Course Schedule” below), I urge you to make alternate arrangements for that activity or event, or
plan to turn in your exam or case early.
Religious Holidays
          Religious holy days sometime conflict with class and examination schedules. By University
policy, you must notify me of your pending absence prior to the date of observance of a religious holy
day. If you must miss an examination or class in order to observe a religious holy day, appropriate relief
will be provided.
Policy on Students with Disabilities
         The University strives to accommodate qualified students with disabilities. Students with
disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD), 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. If you are a qualified student with a disability, please see me
to discuss any appropriate accommodations that have been recommended by the SSD office for this
course.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
          All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Electronic Class Roster and Student Privacy
          The University has requested that students be notified of their privacy rights in regard to
electronic class rosters:
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at the
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information
that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail
rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of
the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory
information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar.
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 7


Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Cases
Policy of the Department of Accounting
         The Department of Accounting has a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA
Program. It is available via the Department website at https://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-
Codes-of-Ethics.
         The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Department's Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By
teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described
in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility
of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of
our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You
should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
         Integrity is a public good from which we all benefit and a trait of successful businessmen and
women. I intend to conduct this course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only achieve
this, however, if you maintain absolute ethical integrity in this course. If in doubt, ask me!
Personal Policy on Working Together on Cases (applies only to this course)
         For this course, you may discuss issues related to assigned cases with other students in this class
(but not other persons). You may work in the formative stages of an assignment with others to clarify
issues or exchange ideas. However, the joint or collaborative preparation of case solutions is not
permitted and I expect the final product of each collected assignment to reflect individual thought
and composition. You may not copy or paraphrase from others' draft or final solutions. Examples
intended to clarify this policy follow.
Examples of acceptable collaborative efforts (apply only to this course):
• A student is confused about an ambiguous aspect of a case, and asks another student in the class
      what s/he thinks.
• Students ask questions and share helpful insights in class or on Canvas.
Examples of collaborative efforts that are unacceptable:
• Student A completes a case before student B. B asks A for (or A offers) A's solution. B bases
      his/her solution on A's solution. Both A and B are guilty of scholastic dishonesty.
• A student finds a source relevant to a case and copies extensively from it, without using quotation
      marks, indentation or other references to acknowledge the source. This example constitutes
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 8


     plagiarism, which is a clear case of scholastic dishonesty.
• A student finds or is given a solution to a case, whether online or provided by another source (e.g.,
     a former student in the course), and bases his/her solution, in whole or in part, thereon.
• Any collaboration, breach of security or other cheating on a course examination.
Anticipated Course Schedule
Assigned chapters are from the text noted above. Various other readings will supplement the text
and be added to Canvas modules from time to time.
Please note the concentration of cases and readings following the Midterm Exam and plan
accordingly.
IMPORTANT: Please complete each day's assigned reading before class. The readings provide
     background that is necessary for understanding classroom discussion.
 Date                     Topic                                                    Reading Assignment
 June        8            Course overview                                          Syllabus
                          Introduction to fraud examination                        Chs. 1, 29
                          Comparison of audits and fraud investigations            Chs. 3, 5
             9            Comparison of practices, continued
                          Auditor responsibilities regarding fraud                 Ch. 4
                          Independence considerations for the auditor              Ch. 11
                          and fraud examiner
           10             Independence, continued
           15             Guest speaker*
                          Case 1 due by 8:00 a.m. CST (class time)
           16             Fraud psychology and characteristics                     Ch. 2
                          Additional readings:
                          Fraud red flags and detection techniques                 Ch. 13
                          Financial reporting fraud and asset                      Chs. 21, 22, 23
                          misappropriation schemes
           17             Bribery and corruption – U.S. FCPA and                   Supplemental
                          U.K. Bribery Act                                         readings
           22             Public corruption                                        Supplemental
                          Guest speaker*                                           readings
           23             Guest speaker*
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                                  Page 9


           24       Midterm Exam (during class)
           29       Commencing an investigation: anonymous Chs. 8, 7, 14
                    communications; working with investigators;
                    early investigative matters
           30       Case 2 due by 12:00 p.m. CST (noon)
                    Evening session (6:00-9:00) with forensic
                    training software* (no class at 8:00 a.m.)
 July      1        Interviewing skills                         Ch. 16
                    Guest speaker*
            6       Conducting the investigation:               Chs. 10, 19, 20, 18
                    Building a case with evidence; supporting a
                    criminal prosecution; working with legal
                    counsel; reporting on an investigation
                    Case 3 due by 8:00 a.m. CST (class time)
            7       Privacy issues and investigative challenges Chs. 9, 12
                    Guest speaker*
                    Additional reading:
                    Money laundering                            Ch. 25
            8       Ponzi schemes (video)                       Ch. 24
                    Final Exam (TBA)
ACC F383K.4
SUMMER 2020 (FIRST)
Mark L. Bradshaw                       Page 10
