       Palestine and the Palestinians: A Journey through Time
Instructor:
Dr. Mohammad Mohammad (WMB 5.142, mamohammad@austin.utexas.edu )
Meeting Time and Place​:
Office Hours:
MW 1:00-2:30
Politician Newt Gingrich, a historian by training, pronounced during his failed bid for the
Republican Party’s nomination for president that Palestinians are an invented people.
Hearing that, I wondered about my own personal history--I checked Yaquut
Al-Hamawi’s (1178-1225 ) ​Dictionary of Towns​ to see if he mentioned my insignificant
ancestral village in historical Palestine. He did.
Gingrich does not stand alone in his perception of Palestine and its people. In fact, as
Yaquut's book reveals, this people has a rich and textured history, which UT-Austin's
course ​Palestine and the Palestinians: A Journey through​ ​Time ​will explore​.
Palestine and the Palestinians: A Journey through​ ​Time​ is devoted to understanding
Palestinian history, politics and culture. In an attempt to understand and analyze the
Palestinian experience, the course draws on materials taken from government documents,
holy texts, scholarship, memoirs, poetry, fiction, folk stories, music, photography and
films (feature & documentary). Since the course is taught in Arabic, English materials
will be used only when they are not available in Arabic. The course addresses the very
important issue of the universality of the Palestinian experience.
Yaquut's book -- and his description of my town, Iksal -- is testament to the richness of
Palestinian history, and will be an important part of the course. For example, he wrote
about Iksal:
                                                                                              ُ ‫أَ ْﻛ َﺴ‬
                                                                                             :‫ﺎل‬
                                                                    ّ
  ‫ ﻟﻬﺎ ذﻛﺮ‬،‫ ﺑﯿﻨﻬﺎ وﺑﯿﻦ ﻃﺒﺮﯾﺔ ﺧﻤﺴﺔ ﻓﺮاﺳﺦ ﻣﻦ ﺟﻬﺔ اﻟﺮﻣﻠﺔ وﻧﻬﺮ أﺑﻲ ﻓﻄﺮس‬،‫اﻷردن‬ ‫ ﻗﺮﯾﺔ ﻣﻦ ﻗﺮى‬:‫اﻟﺴﯿﻦ ﻣﻬﻤﻠﺔ‬
    ‫اﻹﺧﺸﯿﺪي ﻓﻘﺘﻞ أﺻﺤﺎب‬
               ّ        ‫ ﻛﺎﻧﺖ ﺑﻬﺎ وﻗﻌﺔ ﻣﺸﻬﻮرة ﺑﯿﻦ أﺻﺤﺎب ﺳﯿﻒ اﻟﺪوﻟﺔ ﺑﻦ ﺣﻤﺪان وﻛﺎﻓﻮر‬،‫ﻓﻲ ﺑﻌﺾ اﻷﺧﺒﺎر‬
                                                                              .‫ﺳﯿﻒ اﻟﺪوﻟﺔ ﻛﻞ ﻣﻘﺘﻠﺔ‬
‘Iksal: with un-dotted ​siin​: a village in Jordan. It is 15 miles away from Tabariyya
from the direction of Ramlah and Al-Awja River. Its name occurs in some historical
events, notably a famous battle between the forces of Sayf Ad-Dawlah and Kafuur
Al-Ikhsheedi where the forces of the former were wiped out.’
This is my personal history. Noting that Sayf Ad-Dawlah died in 976 AD, this quote
states that my (really minor) village has been in continuous existence for at least one
thousand years. In the course, we will, therefore, look at a random sample of Palestinian
towns mentioned in Yaquut’s dictionary and observe their place in history.


A Journey through Time
The course begins with a brief survey of Palestinian​ ​history: the history of Palestine
starting with Islamic conquests, passing through the period of the Crusades, ending with
modern history.
The course primarily will focus on Palestine’s modern history and culture.
As a result of the wars in 1948 (Nakbah I) and in 1967 (Nakbah II), the Palestinian
society suffered catastrophic consequences with the near-total destruction of traditional
society and the new experience of living as a refugee in camps outside Palestine. We will
examine the lives of Palestinian refugees in the surrounding countries, particularly
Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria.
Materials:
sic​. Wedding music has changed since the Nakbah, and varies between regions where
Palestinians live. Folk songs that have been and are played at weddings will give students
an idea of what has been and what is important to the Palestinian people.
Movies​. Students will watch the movie ​Wedding in Galilee​..
Literature​. The destruction of Palestinian society and the dispersal of Palestinians
touched every aspect of life and culture. We will read excerpts from the following
authors who are Palestinians or are in some way personally touched by the Palestinian
plight:
      ● Mahmoud Darwish
      ● Fadwa Touqan
      ● Ghassan Kanafani
      ● Ibrahim Touqan
      ● Emil Habibi
Government documents.​ Students will study the two most important UN documents
pertaining to the Palestinian question: the UN Partition Resolution 181 (November 29,
1947), and the Right of Return Resolution 194 (November 12, 1948). Significantly, the
Balfour Declaration will also be studied, as well as correspondence between the Sharif of
Mecca and the British.
Reference Books (for those who wish to do more research)
                                                               ‫ ﺣﻮل اﻟﻘﻮﻣﯿﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬.. ‫ﺳﺎﻃﻊ اﻟﺤﺼﺮي‬
                                          ‫اﻟﺠﺰء اﻻول‬..‫ﯾﻘﻈﺔ اﻟﻘﻮﻣﯿﺎت اﻻوروﺑﯿﺔ‬..‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ اﻟﺤﺮﻛﺎت اﻟﻘﻮﻣﯿﺔ‬


                          ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ اﻟﺤﺮﻛﺎت اﻟﻘﻮﻣﯿﺔ‪..‬ﯾﻘﻈﺔ اﻟﻘﻮﻣﯿﺎت اﻻوروﺑﯿﺔ‪..‬اﻟﺠﺰء اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻰ‪..‬اﻟﺤﺮﯾﺔ و اﻟﻘﻮﻣﯿﺔ‬
                                                                             ‫ﺟﺬور اﻟﻔﻜﺮ اﻟﻘﻮﻣﻲ واﻟﻌﻠﻤﺎﻧﻲ‬
                                                                ‫ﯾﻘﻈﺔ اﻟﻌﺮب ـ ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﺣﺮﻛﺔ اﻟﻘﻮﻣﯿﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬
                                      ‫اﻷدب اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﻲ اﻟﻤﻘﺎوم ﺗﺤﺖ اﻹﺣﺘﻼل ‪1948‬ـ‪ .. 1968‬ﻏﺴﺎن ﻛﻨﻔﺎﻧﻲ‬
                                                                       ‫رواﯾﺔ رﺟﺎل ﻓﻲ اﻟﺸﻤﺲ‬
                                                                                       ‫ﻋﺎﺋﺪ إﻟﻰ ﺣﯿﻔﺎ‬
                                                                                 ‫اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﻮن اﻟﺠﺪد ﻣﺘﺮﺟﻢ‬
                                                             ‫أﻗﺴﺎم اﻷرﺿﯿﻦ وأﺣﻜﺎﻣﻬﺎ وﺣﻜﻢ أرض ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ‬
                                             ‫اﻗﺘﺮاح دوﻟﺔ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ وﻣﺎ ﺣﻮﻟﺔ ﻣﻦ ﻣﻨﺎﻗﺸﺎت ﻷﺣﻤﺪ ﺑﻬﺎء اﻟﺪﯾﻦ‬
                                                                         ‫اﻟﻼﺟﺌﻮن اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﻮن ﻓﻲ اﻟﺸﺘﺎت‬
                                                      ‫اﻟﻤﻮﺟﺰ ﻓﻲ ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ اﻟﺴﯿﺎﺳﻲ ﻹﻟﯿﺎس ﺷﻮﻓﺎﻧﻲ‬
                                                                ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ اﻟﺤﺪﯾﺚ ﻋﺒﺪ اﻟﻮﻫﺎب اﻟﻜﯿﺎﻟﻲ‬
                        ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ اﻟﻘﺪﯾﻢ ﻣﻨﺬ أول ﻏﺰو ﯾﻬﻮدي ﺣﺘﻰ آﺧﺮ ﻏﺰو ﺻﻠﯿﺒﻲ _ ﻇﻔﺮ اﻹﺳﻼم ﺧﺎن‬
                                                      ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                           ‫ﻣﻘﺪﻣﺔ ﻓﻲ ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ اﻟﻘﺪﯾﻢ‬
                                                                                 ‫ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ اﻟﺤﻘﯿﻘﺔ واﻟﺘﺎرﯾﺦ‬
                                                                     ‫ﻫﻞ ﻹﺳﺮاﺋﯿﻞ ﺣﻖ ﺗﺎرﯾﺨﻲ ﻓﻲ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ‬
                                                                       ‫ﻗﺮار ﺗﻘﺴﯿﻢ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ وﻗﺮارات أﺧﺮى‬
                                               ‫وﺻﻒ اﻷراﺿﻲ اﻟﻤﻘﺪﺳﺔ ﻓﻲ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻠﺮﺣﺎﻟﺔ اﻷﻟﻤﺎﻧﻲ ﯾﻮﺣﻨﺎ‬
                                                                         ‫اﻟﻼﺟﺌﻮن اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﻮن ﻓﻲ اﻟﺸﺘﺎت‬
                                       ‫اﻟﺪﻛﺘﻮر ﺳﻬﯿﻞ زﻛﺎر اﻟﻤﻮﺳﻮﻋﺔ اﻟﺸﺎﻣﯿﺔ ﻓﻲ ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ اﻟﺤﺮوب اﻟﺼﻠﯿﺒﯿﺔ‬
                                                                            ‫ﻣﻮﺟﺰ ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ اﻟﺤﺮوب اﻟﺼﻠﯿﺒﯿﺔ‬
                                                        ‫ﻣﺤﻤﻮد دروﯾﺶ و اﻷرض اﻟﻤﺤﺘﻠﺔ ‪ --‬رﺟﺎء اﻟﻨﻘﺎش‬
                                                                 ‫اﺑﺮاﻫﯿﻢ ﻃﻮﻗﺎن ‪ -‬اﻷﻋﻤﺎل اﻟﺸﻌﺮﯾﺔ اﻟﻜﺎﻣﻠﺔ‬
                                                               ‫اﻷﻋﻤﺎل_اﻟﺸﻌﺮﯾﺔ_اﻟﻜﺎﻣﻠﺔ_‪_-‬ﻓﺪوى_ﻃﻮﻗﺎن‬
                                                                 ‫ﯾﻮﻣﯿﺎت أو أﺛﺮ اﻟﻔﺮاﺷﺔ ‪ -‬ﻣﺤﻤﻮد دروﯾﺶ‬
                                                                       ‫ﻣﺤﻤﻮد دروﯾﺶ ‪ ،‬ﻓﻲ ﺣﻀﺮة اﻟﻐﯿﺎب‬
                                                                         ‫ﻋﺒّﺎد اﻟﺸﻤﺲ رواﯾﺔ ﻟـ ﺳﺤﺮ ﺧﻠﯿﻔﺔ‬
                                                                            ‫ﻣﺤﻤﻮد دروﯾﺶ اﻻﻋﻤﺎل اﻟﻜﺎﻣﻠﺔ‬
‫‪Grading:‬‬
    ‫‪● Participation 5%‬‬
‫‪Students are expected to come to class having read the material assigned for that day.‬‬
‫‪Participation is assessed based on the frequency and quality of the questions and‬‬
‫‪comments raised in class.‬‬
    ‫‪● Person of the Week 10%‬‬
‫‪Report to class on your “person of the week” (see list in syllabus), providing visuals and‬‬
‫‪other supporting materials as appropriate. The presentations will be scheduled during‬‬
‫‪Week 2 of the session.‬‬
    ‫‪● Homework/Reaction papers 45%‬‬


Students are required to submit weekly written reports reacting to what was covered/read
the week before. These are due on Mondays. Homework is due on the date as specified
for each.
    ● Presentation 15%
Students will present to the class research on any topic relevant to the content of the
course. The presentations will be scheduled during Week 3 of the session.
    ● Paper or Project 25%
Students are required to read either (available on Canvas>Files)
‫رﺟﺎل ﻓﻲ اﻟﺸﻤﺲ‬
Or
‫ﻋﺎﺋﺪ إﻟﻰ ﺣﯿﻔﺎ‬
throughout the semester and write an essay in Arabic discussing
the text.
Due on the last day of classes.
GRADING POLICIES
Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies:
Number/Letter grade equivalents are:
94-100    A       87-89.9         B+       77-79.9     C+      67-69.9       D+        Below 60 F
90-93.9 A-        84-86.9         B        74-76.9     C       64-66.9       D
                  80-83.9         B-       70-73.9     C-      60-63.9       D-
Attendance
You are allowed no unexcused absences. Excused absences include religious
holidays, family emergencies, and illnesses. If you need an absence to be
excused, contact me before the incident or as soon as possible afterwards with
appropriate documentation. Being absent, for whatever reason, does not excuse


you from handing the assigned homework. Each unexcused absence will result
in two percentage points being deducted from the final grade.
Honesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the university. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will
be strictly enforced.
Accessible/Compliant Statement:
If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a disability, and need
accommodations please contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). You may
refer to SSD’s website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with SSD, please
deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the semester so we
can discuss your approved accommodations.
Accessible, Inclusive, and Compliant Statement:
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning
environment consistent with university policy and federal and state law. Please let me
know if you experience any barriers to learning so I can work with you to ensure you
have equal opportunity to participate fully in this course. If you are a student with a
disability, or think you may have a disability, and need accommodations please
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). Please refer to SSD’s website for
contact and more information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are
already registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as early
as possible in the semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations and
needs in this course.
Person of the Week List:
Yasser Arafat
Mahmoud Abbas
Ahmed Shuqayri
George Habash
Nayef Hawatmeh
Abdel Bari Atwan
Tamam Al-AkHal


Walid Saif
Hanan Ashrawi
Salma Khadra Jayyousi
Ismael Shammout
Sahar Khalifah
Tawfiq Zayyad
Mohammad Mohammad (just kidding)
Azmi Bishara
Ibrahim Abu Lughud
Amin Al-Husseini
Fairouz
Samih Al-Qasem
Anton Shammas
Wadah Khanfar
Michel Khleifi
Jabra Ibrahim Jabra
Naji Al-Ali
Hisham Sharabi
Abdel Rahim Mahmoud
Edward Said
Khalil Sakakini
Imad Hajjaj
Jamal Rayyan
Ghassan Kanafani
Mahmoud Darwish
Fadwa Touqan
Ibrahim Touqan
Emil Habibi
Weekly Agenda/Schedule
Date           In class         Prepare
January 14                      Setting the stage
January 16     Present in       Prepare a detailed biography of yourself to be presented in
               Arabic your      class.
               biography.       Yaquut al-Hamawi:
               My village and   references to my village and Palestine
               Palestine        read: palestine_my_village_yaquut
                                on BB
January 21
MLK
January 23     Discuss reading.                         ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                            on BB


                                                                             ‫‪pp 7-37‬‬
‫‪January 28‬‬  ‫‪Discuss reading‬‬               ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                 ‫‪on BB‬‬
                                                                            ‫‪pp 37-57‬‬
‫‪January 30‬‬                                ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                 ‫‪on BB‬‬
                                                                            ‫‪pp 57-77‬‬
‫‪February 4‬‬                                ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                 ‫‪on BB‬‬
                                                                            ‫‪pp 77-97‬‬
‫‪February 6‬‬                                ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                 ‫‪on BB‬‬
                                                                           ‫‪pp 97-118‬‬
‫‪February 11‬‬                               ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                 ‫‪on BB‬‬
                                                                          ‫‪pp 159-180‬‬
‫‪February 13‬‬                               ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                 ‫‪on BB‬‬
                                                                          ‫‪pp 180-200‬‬
‫‪February 18‬‬                               ‫ﺗﺎرﯾﺦ ﻓﻠﺴﻄﯿﻦ ﻟﻌﻤﺮ اﻟﺼﺎﻟﺢ اﻟﺒﺮﻏﻮﺛﻲ وﺧﻠﯿﻞ ﻃﻮﻃﺢ‬
                                                                                 ‫‪on BB‬‬
                                                                          ‫‪pp 245-269‬‬
‫‪February 20‬‬                                                        ‫اﻟﻼﺟﺌﻮن اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﻮن‬
                                                                                 ‫‪:Read‬‬
                                          ‫‪refugees_definition_booklet_comission‬‬
‫‪February 25‬‬                                                        ‫اﻟﻼﺟﺌﻮن اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﻮن‬
                                                                                 ‫‪:Read‬‬
                                                               ‫‪refugees_definition‬‬
‫‪February 27‬‬                                                        ‫اﻟﻼﺟﺌﻮن اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﻮن‬
                                                                                 ‫‪:Read‬‬
                                                         ‫اﻟﻼﺟﺌﻮن اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﻮن ﻓﻲ اﻟﺸﺘﺎت‬
‫‪March 4‬‬     ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬                                            ‫اﻟﻤﻘﺎوﻣﺔ اﻟﻤﺴﻠﺤﺔ‬
            ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪March 6‬‬     ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬                                            ‫اﻟﻤﻘﺎوﻣﺔ اﻟﻤﺴﻠﺤﺔ‬
            ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪11-13‬‬       ‫‪Spring Break‬‬     ‫‪Spring Break‬‬
‫‪March 18‬‬                                                         ‫اﻟﻐﻨﺎء اﻟﺸﻌﺒﻲ اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﻲ‬
‫‪March 20‬‬    ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬                                     ‫اﻟﻐﻨﺎء اﻟﺸﻌﺒﻲ اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﻲ‬
            ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪March 25‬‬    ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬                                           ‫اﻻﻣﺜﺎل اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﯿﺔ‬
            ‫‪week‬‬                                                     ‫‪Read proverbs‬ا‬
‫‪March 27‬‬    ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬                                                ‫اﯾﻤﯿﻞ ﺣﺒﯿﺒﻲ‬
            ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪April 1‬‬     ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬                                                ‫اﯾﻤﯿﻞ ﺣﺒﯿﺒﻲ‬
            ‫‪week‬‬


‫‪April 3‬‬  ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬     ‫اﻟﺸﻌﺮ اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﻲ‬
         ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪April 8‬‬  ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬     ‫اﻟﺸﻌﺮ اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﻲ‬
         ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪April 10‬‬ ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬     ‫اﻟﺸﻌﺮ اﻟﻔﻠﺴﻄﯿﻨﻲ‬
         ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪April 15‬‬ ‫‪Person(s) of the‬‬ ‫ﻓﯿﻠﻢ ﻋﺮس ﻓﻲ اﻟﺠﻠﯿﻞ‬
         ‫‪week‬‬
‫‪April 17‬‬
‫‪April 22‬‬                        ‫ﻓﯿﻠﻢ اﻟﺠﻨﺔ اﻵن‬
‫‪April 24‬‬                       ‫ﻓﯿﻠﻢ ﻋﺮس راﻧﺎ‬
‫‪April 29‬‬                     ‫اﻟﺘﻘﺪﯾﻤﺎت اﻟﺸﻔﻮﯾﺔ‬
‫‪May 1‬‬                        ‫اﻟﺘﻘﺪﯾﻤﺎت اﻟﺸﻔﻮﯾﺔ‬
