N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                           page 1
                        The University of Texas at Austin School of Nursing
     Ns309 Engaging Global Health in Costa Rica: Focus on Central America/Study Abroad
                                  Summer 2019 (Unique # 87355)
                                               SYLLABUS
Time & Location: 2-3 classes per week, 2.5 hours each, at the Instituto de San Joaquin with
additional field experiences. See course calendar posted on Canvas for dates/times of classes
and field experiences. Transportation provided to field experiences.
Course Faculty:
July 7- July 30, 2019
Ana Todd, PhD, RN, atodd411@utexas.edu
Office hours: TBD and by appointment
July 29 –August 15, 2019
Nancy Guillet, MSN, RN, DM, nguillet@mail.nur.utexas.edu
Office hours: TBD and by appointment.
Course Description: This course provides students with an overview of global health. Particular
emphasis is given to the determinants of health, health indicators, human rights, globalization,
current socio-cultural factors, healthcare and public health systems.
Course Objectives: During the course, students will:
1.      Define key public health concepts related to global health including epidemiology,
        measures of health status, determinants of health, burden of disease, health promotion,
        and social justice.
2.      Describe how globalization impacts changing patterns in health and disease.
3.      Analyze how determinants of health, approaches to disease prevention and health
        promotion, and social, cultural, economic, and human rights factors influence the health
        of world populations.
4.      Compare the impact of health disparities in various regions of the world.
5.      Assess how research and technology contribute to improving global health.
6.      Describe how the environment and disasters (natural and man-made) affect global
        health.
7.      Describe key organizations’ and institutions’ roles in global health.
8.      Examine interventions designed to improve global health.
Global Cultures Flag: This course has been designated by The University of Texas at Austin as
having a permanent global cultures flag. The assignments in this course are consistent with this
designation. A Global Cultures Flag course means that, students are asked “to explore the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present, with the
goal of encouraging students to reflect on their own cultural experiences within a global
context.” (From: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/ccc/flags/global-cultures )


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                          page 2
Required Book: Skolnik, R. (2015). Global health 101, Third Edition. Burlington, MA: Jones &
Bartlett.
Assigned Readings: Assigned readings are listed on the Class Schedule. Skolnik textbook will be
posted in Canvas Modules.
Evaluation Methods: The course grade will be based on the following assignments:
       Assignment                                         % of Grade       Due Date
 1.    Class Attendance and Participation                       10%              Every Class
 2.    Field Work Practice and Reflection (NOTE:                24%          All reflections are
       locations subject to change) MUST COMPLETE 6                        due within 48 hours
                                                                                of field work
       Hogar de la Esperanza                                      6%                 TBD
       Palliative Care Center                                     6%                 TBD
       Indigenous community: ethnomedicine                        6%                 TBD
        Casa del Adulto Mayor en San Joaquín                      6%                 TBD
 3.    Interview with Community Member                          14%                  TBD
 3.    Group presentation on overview of selected               30%                  TBD
       Central American country health system and
       culturally appropriate solutions to a health issue
       in in selected country
 4.    Reflection on “Engaging in Global Health in              10%                  TBD
       Costa Rica” experience
 5.    Online Reading Response and Group Discussion             12%             As scheduled
                                          Week 2                  3%
                                          Week 3                  3%
                                          Week 4                  3%
                                          Week 5                  3%
Grading Scale: The School of Nursing does not use plus (+) or minus (-) with grades.
    A     =     90-100%
    B     =     80-89.9%
    C     =     79-79.9%
    D     =     60-69.9%
    F     =     Below 60%
Format of Written Assignments: Written assignments should be uploaded onto Canvas
Assignments. All Word documents must use 12-point font and 1-inch margins, be double-
spaced, include the student(s) name, date of submission, and page numbers.


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                           page 3
Writing Style: Students must use American Psychological Association (APA) format for citing
references. APA style is explained in the American Psychological Association’s (2010)
Publication manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.). Online resources for
APA style are at http://www.utexas.edu/nursing/norr/html/courses/writing_apa.html The APA
Style website itself is a useful searchable source of instructions for how to cite references
http://www.apastyle.org/. Students who use resources such as NoodleBib or CitationMachine
should do so with caution because these products might not adhere to APA guidelines.
Late Submissions: All written assignments should be submitted by the due dates. Students who
are unable to turn an assignment in on time need to negotiate an extension with the faculty.
Unless there is a serious emergency, students are expected to e-mail or talk with faculty in
person to explain the problem and to report when the assignment will be submitted. Failure to
negotiate an extension can result in a loss of 1 point per day.
                                 Explanation of Evaluation Methods
Class Attendance and Participation (10%): Attendance at all classes and field experiences is
required. Students must arrive on time for all classes, behave professionally, and stay until the
end of the class. Students are expected to complete the assigned readings or other assignments
prior to class. As class participants, students are expected to be curious, self-directed learners
and contribute to others’ learning. Students are expected to raise salient questions and issues
and to respond respectfully to other students and to faculty questions based on the readings,
knowledge gained from other assignments (e.g., preparation for group presentations), and their
personal experiences. Engaging in activities during class that are not pertinent to the global
health discussion or classroom assignments will adversely affect the participation grade.
Students are responsible for all information presented and announcements made during class
and for submitting due assignments, even on missed class days. Students who will miss class
must notify faculty by e-mail or text prior to class, or as soon as possible in case of emergencies.
When students are not able to attend class they should contact a classmate for missed
announcements, assignments, or notes. Please do not ask faculty what was missed or what was
important.
Field Work Practice and Reflection (24%) Must attend ALL Field Work and submit a Reflection
on 6 Field work experiences: Students will participate in approximately 4 class field experiences
for observational and service learning. After the field learning experiences, each student
individually will submit a written response to a set of questions (see below) on Canvas
Assignments that ask the student to think critically, reflect on the experience, and connect the
experience to the course content. Instructions will be provided for each experience. Each field
assignment and reflection is 6% of the course grade. Reflections will be due within 48 hours
(not including Saturday and Sunday) of completing the field experience.
    1. Describe the agency or organization and the community it serves.
    2. How does the agency’s work impact Costa Rica’s and global health? Explain some of the
        social, cultural, and environment context for someone served by the agency and how
        those aspects affect his/her health.


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                            page 4
    3. Relate your observations and activities of the field experience to at least one of the
        course readings to date (cite author, chapter).
    4. How, if at all, have you been affected by the field experience or how have you changed
        your thinking because of the field experience?
Interview with Community Member (14%): Students will conduct one interview to a local
member of the Costa Rican community. The goal of the interview is to capture the health care
experiences of a local community member. Students will submit a written and/or voice
recording summary of the interview on Canvas.
Online Discussion (12%): Students will be required to participate in online discussions on
Canvas for all on-line classes (See Canvas for grading rubric)
Online Reading Response and Discussion
The readings are related to health topics that influence health and health care globally. Students
will write a response and engage in discussion with peers of how the content of the readings may
apply to real life and solutions to global health issues. Students will apply these global health
concepts to their country in Central America. The reading response posted online is the
student’s response to the content of the assigned reading and her/his reflection of differences
and similarities found in the readings compared to the student's own healthcare experiences
or knowledge. Reading responses are to be submitted on or before the due date via Canvas under
the Discussions tab; students must first post their response and then reply to at least 3 other
posts/responses from classmates as scheduled. To get credit for reading response post and
group discussion, the student must submit his/her response on Canvas as scheduled. Late
post submission of student’s initial response to assigned readings is subject to 10% grade
reduction per day.
Criteria for Discussion Board Postings:
1. Post is the student’s initial response to the assigned reading(s).
2. Post is 2 paragraphs or more and 200-400 words in length total.
3. Post contributes thoughtful, substantive ideas about the topic, or responds to the postings of
     other classmates in a substantial way. (“I agree with your comment” is not substantial.
     Stating agreement or disagreement AND why you agree or disagree would be substantial.)
4. Posts thoughtful replies to at least 3 other posts/responses from classmates.
5. Posts displays good manners, is respectful, considerate, and polite (no name-calling,
     bullying, etc.).


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                           page 5
Class participation will be evaluated using this rubric:
  Category                                       Level of Achievement
                       Strong (100-90%)              Solid (89-80%)            Weak (79% or less)
  Initiative      Usually or always initiates Occasionally initiates or    Rarely responds or
                  and advances class          advances class discussion    advances class discussion
                  discussion
  Content and Opinions, ideas, and facts Opinions, ideas, and facts        Opinions, ideas, and
  Verbal          usually or always stated    often lack clarity,          facts rarely stated clearly
  Expression      clearly and concisely with conciseness, or connection    or concisely or
                  obvious connection to the to the topic, assigned         frequently lack
                  topic, assigned readings    readings or evidence-based   connection to the topic,
                  and evidence-based          literature                   assigned readings or
                  literature                                               evidence-based
                                                                           literature
  Creativity      Usually or always           Usually presents relevant    Rarely provides
  and             attentive to other          viewpoints on topics under   meaningful reflection on
  Contribution    students; frequently        consideration or             the topics under
  to the          poses questions and         occasionally poses new       discussion; minimal
  Learning        challenges thinking;        questions or viewpoints for  effort to become
  Community       provides added resources    consideration by group       involved with the group
                  for consideration
Group Presentation: Overview of Selected Central American Country (30%): Each student will
be part of a group of 3 students that will select a country in Central America: Belize, Costa Rica,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, or Panama. Students will make a presentation
about the health care system and a significant health issue in the selected country. The
presentation will be made in class as scheduled. Each student in the group should contribute
equally to the presentation. In the 20-minute presentation and 5-minute question/discussion
(total 25 minutes), students will provide an overview of the country addressing the following
topics to provide an overview and description of the overall health status of the selected
country. Students are required to provide discussions questions for the audience.
A. General overview of the country (e.g., location, population, size, geography, government,
     history, economy)
B. Health status and Social determinants of health indicators: Explain the health status of the
     selected country and interpret the health status indicators in comparison to the US and
     Costa Rica. Prepare a table or graph comparing data for the selected country with the US
     and Costa Rica.
             • Life expectancy
             • Neonatal mortality rate


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                         page 6
          •   Infant mortality rate
          •   Under 5 mortality rate
          •   Maternal mortality ratio
          •   Top 3 causes of morbidity and mortality
          •   Prevalence of major diseases (i.e. HIV, TB, Malaria or other conditions of concern
              to the country)
          •   Income level classification of the country
          •   GDP per capital
          •   Percent of the population living below $1 or $1.25 per day or living below poverty
              level
          •   Education and literacy levels: male and female
          •   Gini Index
          •   Health care expenditures
C. Health policies and health care access:
           • Describe the type of health care system (e.g., all or parts similar to Beveridge,
               Bismark, out-of-pocket, pluralistic) and its components.
           • What health care is provided by government, private providers?
           • How many have insurance? Who do patients pay for health care (insurance
               company directly, through insurance tax or income tax, or directly to providers).
           • Describe the minimum and maximum levels of health care offered.
           • Describe the health workforce:
               • What type of training is needed to be a RN and MD
               • Percent of births attended by a skilled birth attendant
               • Doctors per population
               • Nurses per population
D. Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
           Identify two of the most relevant SGDs in this country based on the findings you
           presented in section B. Use data that support your conclusion (why these SDGs are
           important). Summarize the progress made on the two SDGs.
E. Cultural perspectives: Discuss aspects of culture that relate to health in your selected
country such as:
           • Religions
           • Language
           • Traditions
           • Health beliefs, health practices including attitudes toward Western medicine,
               indigenous practices and beliefs (e.g., hot and cold foods), and beliefs about
               causes of illness and diseases.
           • Rituals, food, gender and family roles
           • Recent and/or past historical events that have shaped the people’s beliefs or
               practices.


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                           page 7
             •   Human rights concerns or conflicts within or affecting the country
E. Major health issue:
        a. Describe one significant health concern in the selected country. Briefly report the
             incidence and prevalence; identify who is at higher risk; explain the cause, biology,
             pathophysiology, natural progression of condition, signs and symptoms, and
             treatment.
        b. Explain the social, political, and economic causes of the problem. Report how the
             country and any NGOs or other partners are addressing the problem.
F. Solutions and Recommendations
        a. Recommend one culturally appropriate solution that should be continued or added
             to how the country addresses the health issue. Identify the benefits of the solution
             for selected country or region and why the solution is better than alternatives. The
             solution or recommended approach to the problem must build on the cultural
             beliefs and practices of the country and the current approaches to the health issue.
             For example, do not just say your solution is culturally appropriate or that you will
             educate people about the causes of the issue from a Western point of view because
             the people and government of your selected country may disregard such an
             approach as disrespectful or irrelevant. Therefore, explain the appropriate cultural
             dimensions you will incorporate in the solution or recommendation.
        b. Describe how the solution should be implemented, e.g., which organizations would
             be involved, how financed with a rationale or justification (be specific; do not
             propose that the government can pay for it or that funds would be raised etc.
             Financing options could include raising taxes, shifting expenses from another area,
             generating income from new sources), logistics of training personnel or delivering
             health care, actual or proposed policies and organizations that would put the
             solution into practice.
        c. Identify barriers or possible opposition to the solution/recommendation. Explain
             how the challenges or barriers can be overcome.
This presentation requires at least 8 sources; at least 3 of the 8 must be from peer-reviewed
scholarly publications and 1 of the 8 must be from a news source local to the chosen country.
Peer-reviewed publications are most efficiently found by searching PubMed or a similar library
database (we will discuss this in class). Assistance in finding peer-reviewed scholarly
publications is available On-line from the School of Nursing Learning Center at
http://www.utexas.edu/nursing/academics/services_lc.html. Sources of news local to specific
countries are listed on page 13 of this syllabus.
Students who only briefly or superficially mention the topics within the criteria will not get
the full number of available points. To earn all points, students must present in-depth,
insightful, information and analysis in a concise way. The format and style of the references
should be in accordance with the APA publication manual, 6th edition (see information on


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                         page 8
Writing Style on page 2 of this syllabus). Each student’s portion should be incorporated to
create a cohesive presentation. Points for the required components are listed below.
Students should demonstrate effective use of audiovisual support (e.g., PowerPoint or
handouts) and communication skills (e.g., audible voice, maintaining eye contact, only
necessary reading of notes). Students should use questions or other ways to generate
discussion.
                                      Criteria                                       Possible
                                                                                      Points
 1. General overview of the country (e.g., location, geography, government,              5
     economy)
 2. Health status indicators and social determinants of health                          10
 3. Health care system, payment system, health care access, and health                  10
     care providers.
 4. SDGs                                                                                10
 5. Describe the selected health problem: incidence and prevalence;                     20
     identify who is at higher risk; the cause, biology, natural progression,
     signs and symptoms, and treatment. Explain the social, political, and
     economic causes of the problem. Report how the country and any NGOs
     or other partners are addressing the problem
 6. Give cultural perspectives of your country and provide culturally                   20
     appropriate solutions to main health issue, plan for implementation,
     barriers or challenges that may hinder implementation of the solution
     and how they could be overcome
 7. Incorporate varied presentation strategies such as audio and visual
     materials, leading the class in a meaningful discussion, and responding            10
     to questions from class members.
 8. All students present and group adheres to 25-minute time limit.                      5
 9. Be well prepared to lead an intellectually stimulating discussion,
     interact with audience, and communicate accurate information.                       5
     Students engage audience through discussion questions.
 10. Posts presentation (power point or Prezi) and list of references on                 5
     Canvas. References are in APA format and at least 3 (of at least 8) are
     from peer-reviewed scholarly publications and at least 1 (of the 8) is
     from local news source.
                                                                 Total Points          100


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                         page 9
Class Schedule: The tentative schedule of weekly topics, assignments and visits to community
agencies is presented in the table below. Although changes are not anticipated, it is within the
discretion of the faculty to adjust the schedule to enhance topic relevancy, include new
publications, or respond to current trends.
                                           Class Schedule
   Week #             Topics and Activities                       Reading & Assignments
    Faculty
       1       Course Overview (7/10)                   Read syllabus
               Introduction to Global Health,           Bring required book and syllabus (paper or
      AT           Sustainable Development Goals           electronic)
                                                        Read Skolnik, Chapter 1
               Health Determinants, Measurements        Read Jacobsen Pg. 9-11; Ch 2
                   and Trends (7/11) Group sign up
                   7/11
               Health Care Systems and Access to        FOR ONLINE: Read Skolnik, Chapter 5
                   Care (7/12) (ONLINE)                 Read Reid, T.R. (2009). The healing of
                                                           America: A quest for better, cheaper,
                                                           and fairer health care, pgs.1-45
                                                        Be Prepared to Discuss: The health care
                                                           system of your country


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                       page 10
   Week #             Topics and Activities                    Reading & Assignments
   Faculty
      2       Ethical and Human Rights Concerns     Read Skolnik, Chapter 4
                  in Global Health (7/16) (On-line) Reflection (upload in Canvas): Answer the
     AT                                             following questions: How can you apply
                                                    ethical principles to global health issues?
    Visit:                                          Describe the key ethical and human rights
    Hogar                                           concerns as they relate to global health and
  Esperanz                                          health in your country. What are the
      a                                             significant historical cases in human
                                                    subjects research?
              Natural Disasters & Complex           Read Skolnik Chapter 15
                  Humanitarian Emergencies (7/17)
              Communicable Diseases (7/18)          Read Skolnik, Chapter 12
                                                    Be Prepared to Discuss: Which
                                                        communicable diseases are of most
                                                        concern in your group’s selected
                                                        country? What are the incidence and
                                                        prevalence of TB, malaria, and
                                                        HIV/AIDS?
                                                    https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-
                                                        sheets/detail/zika-virus
              Cultural Influences on Health
              (online) (7/19)
              Interview with Community Member       Read Skolnik, Chapter 6;
                                                    Discussion Board on Canvas
      3
              Children’s Health (online) (7/22)     Read Skolnik, Chapter 10
     AT                                             Discussion Board on Canvas
    Visit:    Trip to Koswak (7/23-7/24)
   Ethno-
  medicine


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                              page 11
   Week #           Topics and Activities              Reading & Assignments
   Faculty
       4
              N309 Presentations 10 am-4 pm Read Skolnik, Chapter 9
     NG       Women’s Health (7/31)         Watch BBC One. (June 26, 2005). Dead
    Visit:                                      mums don’t cry. Panorama.
  Palliative                                    http://vimeo.com/18510214 (≈ 48 min.)
    Care                                    Listen to/Read Nelson, S. S. (January 2,
   Center                                       2014). Berlin clinic aims to make genital
                                                cutting survivors whole. All Things
                                                Considered, National Public Radio.
                                                http://www.npr.org/2014/01/02/25912
                                                1408/berlin-clinic-aims-to-make-genital-
                                                cutting-survivors-feel-whole (about 8
                                                minutes).
                                            Be Prepared to Discuss: How are women
                                                regarded in your group’s selected
                                                country? What are fertility and maternal
                                                mortality rates in your group’s selected
                                                country?


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                        page 12
   Week #            Topics and Activities                       Reading & Assignments
    Faculty
       5
              Environmental Health (online) (8/5)     Read Skolnik, Chapter 7
      NG                                              Discussion Board on Canvas
              Nutrition (8/6)                         Read Jacobsen Ch 12
                                                      https://www.facebook.com/TELEGRAPH.C
                                                          O.UK/videos/10155760136094749/?vid
                                                          eo_source=permalink
              Non-Communicable Diseases (8/7)         Read Skolnik, Chapter 13
                                                      https://www.facebook.com/WHO/videos/2
                                                      059586634104279/
                                                      https://www.who.int/nmh/publications/nc
                                                      d-infographic-2014.pdf?ua=1
                                                      https://www.who.int/ncds/introduction/en
                                                      /
                                                      https://www.who.int/en/news-room/fact-
                                                      sheets/detail/noncommunicable-diseases
              Presentations N390D (8/8)
       6
      NG      Integrating Global health into          Be Prepared to Discuss: how to integrate
     Visit:       professional practice (8/13)            Global health into your professional
    Senior                                                practice.
      Day     Course Evaluations                      What is your special interest within Global
    Center                                                health issues?
                                                      What is your action plan to address the
                                                          issue?
                                    Global Health Resources
The following sources contain information that will be helpful as you complete many of your
assignments or search for further information.


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                           page 13
   • PubMed, Medline, or CINAHL. Assistance in finding peer-reviewed scholarly publications is
      available On-line from the School of Nursing Learning Center at
      http://www.utexas.edu/nursing/academics/services_lc.html.
   • The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) World Factbook contains economic, cultural, and
      other social information: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
      factbook/index.html
   • The World Health Organization http://www.who.int/countries/en/ then select your
      country for general information and then choose the link to your country’s WHO Office
      website to view priorities, news, and Country Cooperative Strategy. Also try
      http://www.who.int/topics/millennium_development_goals/en/
   • WHO regions http://www.who.int/about/regions/en/index.html. Click on “regional office”
      to see the countries assigned to the 6 WHO regions (Africa, the Americas, South-East Asia,
      Europe, the Eastern Mediterranean, and the Western Pacific)
   • The World Bank http://data.worldbank.org/
   • The Institute for Health Measurement and Evaluation (IHME) http://www.healthdata.org/
   • Gapminder: http://www.gapminder.org
   • Skolnik textbook and other assigned readings
     • The country’s English language newspapers and news sources. For example:
        • TheBigProject.co.uk is a portal to newspapers in English from across the world:
            http://www.thebigproject.co.uk/news/
        • English online International newspapers. http://www.inkdrop.net/dave/news.html
        • New Hope, PA foreign newspapers.
            http://www.newhopepa.com/news/intl_news/default.htm
   • Understanding Global Cultures (4th ed., 2009) by Martin J. Gannon & Rajnandini Pillai, at:
       http://www.everyculture.com/
   • Find the web site for the Country’s Ambassador to the United States. Each country’s
       website usually provides information about the culture.
   • United Nations International Children’s Fund (UNICEF) http://www.unicef.org
   • Carter Center http://www.cartercenter.org/homepage.html
   • Clinton Foundation http://www.clintonfoundation.org/
   • Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation http://www.gatesfoundation.org
   • Partners in Health http://www.pih.org
                    Selected Applicable Course, School, and University Policies
All courses at UT-Austin must adhere to all university policies. The following policies are
included for your convenience.
Last Day to Withdraw or Change to Pass/Fail: Refer to the Registrar’s website for additional
information: http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/16summer Texas law limits the number of
course drops for academic reasons to six. Senate Bill 1231 says, “an institution of higher
education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education,
unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                           page 14
Note: Students should refer to the Study Abroad Financial responsibility policy
http://world.utexas.edu/io/forms/abroad/refund20166.pdf for information about financial
penalties of withdrawal or dismissal.
July 29 is the last day an undergraduate student may change registration in a class to or from the
pass/fail basis.
August 12 is the last day an undergraduate student may (with the dean’s approval) withdraw
from the university or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons.
Use of Canvas: This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system available at
https://courses.utexas.edu. Canvas will be used to distribute course materials, communicate
and collaborate online, post grades, and submit assignments. Students will be responsible for
checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. As with all
computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated
disruptions. Notification of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page.
Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work. If there is an unscheduled downtime for
a significant period of time close to a due date, adjustments may be made by the course
faculty. Canvas support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 Monday through
Friday 8 am to 6 pm.
Feedback is an important part of any kind of learning. Without feedback on how well you
understand the material, it is more difficult for you to make significant progress. During this
course, students will give feedback on their learning in informal and formal ways, such as in-
class participation, assignments, and tests. Faculty want to know when something in the text,
syllabus, or discussion is not clear. Student feedback will enable faculty to provide additional
information when needed or to explain a concept in different terms. In addition to feedback on
your learning, faculty will ask for feedback about how teaching strategies are helping or
hindering your learning. Some of this feedback will be gathered from anonymous surveys online
and/or in class. Students are encouraged to respond to these inquiries so that together an
effective teaching and learning environment is created. Students are also encouraged to use
office hours to share thoughts or clarify class material.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy: The University (including course faculty) will
exercise the right to send e-mail communications to all students, and the University will expect
that e-mail communications will be received and read in a timely manner. Every student must
provide the University with his or her official e-mail address using the on-line update form in UT
Direct. The student's official e-mail address is the destination to which the University and
course faculty will send official e-mail communications. It is the responsibility of every student
to keep the University informed of changes in his or her official e-mail address; consequently, e-
mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed
communication. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order
to stay current with University-related communications. It is recommended that e-mail be
checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and
instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                            page 15
Student Conduct Policy: Students and faculty in The School of Nursing each have responsibility
for maintaining an appropriate learning environment. Faculty members have the professional
responsibility to treat students with understanding, dignity and respect and to guide the
teaching/learning process. Students are expected to refrain from verbal and nonverbal
behaviors in the classroom that may be distracting to others, such as, but not limited to:
arriving late or leaving early, side conversations, text messaging or tweeting, note passing,
surfing the internet, checking/posting on Facebook, checking/answering e-mail, or playing
games. Place phones on vibrate or off. Students engaging in distracting behaviors will be
marked as absent for the day. Students who persistently engage in behaviors that are disruptive
to the teaching/learning process may be required to leave the classroom. For further
information refer to General Information, Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities,
Chapter 11: Student Discipline and Conduct.
Honor Code: Learning and practicing responsible and ethical behavior is a vital part of being a
good citizen and student. The Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities given in the
General Information Catalog (p. 201, Sec. 11-101) and The University of Texas at Austin’s Honor
Code apply to all students:
    The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
    leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
    expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
    toward peers and community.
The profession of nursing has a legacy of public respect and trust. We provide specialized care
for the health needs of individuals and the community with integrity, honesty, compassion, and
state of the art knowledge and skills. Learning and practicing responsible and ethical
professional behavior is a vital part of professional education. The School of Nursing has its
own Honor Code:
    As a student in The University of Texas at Austin’s School of Nursing, I pledge myself to be
    honest in all of my student activities including, but not limited to, all of my scholastic work
    and interactions with patients, members of the community, faculty, and peers.
    Furthermore, I will not use any substance prior to or during my interaction with patients
    that could alter my judgment or ability to render safe care: this includes but is not limited to
    any use of alcohol, illegal drugs, and prescription or over-the counter drugs that may impair
    my mental and/or physical abilities required to perform safe patient care. I will disclose to
    my instructor any violations of the above standards of conduct.
Scholastic Integrity and Scholastic Dishonesty: The School of Nursing recognizes the strong link
between honesty in academic work and professional integrity. Students are expected to
present original work for completion of course requirements and strictly adhere to the
American Psychological Association (APA) principles of documentation of sources and proper
citation of quoted material.


N309 Guillet and Todd Summer 2019                                                            page 16
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying
academic records, and misrepresenting facts. Plagiarism is basically not giving others credit for
their work when you use it in your work (including images). Presenting another’s published or
unpublished work as one’s own work for completion of course requirements will result in a
grade of zero (“F”) for that assignment and reporting of the incidence to the Dean of Students’
Office. The Dean of Students Office records acts of dishonesty and notifies the School of
Nursing of each incident. Any act of academic dishonesty, including fabrication of reports or
records of interactions with clients, is considered incompatible with ethical standards of nursing
practice. The School of Nursing does not admit to the professional sequence students who have
a record of violations. Students who engage in scholastic dishonesty may be subject to dismissal
and may jeopardize their eligibility for licensure as a registered nurse. The Dean of Students
may take action above and beyond that of the course instructor. More information can be
found in the section on plagiarism in the APA Manual and the statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty Policy Sec. 11-802.
Academic and Program Accommodations for Students with Disabilities: The University of
Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students
with disabilities. For more information, refer to General Information for more on Academic and
Program Accommodations for Students with Disabilities or contact the Services for Students
with Disabilities office in the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 or 471-6461 TDD. The
School of Nursing works to ensure that students who have disabilities have equal access to the
University’s programs and services. If you have any questions about services or
accommodations for students with disabilities, please talk with the faculty member, the
Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs, or the Assistant Dean for Student and Clinical
Affairs.
Religious Holidays: A student who is absent from a class or test for the observance of a
religious holy day may complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence, if
proper notice has been given. Notice must be given at least fourteen (14) days prior to the
classes scheduled on dates the student will be absent. For religious holy days that fall within the
first two weeks of the semester, notice should be given on the first day of the semester. It must
be personally delivered to the instructor and signed and dated by the instructor, or sent
certified mail, return receipt requested. A student who fails to complete missed work within the
time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): You may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas
Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
