Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture
The University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
Syllabus Spring 2019
Course:                    LAR 696 Advanced Design: Landscape Architecture
Studio Title:              The Yucatán Coast Studio:
Social, Economic and Environmental Integration in a Global Touristic Destination
Unique numbers:            01700 (LAR 696), 01280 (ARC 696), 00911 (ARC 561R)
Course type:               Studio
Credits:                   6
Instructor:                Gabriel Díaz Montemayor, ASLA, Assistant Professor of Landscape Architecture
                           diaz.montemayor@utexas.edu
Office location:           WMB (West Mall Office Building) Room 4.102C.
                           Office telephone: (512)471-0752
Schedule:                  Mondays & Wednesdays 1:00 - 5:00 p.m, Fridays 1:00 – 3:00 p.m.
Location:                  GOL 3.108 West
Office hours:              By appointment. Set up via email.
Catalog Description:
LAR 696 ADVANCED DESIGN: LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Elective studios offering students an opportunity to explore particular topics in landscape, often in
collaboration with architecture and community and regional planning students.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing, Landscape Architecture 695 with a grade of at least C, and consent of
the graduate adviser.
Course number may be repeated for credit when the topics vary.
ARC 696 ADV ARCH DESIGN
Advanced problems in architectural design to help develop skills in areas of students' and faculty
member's choice, including interior architecture and preservation, as well as landscape, urban, and
sustainable design.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing, Architecture 694 or the equivalent, and consent of the graduate adviser.
Course number may be repeated for credit when the topics vary.
ARC 561R ADV ARCH DESIGN
Restricted to students in the School of Architecture. Architecture 661R is restricted to students
participating in the Professional Residency Program.
Advanced problems in architectural design.
Prerequisite: Architecture 520E (or 520L) and 520G (or 530T) with a grade of at least C and satisfactory
completion of third-year portfolio review.
Offered on the letter-grade basis only. Course number may be repeated for credit when the topics vary.
Meeting Information:
This studio will be executed in the revised approach to advanced design studio meeting times at the School
of Architecture. In this context, we will meet three times a week for a total of ten contact hours: on Mondays
from 1:00 to 5:00 pm, Wednesdays from 1:00 to 5:00 pm, and Fridays from 1:00 to 3:00 pm, to be spent
working and collaborating in a design and planning studio environment.
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


Studio Description and Main Topics:
The Yucatan Coast Studio:
Social, Economic, and Environmental Integration in a Global Touristic Destination
Can an intensive presence of global tourism be sustainably integrated with local communities and
cultures in a way that ensures a healthy and long-term future for the social, economic, and
environmental aspects on the ground?
What is the role of the practice of twenty-first century urban planning, urban design, architecture and
landscape architecture in achieving that?
The studio will explore the issues, stimuli and opportunities for a sustainable social and environmental
mode of development for the coastal region of the Yucatan Peninsula close to Merida, the capital of the
state of Yucatan, in Mexico. This part of the peninsula presents today with significant complexity to
achieve a sustainable future. There is uncertainty. The 30 miles+ coastal strip, extending from Puerto
Progreso (24 miles north of Merida) to the east, has seen in recent years the growth of coastal
development and urbanization oriented to tourism and leisure. Ecologically critical marshes lie between
the urbanizing coastal strip, the inner urban and suburban landscape of Merida, and the constellation of
small traditional Mayan towns and agricultural lands around it occupying the mainland.
The city of Merida itself has experienced rapid urban growth, sprawl, in recent years. Merida is well
known in Mexico and abroad as a city with high quality of life and living standard. Its stable economy, low
crime and violence rates, and the cultural and environmental wealth of its region have made it attractive
to relocating Mexicans and permanent or seasonal immigrants from other places. In particular, the
United States and Canada. Real estate signage all over the large colonial/nineteenth century urban core
is written in English. AirBnb’s are in expansion, both in Merida and its nearby coastal strip.
But, as we know, all this development comes with a cost. The stress, pressure and impacts on the natural
environment, the urban systems and infrastructure, and the local urban and rural societies of the
Yucatan are palpable now.
This condition might be about to be exacerbated soon. The new Mexican federal administration has
announced as its main infrastructural “mega-project” the construction of a tourist oriented train, the
Maya Train 1. This should happen within the 6 years the current presidential sexennial period. By 2024, the
train will be ready, connecting cities, towns, archaeological sites, and beach resorts in the Mayan
Peninsula.
This “mega-project” brings forward and accentuates the need to develop strategies to integrate the
incoming additional tourism influx (the Yucatan Peninsula is already the second touristic destination in
Mexico; the country is consistently one of the 10 most visited countries in the planet) with the rich cultural
and historic heritage of the region while mitigating impacts, protecting communities and their culture,
and regenerating the natural environment.
Of critical concern, derived from this mega-project, is the proven inability of the state, the government, to
control predatory development in all its forms –gated communities, spatial ghettos, over-consumption or
resources, disregard for the local and the poor and the weak- and its dire consequences –unchecked
urbanization, deforestation, pollution, spatial segregation, exhaustion of resources, et al-. This is
particularly worrisome today, as even the leftist government promoting the project has failed to take the
time to adequately consult the matter with the local Mayan communities, the urban communities, all
1 https://www.tren-maya.mx/
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


communities, except –presumably- the (economic) capital 2. While ignoring, at least apparently to date,
the legal requirement to develop full environmental impact studies to decide on the project and how it
should be planned, designed, built and maintained. Simply put, there is just not enough information to
date to gauge the project. This is an opportunity.
The time is ripe to explore how to ensure that the social, cultural and environmental wealth of the
Yucatan is preserved and regenerated, while leveraging the potential economic benefits of the growing
tourist industry and its support infrastructure.
The studio will look at how to address this situation and opportunity through socially, culturally,
economically and environmentally sound infrastructural systems, public spaces, community engagement
and development policies where this integration can be enjoyed in a process over time oriented set of
strategies and tactics.
The Territory and its Scales
This studio will define the project as established by the multiple urban and natural systems converging
through a series of nested scales.
     •    First, if we think of the whole of the Yucatan Peninsula, a region, and its Mayan world as a “mega-
          project”, only matched by the scale of the Maya Train, then we will be enabled to understand the
          relevance of smaller scale operations which contribute to the unique character and value in
          question, under threat, but also an opportunity and asset.
     •    Second, through the territorial, as defined by the largest urban center of Merida, its hinterland,
          the constellations of small Mayan agricultural towns, and their area of influence stretching all
          the way to the coast with the Gulf of Mexico.
               o It is in this scale where the reach and implications of “mega-projects” takes more
                    consequence. It is also this scale the one that requires research on global successes and
                    failures with similar regions and territories facing the preventable (as will be embraced
                    in the studio) conflict of the local (the cultural, the social) and the global (tourism and
                    economic development).
     •    Third, the coastal strip stretching from Puerto Progreso to Telchac Puerto (but flexible enough to
          be reshaped as determined by a comprehensive analysis to be developed in studio). This coastal
          strip is composed of the following minimum components, from the coast-south: coastal waters,
          the beach, the urbanized strip, the marshes-lagoons, the transition to the deciduous forest and
          agricultural lands, and the immediate rural Mayan communities and towns.
     •    Fourth: The marshes-lagoons and their diverse perimeter, with variable width, including urban,
          rural, and natural areas.
     •    Fifth: Specific areas of particular intensity where the convergence of social, economic, and
          environmental issues is an opportunity to explore –through planning and design- a sustainable
          mode of development and environmental protection/regeneration.
               o At this point, before the extensive analysis to be performed in studio, there is an
                    identified epicenter of interest defined by the transect cutting (from north to south)
                    across the beach - urbanizing strip - salt ponds of Xtampu - the archaeological site of
                    Xcambo 3 - and the forest/agricultural edge.
2 For an opinion on this matter by the instructor of the studio, please read:
https://research.gsd.harvard.edu/mci/maya-train-and-isthmus-consultation-qa-with-gabriel-diaz-montemayor/
3 To get started on the Mayan Civilization imprint in the region please read the article: “MAYA COASTAL
PRODUCTION, EXCHANGE, LIFESTYLE, AND POPULATION MOBILITY: A VIEW FROMTHE PORT OF XCAMBO,
YUCATAN, MEXICO” by Thelma Sierra Sosa, Andrea Cucina, T. Douglas Price, James H. Burton, and Vera Tiesler.
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


              o    There will be other specific areas to be identified in studio. Including the transect cutting
                   through, from north to south, Puerto Progreso, all the way to the forest/agricultural
                   fringe.
Planning and design are present in all these scales. From strategies to reconcile communities with their
vital space, their landscapes, to specific design opportunities for a sustainable architecture of the
infrastructure necessary to integrate the local and the global.
Studio theories and methods
This is a multi-disciplinary studio. Landscape Architecture, urban design, architecture and urban
planning provide with a diverse repertoire of theories and methods that will be identified and employed.
One premise of the studio is that there is a lot of architecture to be made part of infrastructure, and
viceversa. As opposed to thinking of traditional infrastructural elements performing one function only,
say a street, or an energy line, the studio will employ design, the architecture of infrastructure, to make
of infrastructural systems more efficient, possibly minimizing their footprint on the ground, and
polyvalent. All while addressing the local technological and cultural capacities (for example, considering
the role of infrastructure construction as a way to provide temporary or permanent employment, and
designing infrastructure with a capacity to be maintained and cared by local people.) More specifically, in
the context of the main preoccupation of the studio, the social, economic, and environmental future of the
Yucatan Coast, theories and methods within the realm of Landscape Urbanism and Ecological Planning
come forward as primordial. Additionally, as a project that wants to base its proposals intersecting the
local and the global, theories and methods of participatory urbanism, community engagement, tactical
urbanism, and others, will be studied, selected, adapted and integrated to territorial scales and
infrastructures. The studio will explore how to shift the equation from a capitalist mode of development to
one that capitalizes on the social, cultural, and environmental wealth of the Yucatan and its peoples.
Initial project references within this theoretical realm include the speculative and critical practice work of
Paola Vigano. In particular, the ideas synthesized in the book “Territories of Urbanism: The Project as a
Knowledge Producer,” which, by the title itself, speaks on the ambitions of the work to be produced by the
studio. Also relevant as an example is the work produced in speculative studios by Chris Reed at the GSD
of Harvard, in example, the book “Retooling Metropolis: Working Landscapes, Emergent Urbanism.” In
the context of Mexico, the speculative large scale planning of what would be “mega-projects” by architect
Alberto Kalach and his firm “TAX” are a good example of the employment of the project as a tool to
evidence opportunity bringing to the foreground the capacity of territorial scales to improve social and
environmental conditions. In particular, the work included in the “Atlas de proyectos para la Ciudad de
Mexico” (Project Atlas for Mexico City), that can be consulted here: https://www.kalach.com/atlas/
“Landing” 4 over the territory, an initial sequence
When travelling to Puerto Progreso from Merida: Exiting Merida, driving northward on the highway, the
car goes by entry gates to hidden-behind-the-forest high-income subdivisions, a few scattered industrial
areas, and the archaeological site of Dzibilchaltun. There isn’t much more to see from the car, only the
thicket of the low deciduous forest growing over a very flat plate with shallow soils and karstic geology.
15 miles later, just before getting to Puerto Progreso, a bridge spans over the marsh separating the
mainland from the coastal strip. Puerto Progreso is a linear strip, 0.9 miles at its widest and of about 5 to
6 miles in length, occupying what were once salt dunes and marshes. While the blocks facing the beach
are lined with a few hotels and many bars and restaurants, the rest of the town is a humble urban fabric
composed of neighborhoods for a population economically reliant on the tourism and service industry. It
is no longer the fishing village it once was, or the port town. 4 miles away from the beach in Puerto
4 In reference to Christophe Girot’s “Four Trace Concepts in Landscape Architecture.”
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


Progreso is the port of Progreso, connected by an equally long bridge. This port is critical for the
economy of the region as it is a bulk material, container, and cruise port.
Moving along the coastal highway to the east, one encounters the back of Puerto Progreso’s residential
areas. Very unfortunately, exhibited in plain sight, are polluted and dirty ponds, in between the highway
and the last row of houses. These ponds were once part of the rich ecology of the marshlands. This goes
on for hundreds of meters until Puerto Progreso ends, and the next town comes in, Chicxulub Puerto. As
the coastal strip of land narrows, urban form changes from impoverished housing blocks to coastal villas,
condominium complexes, and open –vacant, with signs for sale- stretches of the strip. After Chicxulub,
the pond strip between the highway and buildings disappears. In the next town, Uaymitun, the view to the
gulf of Mexico from the highway is mostly blocked, with intermittent openings, by vacation and seasonal
occupied buildings, many of which remain empty for significant times of the year. Taking care of these are
the Mayan people of the coastal strip, hailing from Puerto Progreso, Chicxulub, Uaymitun, and the other
coastal and inner-land nearby towns.
Most of this leisure oriented urbanization is owned by higher income people from Merida who flee
Merida’s hot summers to the beach, where a permanent breeze flows from the Gulf of Mexico every night,
cooling off and bringing down temperatures. Also significant, are properties of immigrants, permanent or
seasonal, from other countries, while there is a growing presence of properties geared toward outlets
such as AirBnB.
Moving eastward along the coastal highway for 33 kilometers (20 miles) from its intersection between the
north-south highway of Merida-Puerto Progreso, the car gets to the intersection with the highway south
to Xcambo, and on to Dzemul and Motul de Carrillo Puerto. Once in this highway you get to the initially
proposed (this is, before the studio’s analysis) project’s epicenter, existing in the salt harvesting ponds of
Xtampu. These are located between the coast and the archaeological site of Xcambo, exactly 38 miles
from downtown Merida. These salt production ponds, mines, have been in operation since before the
arrival of Spaniards to the continent. Xcambo was once the urban center produced by the exploitation of
salt in the lagoon. Today, the salt ponds support a small Mayan community who continue to harvest with
traditional methods, but have minimal infrastructure and have the responsibility –emanating from an
agreement and financial support from the federal government- to extract salt while protecting a natural
habitat beautifully punctuated by flamingo flocks.
Xcambo had, at some point in history, a system of sac be (s), word for elevated road in Mayan, stretching
from the lagoon and marsh into the forest and beyond, connecting with inland urban and rural
settlements. But today, the southern edge of the marshes is defined by the forest. Beyond it, out of sight,
are agricultural parcels within the forest. The closest towns are 7 miles beyond this edge.
A Parallel Studio:
The studio will be partially coordinated with an Advanced Architecture Studio to be taught by Professor
Coleman Coker. Both studios will travel together to the Yucatan but will work on their own projects. This
studio will operate in the integration of scales, from the regional, to the territorial, to the site specific (for
the demonstration of planning and design strategies); while Coker’s studio will be site specific to the salt
mining Mayan community of Xtampu.
Professors Coker and Diaz Montemayor visited the site during May of 2017. You can see and download
photos from the site visit here:
     • Photos of Xtampu, also known as Las Coloradas (The Redish) salt ponds:
          https://flic.kr/s/aHsmmZhk7P
     • Photos of the nearby Mayan civilization archaeological site of Xcambo:
          https://www.flickr.com/gp/gabodiazm/013m4m
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


     •   Photos of Puerto Progreso: https://www.flickr.com/gp/gabodiazm/A90J81
Travel:
Both coordinated studios will travel to and work together in the Yucatan during/around Spring Break,
specific dates will soon be determined. UTSOA will provide travel support with a $700 USD Mebane Fund
scholarship per student. Each student will have to plan on an additional expense of up to $600 USD, plus
the meals.
The country of Mexico is in the list of restricted regions determined the University’s International
Oversight Committee 5. As such, no student is required to travel to Mexico if he or she decides not to.
However, Merida, its adjacent coast and the state of Yucatan are among the safest areas of Mexico,
enjoying relatively low rates of crime and violence. Common sense precautions will be exercised as in any
foreign location.
The US State Department in its travel advisory for the country of Mexico published on November 15, 2018,
specifies on the state of Yucatan that:
Yucatan state – Level 2: Exercise Increased Caution
Exercise increased caution due to crime.
There are no restrictions on travel for U.S. government employees in Yucatan state, which includes
tourist areas in: Chichen Itza, Merida, Uxmal, and Valladolid.
For a complete travel advisory follow this link:
https://travel.state.gov/content/travel/en/traveladvisories/traveladvisories/mexico-travel-advisory.html
A Partner On Site:
We will work while over there with our local partners at the Marista University of Merida, one of the most
prestigious private institutions of the region. The Marista has offered to support the travel experience
with interaction with their MLA and architecture students. Including a potential workshop on traditional
construction methods and techniques by renowned architect and designer Oscar Hagerman. There is also
the chance to inform the work of the studio with ongoing thesis work being developed in Puerto Progreso
by a group of students from the Master of Landscape Architecture Program at Marista University. We are
exploring the possibility of hosting the Marista University group for a joint final review in early May 2019.
More to come on this.
More specific information regarding travel will be handed to the student during studio sessions.
General learning objectives:
     •   Learn from a unique project which requires multi-disciplinary and collaborative skills, bridging
         knowledge, methods, and matter, preparing the student for real life practice environments.
     •   To understand and explore the complexity of issues in Landscape Architecture, Urban Design,
         and Urban Planning, synthetizing and delivering appropriate responses in an accessible and
         concise manner.
     •   To understand, embrace, and explore in design the relationship of multiple scales in the
         assemblage of projects where a range of scales interrelate and are present throughout, from the
         regional to the construction detail.
     •   To continue to unfold design as a research process, and design as a process over time.
5
  https://world.utexas.edu/risk/ioc
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


Specific learning objectives:
      •  To embrace design and planning as activities integral to environmental justice and equity, dealing
         with health, safety, welfare, accessibility, and diversity, in a complex location where local
         qualities are of significant importance and under significant threat.
      •  To research case studies, methods, and theories and explore ways to push these forward
         effectively influencing a design and planning project that, to a significant degree, lacks
         references, methods, and a practice framework.
      •  To engage in real issues and problems proper of the urban, rural, and territorial administration
         of cities and regions, asking larger questions of urbanism and the environment, converting these
         into analogies to be found elsewhere in the contemporary world, but, at the same time specific to
         the social, economic, political, and environmental factors of the Yucatan Peninsula and the Mayan
         Region.
Work Phases and Evaluation:
Chronological order of phases and final grade composition:
Phase and Activity                                           Duration                  Final Grade Value
PHASE 1: INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS DEVELOPMENT + CASE STUDY RESEARCH
Research for a set of nested scales, from the region and mega-project, to the territory, and beyond
                                                             4.0 weeks
Mega-Project / Mega-Problem / Mega-Stimuli
Case Study Research (individual)                                                       05%
Inventory (group)                                                                      10%
Analysis (group)                                                                       10%
PHASE 2: CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT AT TERRITORIAL SCALE
(small groups or couples)                                    3.0 weeks                 20%
PHASE 3: SITE RECONNAISSANCE, TRANSITION FROM TERRITORIAL DESIGN TO SITE(s) DESIGN
(all studio)                                                 2.0 weeks                 10%
PHASE 4: DESIGN DEVELOPMENT AT MULTIPLE NESTED SCALES
(Preferred: small groups, optional: individual work)         3.5 weeks                 15%
PHASE 5: FINAL PRODUCTION & REVIEW
(Preferred: small groups, optional: individual work)         3.5 weeks                 30%
TOTAL
                                                             16 Weeks                  100%
Specific assignment descriptions for each phase and activity will be handed out in a timely manner.
Some activities are going to be executed individually by students, while others will be small group efforts.
It is important to mention that while many of the assignments will be group activities, students will still
receive individual grades for their work in each of these teams. This means that grades within a group are
not necessarily going to be all the same.
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


Evaluation Criteria:
The work will need to demonstrate the student’s ability to analyze, test, iterate, and develop proposals
with respect to scale, landscape systems, and formal and spatial resolution, whereby each reflects the
criteria of grasp, process, and resolution as outlined in Landscape Architecture studio syllabi, but
applicable to all other disciplines present in the studio:
     1.  Grasp: the work/project has clear conceptual idea that addresses the assignment’s stated
         objectives;
     2.  Process: the work/project rigorously examines, tests, and refines conceptual intent and spatial
         implications through the effective and appropriate use of representation models;
     3.  Resolution: the work/project is complete conceptually, spatially, and technically, as
         demonstrated through verbal and graphic presentation.
General Studio schedule:
     •   This schedule may be modified by the instructor during the semester. You will be notified in
         advance of any changes to this tentative schedule. They may be changes in additional instructor
         absences due to research duties (conferences, lectures).
     •   Refer to the official University calendar for information regarding drop/add dates, payment
         schedules, and recognized holidays: https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/18-19
                                   LAR 696 SPRING 2019 STUDIO SCHEDULE
 WEEK         DATE      DAY    ACTIVITY                                          NOTES / LOCATION
             23-Jan      W     ADVANCED STUDIOS LOTTERY                          NO STUDIO MEETING
    1
             25-Jan       F    STUDIO INTRODUCTION
                                                                                 2-3 pm MLA students Q & A meeting
                                                                                 with Claire Agre from West 8
                                                                                 http://www.west8.com/
                                INTRODUCTION TO PHASE 1: INVENTORY AND
                                                                                 5 PM: CLAIRE AGRE FROM WEST 8
             28-Jan      M        ANALYSIS DEVELOPMENT + CASE STUDY              LECTURES @ Goldsmith 3.120 +
                                                 RESEARCH                        LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPE
                                                                                 ARCHITECTURE BIENNIALS
                                                                                 EXHIBITION SOFT OPENING @
                                                                                 Mebane Gallery
                                                                                 3,30-4,30 pm: Meeting with Claudia
    2                                                                            Harari, Landscape Architect from
                                                                                 Monterrey, Mexico
                                                                                 http://www.hararilandscape.mx/
             30-Jan      W
                                                                                 5 PM: OPENING RECEPTION AND
                                                                                 GALLERY TALK FOR THE LATIN
                                                                                 AMERICAN LANDSCAPE
                                    PHASE 1: INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS              ARCHITECTURE BIENNIALS
                                  DEVELOPMENT + CASE STUDY RESEARCH              EXHIBITION
             01-Feb       F
             04-Feb      M                                                       INSTRUCTOR OUT OF TOWN
                                                                                 DELIVERING LECTURES AT
    3        06-Feb      W                                                       ARKANSAS
             08-Feb       F
    4        11-Feb      M
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


            13-Feb      W               PHASE 1: PRESENTATION
                                                                             5 pm Deborah Berke Lecture @
                                                                             Jessen Auditorium
                                 INTRODUCTION TO PHASE 2: CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT OF TERRITORIAL
            15-Feb       F
                                                                  STRATEGIES
            18-Feb       M
   5        20-Feb      W                                                    5 pm Stih and Schnock Lecture at
                                                                             Goldsmith 3.120
            22-Feb       F
            25-Feb       M                                                   5 pm Joan Busquets Lecture at
                                PHASE 2: CONCEPTUAL DEVELOPMENT AT           Goldsmith 3.120
   6
            27-Feb      W                  TERRITORIAL SCALE
            01-Mar       F
            04-Mar       M                                                   5 pm Michael Murphy Lecture @
                                                                             Jessen Auditorium
   7
            06-Mar      W
                                                                                INSTRUCTOR ATTENDING CELA
            08-Mar       F                                                              CONFERENCE
            11-Mar       M             PHASE 2: MIDTERM REVIEW               5 pm ksestudio Lecture @
                                                                             Goldsmith 3.120
   8                         Phase 3: Transition from territorial design to
            13-Mar      W
                             site(s) design                                  STUDIO SESSION FROM 1 TO 3 PM
                             TBD: MAY BE A DAY OFF TO PREPARE FOR THE TRIP, OR, WE MIGHT BE FLYING
            15-Mar       F
                             THIS DAY
            18-Mar       M
   9        20-Mar      W    PHASE 3: Transition from territorial design to site(s) design / YUCATAN TRIP
            22-Mar       F
            25-Mar       M   NO STUDIO, TRIP DECOMPRESSION
                                     INTRODUCTION PHASE 4: DESIGN
   10       27-Mar      W         DEVELOPMENT AT MULTIPLE NESTED             5 pm William O'Brien Lecture @
                                                 SCALES                      Goldsmith 3.120
            29-Mar       F
            01-Apr       M                                                   INSTRUCTOR OUT OF TOWN
   11       03-Apr      W                                                    5 pm Elena Manferdini Lecture @
                                                                             Goldsmith 3.120
                                  DESIGN DEVELOPMENT AT MULTIPLE
            05-Apr       F
                                             NESTED SCALES
            08-Apr       M
   12       10-Apr      W
            12-Apr       F
            15-Apr       M
            17-Apr      W                                PHASE 4: PREFINAL REVIEW
   13
            19-Apr       F
                                       PHASE 5: FINAL PRODUCTION
   14       22-Apr       M
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


             24-Apr      W
             26-Apr      F
             29-Apr      M
                                                                                  INSTRUCTOR OUT OF TOWN
    15      01-May       W
                                                                                  5 pm Ana Maria Leon Lecture @
                                                                                  Goldsmith 3.120
            03-May       F
            06-May       M
                               FINAL PRODUCTION AND PRINTING - FINAL
    16      08-May       W                                                        INSTRUCTOR SERVING AS REVIEWER
                               REVIEWS OF OTHER STUDIOS
            10-May       F                                        FINAL REVIEW
Grading Policy:
All assignments are graded and tabulated in a spreadsheet using a number scale which is then
translated to a letter scale.
These scales correspond as follows:
A        94 to 100
A-       90 to 93
B+       87 to 89
B        84 to 86
B-       80 to 83
C+       77 to 79
C        74 to 76
C-       70 to 73
D        60 to 69
F        0 to 59
Final grades will be computed in accordance with University Academic Policies as follows:
  grade    performance level
  A        The assignment is complete at all levels, and is sound in its technical
           application and description.
  A-
  B+       The assignment is thorough, with the potential to become superior with
           additional technical or graphic development.
  B        The assignment resolves the stated intent, and accounts for the assignment's
           main concerns. Both process and resolution are complete, but contain minor
           deficiencies.
  B-
  C+       The assignment is undertaken with the minimum effort required to resolve the
           stated issues; it lacks rigor, precision, and extended exploration. This grade
           must be offset with higher grades in support courses in order to maintain
           graduate standing.
  C        The assignment is passing but contains deficiencies in regard to intent,
           development, and resolution. The project's conceptual framework is poorly
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


           constructed, while graphic and verbal materials are fairly imprecise and
           incomplete. This grade must be offset with higher grades in support courses in
           order to maintain graduate standing.
 C-
 D         The assignment is incomplete, and skills are not level appropriate. Technical
           comprehension and capability are not demonstrated.
 D-
 F         The assignment is incomplete. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance
           is not acceptable. Note that this grade will also be assigned when you have
           excessive unexcused absences.
    •   Excused Incomplete grades (X) will only be assigned when the student is absent from class
        according to University approved criteria, and is unable to make up the work by the end of the
        term.
    •   Assignments are to be completed in the time allowed. With the exception of a medical, family or
        personal emergency, late work will be reduced by one letter grade per each 24 hour period after
        the stated assignment deadline.
    •   Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the
        grade to be reduced, remain unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an
        individual basis, not as a comparison with other students' grades.
Attendance Policy:
    •   With the exception of an excused absence, attendance and participation in studio sessions are
        mandatory.
    •   Excused absences include family emergencies, personal emergencies, and illnesses. In the case
        of a family emergency an explanation will be required by the instructor. Family emergencies
        include a family member’s illness, a death in the family, accidents, or any other health related
        issues in the family. In the case of a personal emergency an explanation will be required by the
        instructor. In the case of an illness, a doctor’s notice explaining the absence will be required by the
        instructor. Attending, for example, weddings, graduations, or family trips are not family
        emergencies and therefore are not excused absences.
              o All of these situations should be communicated via email with the instructor.
    •   Acquiring more than 3 unexcused absences will result in the lowering of the final course grade by
        half a point. I.e. from 85 to 80 equal to B to B-.
    •   Acquiring more than 4 unexcused absences will result in the receipt of a failing grade for the
        course.
    •   Arriving late, after 20 minutes of the start of class, or leaving early, before 20 minutes the end of
        class, will be assessed as one half of an absence.
    •   The instructor might have to miss a few of the semester’s studio sessions due to research
        activities. Students will be given advanced notice of this if it happens.
    •   The students are strongly encouraged to attend the lecture series organized by the School of
        Architecture every semester. These are included in the studio schedule. Studio sessions during
        those days are going to finish at 4,45 p.m. in order to give to the student to attend the lectures.
        Attendance to lectures from other design and planning disciplines is also strongly encouraged.
        There might be a small number of lectures which conflict with full (5 hour) sessions of the studio,
        such as reviews and travel, attendance to the lecture will be canceled in this situation.
    •   Religious Holy Days:
              o By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
                  prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
                  examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


                  will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
                  the absence.
Academic Integrity:
Plagiarism or violations of academic integrity in any form will be handled according to measures as
outlined by the General Information catalog and the University.
Students are expected to abide to the Student Honor Code and the University Code of Conduct:
Student Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.”
University Code of Conduct:
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
http://www.utexas.edu/about-ut/mission-core-purpose-honor-code
Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action, including
the receipt of a failing grade for the course, and possible dismissal from the University. Policies on
academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
Accommodations:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Concerns may also be directed to the Program Director, Associate Professor Hope Hasbrouck.
The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
    1.  Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
        buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
        assembling outside.
    2.  Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
        occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
    3.  Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
        first week of class.
    4.  In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    5.  Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
        University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    6.  Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
    7.  Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
        found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Communication between Students and Instructor outside of class hours:
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019


    •   Email will be used by the instructor to communicate with students when not in class time. Email
        should be used by students to ask for office hour appointments and/or any question, comment, or
        request outside of studio meeting times.
    •   Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence. Therefore, students are
        expected to check their email inbox often and on a daily basis. Class announcements, readings,
        assignment descriptions, and other information will be sent by the instructor to students via
        email.
    •   The studio will also have a UT Canvas site and will also use UT’s BOX service to share data and
        assignments.
References:
To be included in assignment descriptions and commented during lectures.
LAR 696 / ARC 696 / ARC 561R Díaz Montemayor Spring 2019
