                                      HISTORY OF RELIGIONS OF ASIA
                                         ANS 301R / R S 302 / CTI 310 · Fall 2019
                                          Instructor: Dr. Oliver Freiberger
                                              E-mail: of@austin.utexas.edu
This course offers a survey of major religious traditions of Asia (Hinduism, Buddhism in South and East Asia,
Confucianism, Daoism, and Shinto). It focuses on the historical development of their beliefs, practices, rituals, and
customs in social context. The course will combine lectures with class discussions on readings. At the end of the
semester, students will have a basic knowledge of the beliefs and practices of those religious traditions, have read
important religious texts and discussed issues pertinent to the religions’ adherents, and have a more refined sense
of how the category “religion” may be applied. All this enables students to develop a greater awareness of global
cultural diversity and will, hopefully, spark the desire to study some of those religions more deeply.
Course materials:
      1. Willard G. Oxtoby, Roy C. Amore, Amir Hussain, eds. World Religions: Eastern Traditions. 4th ed. Oxford:
          Oxford University Press, 2014.
      2. R. K. Narayan, The Mahabharata: A Shortened Modern Prose Version of the Indian Epic. Chicago: The
          University of Chicago Press, 2000.
      3. Zhuangzi: Basic Writings, translated by Burton Watson. New York: Columbia University Press, 2003.
      4. Readings provided as PDF files on Canvas.
Grading
Attendance/participation: 20%
Two quizzes: 20% (10% each)
Two short essays: 20% (10% each)
Midterm exam: 20%
Final exam: 20%
Grading scale: 93–100: A. 90–92: A-. 87–89: B+. 83–86: B. 80–82: B-. 77–79: C+. 73–76: C. 70–72 C-. 67–69: D+. 63–
66: D. 60–62: D-. 0–59: F.
Global Cultures flag
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with
cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or
present.
Scholastic dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For
further information, please visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
Students with disabilities
The Faculty Council's Educational Policy Committee states, "Providing a quality educational experience for all
students includes adapting the instructional environment to accommodate the educational needs of students with
information about Services for Students with Disabilities through the course syllabus." At the beginning of the
semester, students should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) Office (phone 471-6259), which
will prepare an appropriate letter to the instructor to guide you. See also the SSD website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Schedule


                                                                          2
Week 1: Introduction; Indus civilization; Vedic religion
Week 2: Vedic religion; classes, castes, and stages of life; epics
Week 3: Hindu gods; bhakti
Week 4: Hindu religious practice
Week 5: Buddhist origins; the Buddha; Early teachings
Week 6: Early Buddhist teachings; Monastic and lay communities; Theravāda
Week 7: Mahāyāna; Vajrayāna
Week 8: Vajrayāna; Buddhist practice
Week 9: Chinese traditions: introduction; Ancient traditions; Confucius
Week 10: Confucianism; Daoist foundations and practices
Week 11: Chinese Buddhism: arrival and development
Week 12: Interactions between traditions
Week 13: Ancient Japanese traditions; Shintō
Week 14: Shintō; Japanese Buddhism
Week 15: Japanese Buddhism
Week 16: Review
