The University of Texas at Austin                                                  SOC302 (83730)
Department of Sociology                                                             Summer I, 2019
                                                                         Online On-Demand Course
                               Introduction to the Study of Society
Instructor:     Jamie O’Quinn
Skype name:     jamieoquinn
Office Hours:   Tuesday and Thursday (12-1pm); Friday (1-4pm)
Email:          joquinn@utexas.edu
Pronouns:       she/her/hers
TA:             Jess Goldstein-Kral
Skype name:     j_go_k
Office hours:   Monday and Wednesday (10-11am); Friday (9am-12pm)
Email:          jgoldsteinkral@utexas.edu
Pronouns:       they/them/theirs
TA:             Ruijie Peng
Skype name:     ruijiep
Office hours:   Monday and Wednesday (4-5pm); Friday (11am-2pm)
Email:          ruijie.peng@utexas.edu
Pronouns:       she/her/hers
Tech Support: gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu
Because many of you are not in Austin, all office hours for this course will be held on Skype.
You can download Skype for free at https://www.skype.com/en/get-skype/.
Course Objectives
•       To develop sociologically informed knowledge of life in modern society being
        transformed by globalization and inequality
•       To gain deeper understanding of the research process and its role in public knowledge
        and policy
•       To learn how to craft a scientifically based argument and communicate it effectively.
Course Description
This course offers an introduction to the theories, methodologies, vocabulary, and themes of the
discipline of sociology. During the semester, we will explore the linkages between individuals
and the larger cultures, contexts, and groups in which they live their lives in order to better
understand the structure and function of social interaction, human behavior, and the institutional
frameworks of society. The over-arching purpose of the course is to instill in you the
“sociological imagination”, which can then be used to decipher current social issues and patterns
of everyday life.
                                                  1


The course is delivered completely online, which gives students more latitude in completing their
work, though the class is NOT entirely self-paced. The course material is organized into sections
by week, and students are expected to complete all of a section’s reading assignments, lecture
videos (organized into “Modules”), and quizzes by Friday at 11:59pm each week. See the course
schedule below for due dates. This design allows students to complete the work within one week
according to their own schedule.
Course Communication and Instructional Support
Announcements. Outside of the video lectures, any student communication initiated by
instructors and teaching assistants will be conducted via the Announcements page on our course
website, so please make sure to check the Announcements page daily.
Outside-of-Class Communication. Students who wish to contact the instructor or teaching
assistants can do so either over Skype during office hours or via email. Do not assume that TAs
will receive communication submitted through Canvas comments.
Canvas and Course Tech
To access the class home page, students can go to http://canvas.utexas.edu/ and log into the
Canvas system with their UT EIDs. Students will be able to view class lectures through Canvas,
and all course material will be posted on this web page, including announcements and grades.
The home page on Canvas will have links to the course syllabus, the daily videos, a help section,
and several other important links you’ll use through the course.
Tech requirements. All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled laptop or
desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should have
enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:
•        At least 2GB RAM
•        Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
•        Safari, Firefox, or Chrome (highly recommended) browser. Note that Safari and Firefox
         users should be prepared to use Chrome as a backup.
•        5Mbps internet connection speed (check here: http://beta.speedtest.net/)
Again, all students should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by
visiting the test stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.php. There are multiple
computer labs on campus for students to use if they do not have a personal computer or laptop
(https://it.utexas.edu/services/teaching-classroom-technology-labs).
Technical difficulties. Students who experience technical problems playing or accessing class
videos should report the issue to tech support at gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu. The
instructor and teaching assistants cannot address the ramifications that technical problems might
have on grades without a record of the problem with tech support.
Course Readings
Carr, Deborah, Anthony Giddens, Mitchell Duneier, and Richard Appelbaum. 2018. Introduction
to Sociology, Seagull Version Eleventh Edition. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. ISBN:
978-0-393- 63945-2. https://books.wwnorton.com/books/webad.aspx?id=4294994899.
                                                   2


This version of the textbook is shorter and cheaper than the standard version. It should be
purchased through the University Co-op. Purchase comes with free access to the ebook and other
resources, which can be accessed through: https://digital.wwnorton.com/introsoc11seagull.
Course Requirements
Attendance and participation (10%). All students are required to watch all of a section’s daily
videos by Friday at 11:59pm each week. Videos contain built-in instapoll questions to gauge if
students are actually watching. (This means that you cannot simply play the video and then leave
the room and do something else!)
Daily quizzes (50%). Students are responsible for completing a daily quiz before watching the
daily videos beginning on Tuesday, June 11th. The quizzes will be 5 minutes long and contain 5
multiple choice questions covering the previous day’s reading and lecture materials. The purpose
of daily quizzes is to ensure that students keep up with course materials and are grasping the
basic course content. Note that the two lowest grades on the daily quizzes will be dropped from
the final average at the end of the course.
Short papers (40%). Students must also complete THREE of the five short paper prompts during
the semester. These papers will be 2 single-spaced pages in length and are intended to encourage
you to think about current issues and events in a sociological way. More details are located on
each of the paper prompts (located in the “Assignments” tab on Canvas). I will go over paper
prompts at the end of each week and papers you choose to complete should be uploaded on
Canvas by 12:00pm every Monday starting June 17th. These due dates are:
Paper 1 due June 17th
Paper 2 due June 24th
Paper 3 due July 1st
Paper 4 due July 8th
Paper 5 due July 15th
Because students are only required to complete three of the five possible papers, there will be
NO excused late or missing papers. This means that you should plan accordingly! If you already
know that you will be out of town or particularly busy during one weekend of the course, make
sure that you choose papers for different weeks. I also recommend that you do not choose to skip
both of the first papers in case you get sick or have a family emergency later on in the semester.
All five prompts are available on Canvas starting at the beginning of the course. I recommend
that you take a look ahead of time to see which three you might be interested in completing so
that you can plan ahead.
We will not have daily videos posted for Fridays. Instead, Fridays will serve as a writing
consultation day. The instructor and TAs will each hold 3 office hours staggered throughout the
day to address questions about papers.
Note, there will be no final given during finals week.
                                                   3


Grading Policies
Grading: Grades are assigned on a plus/minus scale, where A+ = 98-100, A = 93-97, A- = 90-92,
B+ = 88- 89, B = 83-87, B- = 80-82, C+ = 78-79, C = 73-77, C- = 70-72, D+ = 68-69, D = 63-67,
D- = 60-62, F = 59 or below.
Late assignments. All written assignments must be turned in through Canvas by 12:00pm on
Monday on the day they are due. If you choose to turn in a paper late, they will be docked ½
letter grade (5 points) for each day late. Again, because students may choose which papers to
complete, there will be no excused late papers.
Missed quizzes. There are no make-up quizzes. A missed quiz will count as a 0, but, again, the
two lowest grades on the daily quizzes will be dropped from the final average.
Course Integrity & Academic Dishonesty
University of Texas Honor Code. “As A Student of the University Of Texas at Austin, I Shall
Abide By the Core Values of The University and Uphold Academic Integrity.”
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
When taking daily quizzes, students cannot receive help from any source other than their own
class materials (e.g., notes, textbook). When completing short papers, students can only turn in
original work done exclusively by them. For any course assignment, students must not
collaborate or share information with others, and they are not allowed to provide their UT EIDs
to others for the purpose of engaging in class activities. Please note that the online format of this
course allows the monitoring and detection of issues involving identity verification, collusion,
collaboration, and plagiarism. Students who observe any cheating among their peers are required
to share this information with the professor or teaching assistants.
Grade-related penalties for academic dishonesty can be routinely assessed (up to and including
an "F" in the course), and students can also be suspended or even permanently expelled from the
University for scholastic dishonesty. Please remember that all information is stored on secure
computer servers.
Data security. All instapolls, quizzes, and writing assignments over the system will be saved and
stored for educational and general academic research. Any such research or data-sharing with
other researchers will de-identify the data, including the removal of names, UT EIDs, email
addresses, and other information.
Other University Policies & Services
Religious holy days. Religious holy days should not affect students’ participation in this course,
since students can watch course lectures and take quizzes at times that are convenient for them.
                                                    4


Furthermore, if a paper due date interferes with a religious holy day, students are encouraged to
select that paper as one of their two to skip.
Students with disabilities. Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may
require to accommodate a disability-related need. You may find out more information on the
Services for Students with Disabilities website: https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Mental health needs and concerns. If you have concerns about another student in the class or
anyone else you encounter at UT, please contact the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at
512-232-5050. If you are having a personal crisis, please contact the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC) Crisis Line at 512-471-CALL (2255).
Instructor Profile
Raised in California, Jamie O'Quinn received her B.A. in Sociology with a minor in Education
from the University of California at Santa Cruz and her M.A. in Sexuality Studies from San
Francisco State University before coming to Austin for her Ph.D. studies. She is the manager of
UT's Urban Ethnography Lab and studies gender, race, and youth sexualities. Her dissertation
research uses queer and feminist theories to understand child marriage in the United States.
Teaching Assistant Profiles
Jess Goldstein-Kral is a PhD student in the Department of Sociology. Their interests include
gender, sexuality, intimate relationships, inequality, queer theory, and mixed methods. Their
master’s thesis investigates gender expression and relationship dynamics in same-sex and
different-sex marriages.
Ruijie Peng is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Sociology at the University of Texas at
Austin. She is a Graduate Fellow of the Urban Ethnography Lab and a Graduate Coordinator of
the Rapoport Center for Human Rights and Justice. Her ongoing dissertation research is an
ethnographic study of home support and women’s labor against the backdrop of rural-urban
migration in southwest China. It focuses on how economic changes influence resource transfers
between rural family members and urban workers, and how gender relations are affected by that
process.
                                                  5
