RTF 344M VISUAL EFFECTS & MOTION GRAPHICS
Class Info: TTH 3:00-5pm CMB 4.114
Instructor​: Ben Bays
e-mail address: benbays@utexas.edu
Instructor Availability
Emails are generally answered within 5 days
Office Hours:
        ● My office hours are Thursday evenings: 8pm-11pm in CMB 4.114
                   ○ By appointment only. ​Make an Appointment via this link.
Open Lab:
        ● I will host an Open Lab Thursday Evenings from 8-11pm in CMB 4.114
                   ○ you do ​not​ need an appointment
                   ○ please​ come and work
                   ○ I will be there to ​support​ you
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This is a production course designed to introduce you to the tools and techniques of
motion graphics and visual effects. In contrast to an ​animation​ course, this class will
focus on compositing, the physics of movement and expression of ideas through the
elements and principles of design and motion.


There will be a variety of creative projects. These projects will involve using the
computers. If you feel that you lack the necessary skills to do any of the assignments,
please talk to me. I will be happy to work with you during lab times, but you will be
responsible for putting in the extra work that is necessary to complete the assignments.
Remember this is a production course and will require many hours of work outside of
class.
The Center for Teaching and Learning suggests ​3 hours outside of class for every 1
hour spent in class.
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY FLAG


This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester,
providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem,
or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of
your grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own
work. What does this mean? It means I will expect you to figure things out on your own.
COURSE EVALUATION:
You get points in 3 ways in this course:
         1. ASSIGNMENTS : ​the bulk of the work in this course is spent on creative
              problem solving and expression of ideas and concepts through short films
                      1. Assignments are GRADED according to a RUBRIC
                      2. I subtract 1 point for lateness (even 1 minute). Each subsequent
                         day, I remove a point.
         2. PREPARATORY QUIZZES: ​ in order to streamline the learning process, you
              are sometimes required to complete a Preparatory Quiz ​before​ ​beginning a
              creative assignment or project. These quizzes are designed to force you to
              investigate the basic concepts required for success in a creative project
              (ASSIGNMENT)
                      1. Quizzes must be completed ​before​ the Creative Assignment or
                         Project begins. You will notice they are on timers.
                      2. Quizzes are ​open book​, but may only be taken once.
                      3. Quizzes are (hopefully) self grading.
         3. Extra Credit : ​ there are 2 extra credit opportunities.
Final Grades
Look at the grade book. Look at the points for the assignments and quizzes and extra
credit. ​ It all adds up to 100. ​100 points = 100%


Here is the grading scheme:
 Name Range:
 A       100 %    to 94.0%
 A-      < 94.0 % to 90.0%
 B+      < 90.0 % to 87.0%
 B       < 87.0 % to 84.0%
 B-      < 84.0 % to 80.0%
 C+      < 80.0 % to 77.0%
 C       < 77.0 % to 74.0%
 C-      < 74.0 % to 70.0%
 D+      < 70.0 % to 67.0%
 D       < 67.0 % to 64.0%
 D-      < 64.0 % to 61.0%
 F       < 61.0 % to 0.0%
Checking your grade:


I keep a running tally of your grade as the semester progresses. You may ask me for a
status update at any time or check egradebook in the UT Canvas (​canvas.utexas.edu
(Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.​).
RTF Safety Policy
Special safety precautions for your crew, actors and others in the area are required if
you are undertaking any hazardous activities while filming, including but not limited to
ANY driving or horseback/livestock shots, shooting in or around water or heights, or if
you are using stunts, flames, pyrotechnics, squibs or simulated weapons. Please note
that unlicensed handguns and other real weapons are never permitted in RTF studios or
on location shoots. In addition, you must follow all federal, state and local laws and the
rules of any venue or location at which you are filming regarding hazardous activities,
including University of Texas at Austin rules if filming is done on campus.
Student filmmakers must submit a detailed safety plan to their course instructor and the
RTF Technical Facilities Manager if a script or project involves driving or
horseback/livestock shots, shooting in or around water or heights, stunts, flames,
pyrotechnics, squibs, weapons or any other hazardous activities (this requirement
applies to all shoots, including documentary projects, but please see the special
guidelines for documentary driving shots below). It is the responsibility of the student to
hire experts in the field and budget at least $600/day for expert consultation and on-set
supervision if, in the judgment of the class instructor and the Technical Facilities
Manager, such expert consultation or supervision is necessary. In addition, any
utilization of pyrotechnics on the University of Texas at Austin campus requires prior
review and approval through the Fire Prevention Services office by the University Fire
Marshal or their designee.
Students should understand that driving while filming will be permitted only in strictly
limited circumstances, such as on a private road or drive. In most circumstances,
students who wish to undertake driving shots will be required to arrange for a police
escort and a city permit. Monitors inside the vehicle will NOT be allowed while filming in
a vehicle. Filming from the back of trucks is not considered safe and is not permitted
under any circumstances.
Documentary filming of an interview while the interview subject is driving is only
permitted if the cameraperson is secured in a seat belt and is not directing the driver of


the car in any way, besides engaging in a conversation in which the driver/interviewee
has been informed not to look at the camera or the interviewer at all during the
interview. In addition, any filming from a vehicle, for drive-by B-roll, must be done by a
cameraperson secured in a seat belt, where the driver is not being directed in any way
by the director, so that they are driving as they normally would. As noted above, any
documentary student planning on filming in any vehicle must submit a safety plan to
their course instructor and the RTF Technical Facilities Manager.
Students who fail to comply with this policy will receive a failing grade in this class and
will be barred from future access to RTF production and post-production equipment and
facilities
If Police, Fire, or EMS are called to your shoot, or any injuries on your shoot
require medical attention, this must be reported to your instructor and the
Assistant Director of Production Services, (Keefe Boerner
Keefe.Boerner@austin.utexas.edu), within 24 hours of the incident. There is a
form in checkout and on the RTF website that must be filled out and returned
within three business days.
Policy on Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, please visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site.​.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful
student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in
your way,


there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th
floor
| 512-471- 3515 |​cmhc.utexas.edu
-     CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | ​cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- |CMA 4.134 | 512-471- 7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
-     Brief assessments and referral services
-     Mental health &amp; wellness articles - ​cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-     MindBody Lab - ​cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-     Classes, workshops, &amp; groups - ​cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
