    The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | School of Design and Creative Technologies
AET Foundations of Digital Imaging and Visualization
306 Introduction to digital content creation, manipulation, transmission, and critical inspection
      Spring 2019 | Tue/Thur 8:00–9:30am | DFA 4.126
      INSTRUCTOR: Greg Hervey - ghervey@utexas.edu
      Office Hours (by appointment): M/W 5:00-5:30pm, and T/TH 7:30-8:00am
      CLASS WEBSITE: canvas.utexas.edu
    COURSE OVERVIEW
    Develop foundational skills in visual communications using industry standard software, and exploration of elements and principles of
    design, including color theory, composition and typography. Project-based technical overview of vector and raster graphics, video, and
    motion graphics.
    By utilizing industry-standard software, digital cameras, and a vocabulary of the art and technology within our culture, this course will
    enable students to make educated technological and conceptual decisions on how to explore and utilize digital technology within their
    own creative and technical career.
    Research and practice outside of classroom hours is mandatory. The pages —and linked content— of the course website are
    required reading (there is no required textboox). Other than grading and attendance policies, parts of this syllabus are subject to change
    with advance notice, as deemed necessary by the instructor.
    COURSE MODULES
      Digital Imaging & Design (Adobe Photoshop, image editing, image resolution, digital image/video capture, color space, and
      printing): Development of basic digital image editing skills with digital exploration into both static and temporal space. Introduction to
      elements and principles of design.
      Vector Graphics, Iconography and Typography (Adobe Illustrator, vector vs. raster space, layout and typography):
      Exploration into vector vs. raster, digital file formats, introduction to typography.
      Non-linear Video Editing (Adobe Premiere Pro, storyboarding, digital cinematography, digital presentation, and transmission):
      Exploration into digital video, capture, editing, manipulation, transmission and presentation in technical and creative capacities.
      Motion Graphics (Adobe After Effects, digital rotoscoping, and 2D Animation): Development of traditional and digital animation
      skills, keyframing and motion tracking, compression theory, digital animation workflows, and practical storyboarding.
    COURSE REQUIREMENTS
    • Personal Laptop (DFA computers have Adobe software; but you will need access outside of lab & library hours)
    • Adobe Creative Cloud (UT student price: $75/yr at CampusComputer.com)
    • Internet access and a working email address (class notifications, assignments, and quizzes will all be administered through Canvas)
    • High capacity USB storage and/or Cloud Storage (Dropbox, Google Drive, Box, etc. UT students have free Box access)
            ***backup of your data is solely your responsibility and should be done frequently to avoid loss of any work***
          “My computer crashed” or “my files got corrupted” is the 21st century equivalent of “the dog ate my homework”
    LEARNING OBJECTIVES
    By the end of the course, students should:
    • understand technical parameters of digital images and digital video,
    • recognize the pros and cons of vector and raster images, and the related file formats,
    • identify and employ the Principles of Design and fundamentals of visual composition,
    • be conversant in color theory and typography,
    • demonstrate foundational skills in Adobe Photoshop, Illustrator, Premiere, and After Effects


CALENDAR
Dates and lecture topics are subject to change. Calendar is provided for overview purposes only.
DATE           MODULE/TOPIC/PROJECT                                                                  POINTS (260 TOTAL)
Jan 22         MODULE 1: Introduction to Digital Imaging
Jan 24		                     Introduction to Photoshop
Jan 29		                     Principles of Design & Color Theory
Jan 31		                     EXERCISE 1a: 4 Principles of Design                                              10
Feb 5		                      Composition / Classroom exercise
Feb 7		                      EXERCISE 1b: Montage                                                             20
Feb 12		                     Module 1 Quiz                                                                    20
Feb 14         MODULE 2: Introduction to Vector Graphics
Feb 19		                     Introduction to Adobe Illustrator
Feb 21		                     EXERCISE 2a: Drawing in Illustrator                                              10
Feb 26		                     Introduction to Typography
Feb 28		                     Iconography
Mar 5		                      EXERCISE 2b: InfoGraphic                                                         30
Mar 7		                      (no lecture; studio time for ex. 2b)
Mar 12		                     Module 2 Quiz                                                                    20
Mar 14         MODULE 3: Introduction to Digital Video
Mar 26		                     Storyboarding/Spring Break assignment overview
Mar 28		                     Introduction to Adobe Premiere
Apr 2		                      EXERCISE 3a: inside/outside video sequence                                       10
Apr 4		                      Lumetri color correction, creating credits
Apr 9		                      EXERCISE 3b: video narrative                                                     40
Apr 11		                     Module 3 Quiz                                                                    20
Apr 16         MODULE 4: Motion Graphics
Apr 18		                     Introduction to Adobe After Effects
Apr 23		                     EXERCISE 4a: animated logo                                                       10
Apr 25		                     Rotoscoping
Apr 30		                     EXERCISE 4b: Machine                                                             50
May 2		                      (no lecture; studio time for ex. 2b)
May 7		                      (no lecture; studio time for ex. 2b)
May 9		                      FINAL QUIZ                                                                       20
GRADING
Your final grade in this course will be the total of four module grades (above), and a fifth ‘professionalism’ grade. The professionalism
grade is determined by attendance, punctuality, participation, supererogation (pushing yourself beyond minimum requirements), and
completion of three mandatory Lynda.com videos (on Photoshop, Illustrator, and After Effects) and their corresponding exercises. The
Professionalism grade is 70 points, for a maximum point total of 330 for the course.
Grading in a creative course is inevitably subjective, meaning that the final evaluation of work presented is based on how the criteria for
assignments is met, and instructor assessment of the work’s quality (Creativity, Technical Execution, and Effectiveness of the Solution).
Each student will be graded on an individual basis, not relative to other students.
Grades are calculated as a percentage (points earned ÷ 330) × 100. A = 100–93%, A– = 92.9–88%, B+ = 87.9–83%,
B = 82.9–78%, B– = 77.9–73%, C+ = 72.9–69%, C = 68.9–66% C– = 65.9–63%, D+ = 62.9–60%, D = 59.9–56%, D– = 55.9–50.1%, F=≤50%.
(The University does not recognize the grade of A+)
Late or incomplete work will seriously affect your grade. If you feel you may not be able to complete all work on time, you should ask me
for a grade of Q, or drop before the deadline for doing so passes (see Q drop Policy, below).


ATTENDANCE POLICY
Attendance and use of the full class period is expected. You are required to arrive to class on time. Four absences will drop your
final grade by one letter grade. Each additional absence beyond that will result in an additional one-half letter grade drop. If a
medical or personal situation affects your attendance or punctuality, please discuss it with me ASAP. Absences, tardiness and/or early
departures will adversely affect your Professionalism grade (and when excessive, may result in failing the course).
Roll will be called daily. If you don’t hear your name, arrive late, or are out of the room during roll call, it is your responsibility to contact
me or the TA that day to ensure your attendance is recorded (you cannot contest your attendance record later in the semester).
Q drop Policy The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As stated
in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate
student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
UNIVERSITY ATTENDANCE POLICY: RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy
day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to
keep the University and instructor(s) informed as to changes in his/her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a
frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications
may be time-critical. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
CLASSROOM AND CLASS WEBSITE
The class will be held in the lab located in DFA 4.126. All technical demos and class work will be held in the Lab. The lab is locked outside
of classroom hours. Additional computers with Adobe software are available on the 3rd floor of DFA. I use Canvas to distribute course
materials, communicate and collaborate online, post grades, receive your assignments, and to give you online quizzes and/or surveys.
You can find support for using Canvas at https://canvas.utexas.edu/
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations
without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities.
For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/
disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, so that I can make
the necessary accommodations promptly.
ACADEMIC HONESTY
University of Texas Honor Code The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of Class Materials The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments are
copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the
instructor may be a violation of the University’s Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary
action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other
current or future students.
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE
Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers. Many of the uses we will make of
text, images, and videos will be covered by the doctrine of Fair Use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other
copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will discuss these issues as needed.
A useful resource is the Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.


BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you
   used when you entered the building.
• If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class proctors/TAs. After evacuation, do not leave the vacinity without
   checking in with me or our TA.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire
Prevention Services office.
CAMPUS CARRY
The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as buildings and spaces that are
accessible to the public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms.
It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus.
“About” the person means that a license holder may carry a holstered handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag
must always be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely
cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled. A license holder may not carry a partially or
wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage,
or other parking area.
The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried gun on campus should immediately
call 911. (from https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
CELL PHONES
You must silence your cell phone in class (if your phone interrupts my class, you owe me a Frappuccino™). Texting or social networking in
class—even during free lab time—is prohibited.
