                                                  J310F Reporting Words
                                                          Summer 2019
June 6-July 11, Monday through Friday, 9:30-12:20 a.m., BMC 3.208
Instructor: John Savage
Office hours: Monday 12:20-1:20 p.m. and by appointment
Office location: BMC 3rd floor, just outside conference room (behind elevator)
Cell and text: 512-299-6776
Preferred email: Johnmsavage1@yahoo.com
Twitter: @JohnSavageTX
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course teaches you how to report and write in the manner of a professional journalist — skills that can also help you
communicate effectively in a variety of professional settings. Thiss course contains a substantial writing component.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of the course, J310F students will:
1. Recognize the difference between hard news and news features.
2. Produce newsworthy stories through original reporting and writing.
3. Evaluate the information gathered to choose what’s newsy, relevant and important.
4. Write clear, well organized, interesting news stories that adhere to AP style.
5. Adhere to ethical standards of journalism and understand laws pertinent to journalists.
6. Identify and find credible and diverse sources.
7. Verify information from the internet, documents and interviews.
8. Conduct meaningful interviews, including asking smart questions.
9. Analyze and explain data and statistics.
10. Incorporate current and historical events and information into reporting and writing for necessary context.
HOW TO SUCCEED IN J310
Read news. Reading news stories help you learn about reporting and writing. You learn how to structure stories,
including which types of leads to use, how to use quotes and AP style.
Be curious. Being curious leads to better stories, better reporting and more fun! Ask questions of your instructor, your
classmates and your sources. If you don’t understand something, seek clarification. If something or someone interests you,
pursue more information.
Fake tenacity and resilience until you feel it. You will be rejected and ignored by sources. Don’t complain. Stay
persistent and positive. Your grades may not be what you expected after a lifetime of being told you’re a great writer.
Hang in there.
Enlist time management strategies. You have to think ahead – in one class, you could be pitching a story, turning in a
different completed story, and working on a rewrite of yet another story. Don't worry; it’s doable. But don’t procrastinate.
Seek assistance. The Moody Writing Support Program is more than a writing aid – the program helps students
understand what makes a good story and how to pursue it. The program’s robust journalism coaching is an asset for J310F
students and designed to help them excel in the course. That’s why you are required to take your stories there for
consultation with a writing coach. Summer hours are Monday through Friday from 10:30 a.m.- 3 p.m. or by appointment.
Visit https://sites.utexas.edu/moodywriting/ to book appointments. If you cannot find something that fits your schedule,
email moodywriting@austin.utexas.edu.
Your classmates are your colleagues. Treat them as such. You may compete for assignments, but you are NOT
competitors. At least not yet. This is one of your first networking opportunities, and if you’re lucky, your J310F
classmates will remain in your networking circle for decades to come.
                                                                                                                           1


REQUIRED MATERIAL: Newsroom 101
Need help with commas? Practice with AP style? You got it. Newsroom 101 is composed of online modules (quizzes and
reviews) that you can take at your own pace. The key here is practice and repetition. There are lots of exercises so it may
seem overwhelming, but the workload assigned will take approximately 10-14 hours in TOTAL. This is not meant to be
busy work. These exercises will help you.. You will be graded on only two elements: on your completing of the exercises
in the AP Style, Grammar, Punctuation and Word Usage sections AND a Newsroom 101 “Final” in class. The cost for
120 days of access is $24.95. We will cover set up in class. If you have financial concerns, please contact your instructor.
Visit https://newsroom101.net/
ADDITIONAL MATERIALS
Read, listen and watch the news on various platforms: digital, hard copy newspapers, radio and television. Sign up for
news alerts and follow established news media outlets on social media. The following are highly recommended:
• ONLINE subscription to The Associated Press Stylebook, www.apstylebook.com
• All information on Canvas as well as class handouts.
• Read major news sources at local, national and international levels.
• Listen to the NPR podcast Up First before class every day.
• As a UT student, you have access to the digital Austin American-Statesman! Read it every morning. Log in here:
     http://nieonline.com/austin/studentconnect.cfm
         User name: utjourno              Password: utjourno
COURSE ASSESSMENTS
Core components of this course are the writing assignments, complemented by lab work and quizzes. Most story
assignments are completed outside class, while other elements, including drills and quizzes, are completed in lecture and
lab. Assignments may be added or dropped as needed. Attendance at lecture and lab is required.
GRADING
Your work is evaluated based on professional standards, including newsworthiness, research and original reporting, story
structure, and mechanics (grammar, spelling and punctuation, and AP Style). Grading rubrics will be posted on Canvas.
The instructor may use plus and minus grades, following this range:
A        94-100          B+ 87-89         C+ 77-79        D 60-69
A-       90-93           B 84-86          C 70-76         F 59 and lower
                         B- 80-83
IMPORTANT: YOU MUST EARN AT LEAST an 80 average in this course to proceed to upper-division courses.
Grading Breakdown for Summer 2019 J310F
     ● 70%: Story assignments. Five polished, publishable stories (see below)
     ● 10%: Quizzes. Daily quizzes that will contain questions about news and current events as well as weekly course
         content.
     ● 10%: Newsroom 101. This grade entails the completion of assigned exercises and total score on the Newsroom
         101 final exam during the last week of class.
     ● 5%: Story cycle elements. Analyses, pitches, rough drafts, peer reviews and rewrites, usually completed during
         class.
     ● 5%: Lab. The grade’s main components are attendance, participation and drills.
STORY ASSIGNMENTS
During the course of the semester, you will write five stories. The following is a brief description and value for each story.
Story 1: Breaking news on deadline (5%). You’ll be given a set of facts and quotes and have to write a short news story
in 45 minutes. Completed in class.
Story 2: Covering a speech or event (10%). Attend a speech, lecture or event in the community and report on it. The
story should demonstrate that you understand how to cover an event, including those who planned the event and those for
whom the event is planned. In addition to the main speaker(s), the story should quote (1) person giving the speech (2) at
least two event attendees (3) the event planner or an expert. (500-700 words)
                                                                                                                             2


Story 3: Government story (15%). You will attend a meeting of the Austin City Council (though you are not required to
write your story based on that meeting). Attend the meeting to gain experience by reviewing an agenda, sitting through the
meeting, talking to officials, speakers and sources affected by the agenda. The story should focus on one agenda item
from any governmental body, such as a city council, commission or school board. You should include (1) quotes from
government officials (2) quotes from at least two stakeholders (3) quote from an expert on the issue. (500-700 words)
Story 4: Diversity news feature (20%). Diversity is woven into the fabric of ethics and good journalism. Story must be
newsworthy detail on underrepresented groups, including those singled out by gender, race, ethnicity, religion, physical,
emotional and intellectual abilities. This story should also be enhanced by data and statistics and must be topical. Story
must include (1) two people affected by your issue (2) statistics (3) expert opinion. (800-1,000 words).
Story 5: News feature of your choice (20%). Choose an issue from broad topics such as technology, science, education,
environment, sports, health/medical, public policy, social issues, religion, business, crime, government, arts and culture.
The issue still must include all the elements of a fully dimensional news story, but you will bring humanity to the piece by
telling the story through people affected. Story should include (1) two people affected by the issue (2) statistics (3) expert
opinion. (800-1,000 words)
MORE ON YOUR STORY ASSIGNMENTS
Filing Your Stories
     ● All stories are submitted as Canvas assignments. A Word file (.doc or .docx) is preferred, though .rtf and .pages
         are accepted. Do NOT submit .pdf file types or Google Docs links. Save your files as
         LASTNAME_STORYSLUG.
     ● All story assignments are for publication and public consumption. DO NOT tell sources that your story is “only”
         for class and/or cut deals with sources by promising a story won’t be published.
     ● Put a working headline and byline on every draft and story. Failure to do so is considered a reporting hole (key
         missing information that diminishes a story) and will cost you points.
     ● Some stories will require a photo. This is not the Reporting Images class, but the goal is to get you practicing
         multimedia storytelling. Most of you have a camera built right into your phones that you can use to take
         a good picture for your story.
Cover Sheet
Graded story assignments must be accompanied with a cover sheet (template is on Canvas). Failure to include a cover
sheet is considered a reporting hole and will cost you points. The cover sheet includes:
     ● Your name, the story assignment and the date
     ● Story slug (one- or two-word description used by newsrooms to distinguish stories)
     ● The “budget line” or a one- or two-sentence description of the story
     ● A list of names of sources you interviewed (quoted and unquoted), phone numbers and/or e-mail addresses
     ● An explanation of how you attempted to diversify your sources for this story
     ● A note about anything you did to enhance your professional credibility while reporting
Story Cycles
You just don’t write a story and, boom, it’s published. You get story ideas from events and previous publications; you
pitch a story to your editor (me) who approves it; you write multiple drafts before getting the story published. We follow
those same steps in this class. Depending on the story assignment, you will also complete:
     ● A story analysis of a published story similar to your assignment.
     ● Peer reviews in which you help edit your colleagues’ work.
CLASSROOM POLICIES
Summer Note: Did you know that two days of class in the summer session equals one week of class during a fall/spring
semester? Think about that.
Attendance: Attendance is required and will be taken. You get a zero for any work not turned in if you are absent without
an official or medical excuse. Missing class will significantly hurt your grade.
                                                                                                                              3


Tardiness: You will lose half of your daily attendance points if you arrive late to either lecture or lab without an official
excuse. Class begins promptly at 9:30. If you miss assignments due to unexcused tardiness, you cannot make up those
missed assignments.
Late Work: Deadlines are critical in journalism. Don’t miss them. Late stories will be docked at least one letter grade.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Avoid conflicts of interest – in which you have a vested interest in the people, groups, events or organizations that you
might cover – and what could be perceived as conflicts of interest. Do not pitch stories that potentially contain a conflict
of interest. You can’t interview or cover anyone you already know. Potential conflicts of interest include (but are not
limited to):
     ● School of Journalism and Moody College of Communications instructors, professors, administrators, staffers, and
         undergraduate and graduate students;
     ● Friends, family members and their friends, roommates, suitemates;
     ● Sorority/fraternity sisters/brothers;
     ● Bosses and former bosses, co-workers and former co-workers;
When in doubt about a potential conflict related to a story, ask as soon as possible. If it is discovered after a story pitch
has been approved that there is a conflict of interest, I will not accept the story and your deadline will NOT be extended. If
you turn in an assignment that involves a conflict of interest, whether or not you do so mindfully, you will lose significant
points on the assignment.
UNIVERSITY HONOR CODE AND ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness and respect toward peers and community.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to
these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate UT rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from UT. For details see:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Plagiarism and Academic Dishonesty: In regard to journalism and J310F, academic dishonesty includes:
     ● Plagiarizing or using another media source’s, individual’s or your own (in part or in whole) work and representing
         it as new for this class. If you’ve done or started the work in another class, you must inform your instructor before
         pitching the story.
     ● Pitching or turning in an assignment from a previous class without instructor permission.
     ● Making up quotes, sources and facts.
     ● Not interviewing people who appear in your stories.
     ● Not giving appropriate attribution or citation of a source or background information. In this class, you will learn
         how to properly attribute information.
     ● Cheating during a quiz or any assignment, graded or not
NOTE: Assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an archived
database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods will also be used to determine if a story is
original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, I will make the final determination as to whether a
story has been plagiarized.
GENERAL GUIDELINES AND RESOURCES
The university has numerous resources to aid and support students. Use these to help you succeed in your classes and life.
                                                                                                                              4


Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
     ● Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, Fifth floor | 512-471-3515
         |cmhc.utexas.edu
     ● CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
|CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
     ● Brief assessments and referral services
     ● Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     ● MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     ● Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
The Sanger Learning Center: Even though we require J310F students utilize the Moody Writing Support Program,
students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist
appointments, peer academic coaching and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Canvas: This web-based course management system with password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu/ —is
used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and for
online quizzes and surveys. It is required for this course. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at
475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. or with tutorials at:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
Using Email for Official Correspondence to Students: Email is recognized as an official mode of university
correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your email address. You should
check your email regularly and frequently—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may
be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Students Needing Accommodations: Please notify me of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate
a disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office in order that the
most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through Services for
Students with Disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone). Also: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Q drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6).
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin: The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide
support for your learning, including: The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/ Undergraduate
Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
ITS: Need help with technology? Call the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 or go to http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries: Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
                                                                                                                           5


Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
instructors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Again, call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Evacuation Information: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The UT campus are required to evacuate buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm
activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
         nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
     ● In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
         unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
         Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                                            6


Sample class schedule:                       9-9:15           housekeeping
                                             9:15-9:45        daily news quiz and news discussion
                                             9:45-10:30       lecture
                                             10:30-10:45      break
                                             10:45-11:30      drills/story analyses/pitching/peer editing
                                             11:30-12:20      Reporting, writing, writing center appointments
                                                                         6/6                     6/7
                                                                         Lecture: Intro to       Lecture: What’s
                                                                         course, syllabus        news?
                                                                         discussion
 6/10                  6/11                   6/12                       6/13                    6/14
 Lecture: Leads and    Lead: Story structure  Lecture: Covering a        Lecture: Covering a     Lecture: AP Style
 nut grafs                                    speech                     speech II
                                                                                                 Timed breaking
                                                                                                 news story
 6/17                  6/18                   6/19                       6/20                    6/21
 Lecture: Pitches      Lecture: Covering      Guest Lecture:             Attend City Council
                       Government, FOIA       David Green, Austin        meeting as a class.
                                              City Hall                  Meet at City Hall at
                                                                         9:30
                                                                                                 Speech/event story
                                                                                                 due.
 6/24                  6/25                   6/26                       6/27                    6/28
 Lecture: News         Lecture: Finding &     Lecture: Finding           Lecture: Verification
 features              Developing Story       sources and
                       Ideas                  interviewing
                                                                                                 Government story
                                                                                                 due.
 7/1                   7/2                    7/3                        7/4                     7/5
 Guest lecture:        Guest lecture:         Lecture: Libel and         Independence Day
 Diversity             Writing Tips:          ethics
 Nuri Valbona          Mallary Tenore
                                                                                                 Diversity news
                                                                                                 feature due.
 7/8                   7/9                    7/10                       7/11                    7/12
 Guest lecture:        Guest lecture:         Guest lecture:             Newsroom 101 exam
 Feature writing:      Feature writing:       Internships, resumes,
 Diana Dawson          Bill Minutaglio        cover letters:
                                              Kathleen McElroy
                                                                                                 Final news feature
                                                                                                 due.
                                                                                                                    7


Examples of events you can cover for your second story:
Wednesday, June 12 at 7 p.m. — Author Elliot Ackerman will speak at BookPeople
“Elliot Ackerman is the author of several novels including Dark at the Crossing, which was a finalist for the National
Book Award, and most recently Waiting for Eden. His writings appear in Esquire, The New Yorker, The Atlantic, and The
New York Times Magazine, among other publications, and his stories have been included in The Best American Short
Stories and The Best American Travel Writing. He is both a former White House Fellow and Marine, and served five tours
of duty in Iraq and Afghanistan, where he received the Silver Star, the Bronze Star for Valor, and the Purple Heart. He
divides his time between New York City and Washington, D.C.”
Thursday, June 13 at 7 p.m. —UT-professor Art Markman will speak at BookPeople.
“Professor, author, and popular radio host Art Markman focuses on three essential elements of a successful career--getting
a job, excelling at work, and finding your next position--and expertly illustrates how cognitive science, especially
psychology, sheds fascinating and useful light on each of these elements.”
Friday, June 14 at noon — Lecture at the Blanton Museum will explore the life of artist Ellsworth Kelly.
“Join us for the third event in 2019 of our lunchtime lecture series. Learn about Kelly’s postcard collage practice and his
playful use of the tourist postcard from the mid-1950s through the late 1980s with Kelly scholar Tricia Y. Paik, Florence
Finch Abbott Director, Mount Holyoke College Art Museum.”
Saturday, June 15 at 10 a.m. — Juneteenth parade will start at MLK Boulevard and Comal Street.
Wednesday, June 19, 5:30 p.m. — (Patton Hall, UT-Campus) “Join us on June 19th for "From Diversity to Inclusion,"
an HDO panel discussion. UT Austin faculty and industry leaders will be discussing ideas for how organizations can
move beyond cultivating diverse workforces to actually building inclusive cultures.”
                                                                                                                            8
