                                     fSTA 371G
                              Statistics and Modeling
                          Unique Number 71595/71598
PROFESSOR
      Betsy Greenberg
      Hours: M - Th 1:30-2:30 pm, Saturday 1-3 pm or by appointment
      Phone: 471-1756
      E-mail: betsy.greenberg@utexas.edu
TEACHING ASSISTANTS
 Holden Archer                             Michelle Chahda
 Email: holdenarcher1@gmail.com            Email: michellechahda24@gmail.com
 Hours: M-Th and Sunday 7-9 pm             Hours: M-Th 3-5 pm and Friday 10-noon
OFFICE HOURS are on Zoom
TEXTBOOK
      REQUIRDED: MyStatLab for Business Statistics, 4th Edition, by Sharpe, De
      Veaux, and Velleman. You can use the book and access code or just MSL and
      the e-book. If you’ve already used MSL for STA 309, you should not
      have to pay to register.
GRADING
      Tests               50%
      Project             25%
      Homework            15%
      Participation         5%
      Reading quizzes       5%
COURSE DESCRIPTION
      Business decisions are made under uncertainty. This course provides tools for
      dealing with uncertainty. Upon completion of the course you should be able to
      apply decision analysis techniques, use regression analysis, and simulation
      modeling. This course is designed to present applications for these techniques
      and to deal with topics that prove most helpful to those involved in business.
      This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning
      courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for
      understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter
      in your adult and professional life.
PREREQUISITES
      The following prerequisites are enforced for this class:            Management
      Information Systems 301 or 310; Mathematics 408D, 408L, or 408M; Statistics


     309 or 309H; and credit or registration for Business Administration 324 or
     324H. I am not able to make exceptions to prerequisites. Students are
     expected to be familiar with elementary statistics.
COMPUTING
     As this course is online, you will need a reliable internet connection and a
     computer with a camera, speakers, and microphone. Headphones can be used
     (and you may prefer them anyway) if you don’t have working speakers or
     microphone.
     The practice of statistics requires extensive numerical calculations. We will
     use R, a powerful, state of-the-art statistical software platform, for statistical
     computing in this course. R is frequently used by practitioners and being able
     to use R to do statistical analysis is a valuable (and marketable) skill. No prior
     knowledge of R is needed; we will teach you all you need to know.
CLASS PARTICIPATION
     We will be using the Learning Catalytics (included with MyStatLab) system for
     class participation. You may answer Learning Catalytics questions using any
     device with a web browser including your computer or phone. Your class
     participation grade will be determined from the responses that you provide
     whether you are watching live or recorded lectures. Learrning Catalytics
     questions in a self-test format will be available until the next live class starts.
     During lectures you may also use the “Ask a Question” button or the class chat.
HOMEWORK
     Homework assignments will be posted on MyStatLab. All are due on the due
     date by 11:59 pm. The homework assignments are designed to give you
     practice with the course material. It is recommended that students work on
     assignments independently.
     You may open an assignment (and even print it out) several times before
     submitting your answers. Assignments must be completed by midnight on
     their due dates. It is recommended that you do not wait until the last minute
     to complete assignments. This will allow for any unexpected difficulties (with
     the material, website, software etc.).
READING
     This course will be taught in a ”flipped” model, which means that we will not
     cover all of the material during lecture. Instead, you’ll do the relevant reading
     before class and complete a short pre-class assignment. This way, we can
     spend more time in class on what you find challenging and less time on the
     easy stuff. An average score of 75% will be counted as full credit for Reading
     Quizzes. Reading quizzes are due by 7 pm the evening before the start of a
     new chapter.


WEB PAGE http://canvas.utexas.edu
     This course will use a password-protected class web site. Syllabi, slides,
     assignments, and other resources will be available within this site. Site
     activities will include submission of assignments and posting of grades.
     Registration and access to MyStatLab is through Canvas.
TESTS
     Tests for this class will be given on June 22 and July 6. Each test is worth 25%
     of your grade. You will access the tests through Canvas with Proctorio and
     have R available for computation. You may take the test during the 10 am
     class time (when I am available to answer questions) or at your convenience
     as long as the test is submitted by 11:59 on the test day.
PROJECT
     The course project will offer focused hands-on activities in the statistics-based
     research process using regression modeling with real world data. You will
     develop skills in 1) generating testable hypotheses; 2) conducting a literature
     review and understanding the statistical tests used in previous research; 3)
     understanding large data sets; 4) formatting and managing data in order to
     perform statistical analyses; 5) conducting descriptive and inferential
     analyses; and 6) reporting and interpreting results.
     You will also be required to do peer grading (using Peergrade.io) of projects
     submitted by your classmates and submit a feedback survey after the project
     is complete.
SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
     The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic
     dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to
     scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement
     on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-
     Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty
     responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have
     agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If
     the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its
     assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
     clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
     subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
     and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual,
     all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic
     brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should
     refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
     policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration
     on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.


    Examples of scholastic dishonesty in this course include: copying or
    collaborating during an exam, discussing or divulging the contents of an exam
    with another student who will take the test, the use of assignment solutions
    from another student or semester or violations of scientific integrity such as
    data fabrication, selective reporting, omission, suppression or distortion.
NON-ACADMEIC RESOURCES
    Students with Disabilities, The University of Texas at Austin provides upon
    request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
    disabilities (including learning disabilities). For more information, contact
    Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259. Please provide proper
    documentation from the SSD Office at the beginning of the term.
    Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL), Counseling, and the Mental Health
    Center Crisis (MHCC) line: College can be pretty stressful and sometimes we
    need a little help. Luckily, we have a wealth of resources and dedicated people
    ready to assist you.
    •   If you are experiencing a mental health crisis (depression, anxiety, e.g.)
        call the MHCC line at 512-471-CALL (2255). Call even if you aren’t sure
        you’re in a full-blown crisis, but sincerely need help. Staff are there to help
        you.
    •   If you have a behavioral concern about someone else and need some advice
        on what to do, you may call BCAL at 512-232-5050 to talk with someone
        about it. The call is confidential, and you decide how much information
        you’d like to share.
    •   Of course, if you feel the behavior requires immediate attention, (e.g.
        person is of harm to self or you feel threatened), call 911 directly.
    Personal or Family Emergencies: If you experience a personal or family
    emergency (death in the family, protracted sickness, serious mental health
    issues) that prevents you from attending an exam or forces you to miss
    multiple days of class, you should contact Student Emergency Services in the
    Office of the Dean of Students. They will work with you to communicate with
    your professors and let them know of your situation.
    Religious Observances: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your
    pending absence at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of observance of
    a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
    assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
    given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
    after the absence.


TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
                                                                   Assignment
     Date              Topic                     Reading
                                                                   Due Dates
   June 4*         Introduction                                        HW 1
                                              Chapters 5-7
   June 8*      Probability Review                                    June 9
                                                                       HW 2
   June 9*      Making Decisions           Sections 24.1-24.4
                                                                     June 11
  June 10*                                                             HW 3
              Value of Information         Sections 24.5-24.6
  June 11*                                                           June 15
  June 15*     Review of Inference           Chapter 11, 12
                                                                       HW 4
  June 16*      Linear Regression               Chapter 4
                                                                     June 18
                                            Project: Proposal        June 19
  June 17*                                                             HW 5
            Inference for Regression           Chapter 16
  June 18*                                                           June 21
   June 22            Test 1
  June 23*                                                             HW 6
             Checking Assumptions    Sections 17.1-17.4, 17.6-17.7
  June 24*                                                           June 25
                                       Project: Literature Review    June 26
  June 25*                                                             HW 7
               Multiple Regression         Sections 18.1-18.5
  June 29*                                                           June 30
               Building Regression
  June 30*                                     Chapter 19
                      Models
                                            Section 18.6 plus          HW 8
   July 1*     Logistic Regression
                                             online reading           July 2
                                       Project: Exploratory Data
                                                                      July 3
                                                 Analysis
                                                                       HW 9
   July 2*         Time Series          Section 17.5, Chapter 20
                                                                      July 5
    July 6            Test 2
   July 7*   Problems with P-values      Reading posted online
                                                                      HW 10
   July 8*    Testing and Training       Reading posted online
                                                                      July 9
   July 9*          Simulation           Reading posted online
                                       Project: Final presentation   July 10
