AET 310 FOUNDATIONS OF CREATIVE CODING
UID: 20585, 20596, 20595                               Text: Learning Processing by Daniel Shiffman
Meetings: MW 8-9:30, MW 9:30-11, TH 9:30-11            Instructor: Tyler Coleman
Location: 4.112                                        Office Hours: MW 11-12
Abstract
Computational Thinking and Logical Processes to approach technical problems with creative solutions.
Applying creative coding techniques to Games, Viz, Projection & Lighting, and Music & Sound using
languages and tools including Processing, Touchdesigner, SuperCollider, Unity, and C#.
Assessment
Challenges 1 - 6 are graded pass/fail for 4 or 5 points each, Challenges 7 - 10 (projects) are graded out
of 15 points. The remaining 15 points of the final grade is based on professionalism and attendance.
One-Week Processing Challenges (4 or 5 points each)
     ●  Challenge 1: Colors, Shapes, Animation (build an Alien)
     ●  Challenge 2: Variables, Loops, If-Else (update Alien with variables)
     ●  Challenge 3: Functions, Objects, Datatypes (make Alien object/class)
     ●  Challenge 4: Arrays, Algorithms, Debugging (create Alien minigame)
     ●  Challenge 5: Libraries and Sound (add sound to minigame)
     ●  Challenge 6: Review Quiz
Two-Week Projects (15 points each)
     ●  Challenge 7 (Project 1): Processing Final, complete game or interactive experience/story
     ●  Challenge 8 (Project 2): SuperCollider project for Music & Sound
     ●  Challenge 9 (Project 3): Touchdesigner and Arduinos for Projection & Lighting
     ●  Challenge 10 (Project 4): Unity / C# for Games & Viz
Required Equipment
All students MUST have access to a portable computer, either Mac or PC. Arduinos will be provided for
use during lab time. All software used in this class is available for free.
Textbook
        Learning Processing by Daniel Shiffman
Units of Study
           ●   Foundations
                   ○ Logical Processes
                   ○ Programming Basics
           ●   Application
                   ○ Solving problems with code
           ●   Systems
                   ○ Processing libraries
                   ○ Other creative coding tools for:
                           ■ Games & Viz, Projection & Lighting, Music & Sound


Calendar
Week                                        Book
1    Course Intro
     Processing Basics
2    Challenges and Assignments             Chapters 1 - 3
     Demo 1: Shapes, Colors, and Animation
     LAB - Building Alien with Shapes
3    Challenge 1 Due                        Chapters 4 - 6
     Demo 2: Variables, Loops, If-Else
     LAB - Building Alien with Variables
4    Challenge 2 Due                        Chapters 7 - 8
     Demo 3: Functions, Objects, Data Types
     LAB - Make Alien into Object
5    Challenge 3 Due                        Chapter 9
     Demo 4: Arrays, Algorithms, Debugging
     LAB - Minigame
6    Challenge 4 Due                        Chapters 10 - 12
     Demo 5: Libraries and Sound
     LAB - Add Sound to Minigame
7    Challenge 5 Due                        Chapters 13 - 14
     Demo 6: Images, Sprites, Video
     Lab - Review
8    Challenge 6 Due                        Chapters 15 - 16
     Demo 7: Math and Transformations
     LAB - Processing Game
9    Spring Break                           Chapters 17 - 21
10   Challenge 7 Due                        Bonus: 5pts Extra Credit for submitting the game to
     Lecture: CC for Music & Sound          OpenProcessing.org
     LAB
11   Demo 8: SuperCollider                  Video Tutorials created by M&S Faculty (??)
     Discussion: Music & Sound
     LAB
12   Challenge 8 Due
     Lecture: CC for Projection & Lighting
     LAB
13   Demo 9: Touchdesigner / Arduino        Video Tutorials created by PLAI Faculty (Michael M)
     Discussion: Projection & Lighting
     LAB
14   Challenge 9 Due
     Lecture: CC for Games & Viz
     LAB
15   Demo 10: Unity / C#                    Video Tutorials created by Game / Viz Faculty (MJ)
     Discussion: Game Design & Viz
     LAB


 16      Challenge 10 Due
Process
We will work through demonstrations, textbook content, and a number of technical and creative
challenges to learn about multimedia and interactive system programming.
Grades
6 Challenges: 4% or 5% each
3 Projects: 15% each
Attendance and Professionalism: 15%
Bonus: 5%
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will
be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the grade
of A+.
A = 94-100
A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89
B = 84-86
B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-79
C = 74-76
C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69
D = 64-66
D- = 60-63
F = 0-60
Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns professionalism credit.
Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to attend class meetings. If attending a
scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are expected to promptly notify the instructor of
extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to
six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of
higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless
the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.


Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-
6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I
can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
Academic Integrity
The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide
by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to maintain
absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the
University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic
endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
     ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
     ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
         assistance in preparing them;
     ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
         discipline;
     ● and avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
         student.
(adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty
as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
     ● Cheating
     ● Plagiarism
     ● Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
     ● Falsifying Academic Records
     ● Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
         extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
     ● Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
         without authorization to do so)
     ● Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
(adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
(from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining
by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas,
illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that material as
one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement
(from Sec. 11-402, http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-
discipline-and-conduct/).
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided


through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when
a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies
regarding evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. • If
you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. • In the event
of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire
Prevention Services office.
Student Support Services
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They include
(but are not limited to) the following:
Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
of services and resources to support students and alumni.
The Undergraduate Writing Center
(512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
their courses.
The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
time-management, and note-taking courses.
University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
officially enrolled in certain University programs.
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with
their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his
or her official e-mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for
missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a
spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
