                              Introduction to Jewish Studies
                                                 Spring 2020
                                                 Hybrid Version
                                    JS 301 * ANT 310L * MES 310 * RS 313
                                    39050       31610       40275      42335
                                  Instructor: Dr. Amelia Rosenberg Weinreb
                                       amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu
                                     Office hours scheduled upon request
                                       Tue/Thu 11:00am-12:30pm
                              Dates highlighted in green= Meet in GEA 114
                     All other classes live-streamed online in my Zoom meeting room:
                                        https://zoom.us/j/3202806665
                Technical support for Zoom: Dr. Mattew Russell, Faculty Innovation Center
                        matthew.russell@austin.utexas.edu, SZB 405, 512-232-6053
                                                     * * *
1. Course Description
This survey course aims to expose students to major themes in Jewish Studies through guest lectures by
UT faculty who work in the field. It is recommended for motivated undergraduates in any discipline with
an intellectual curiosity about Jewish Studies, but requires no previous knowledge of Jewish religion,
ethnicity, or culture. The material in the course is not designed be comprehensive, but rather provides a
curated sample of lectures and core topics. This semester, the course is organized around three
thematic units: 1) Exile and Diaspora, 2) Jewish Identity, and 3) Jewish Ethics. Students are encouraged
to consider course materials comparatively, in view of both their distinct features and their overarching
threads, and defend positions through evidence based both on lectures and the course reader. Student
discussion leaders, designated in advance, will raise questions, stimulate debate, and integrate ideas
into our collective analysis.
Hybrid version: Note that this year’s course is hybrid. That means some of the course learning activity
has been moved online, making it possible to reduce the amount of time spent in the classroom, and
instead live-stream from your device.
In the classroom: Various faculty affiliated with Jewish Studies will visit the classroom and deliver
lectures concentrating on their period, geographical area, and field of research as they relate to the
thematic unit at hand. Student volunteers will be assigned to take attendance and introduce each guest
lecturer, a special professionalization opportunity.
Discussion streamed online: Log into Zoom and use this link to join the class in my “Zoom meeting
room”: https://zoom.us/j/3202806665, wherever you are comfortable, during the scheduled class.


Zoom sessions are a series of lively, fast-paced, interactive meetings in which we discuss the readings
and lectures from the week prior. These discussions are led by students, livestreamed to your device,
and facilitated by Dr. Weinreb. You may livestream from any location that is convenient for you, as long
as you can focus, hear clearly, and participate fully. The dates of the classroom lectures and activities
are highlighted in yellow in the syllabus schedule below livestreamed or self-paced lessons online are
listed, but not highlighted in yellow. Note that Dr. Weinreb will also visit three times during the
semester to lead workshops and seminars in the classroom. If you have questions about this hybrid
format, please find the FAQ on Canvas.
Course flags
This course carries both a Global Cultures and Ethics flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories
of non-U.S. Jewish groups, past and present. Courses carrying the Ethics Flag equip you with the tools
necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. Courses carrying this flag
expose you to ethical issues and to the process of applying ethical reasoning. This course exposes
students to Jewish Ethics and its application.
2. Course Reading, Materials, and Ideal Streaming Environment
Readings: All required readings and links to required videos are posted on as a hyperlink in the syllabus,
and also under files in Canvas.
Materials: a) I recommend a good pair of earbuds/headphones so you can hear and concentrate during
streaming if you are streaming on your own; b) Make sure your laptop or phone is fully charged, or in a
location where you can charge during online class time. You would not want to run out of battery in the
middle of a class!; c) A clearly labelled notebook for taking hand-written notes exclusively for this
course. No computers are phones are allowed during the lectures (strictly enforced). d) A pen that is
satisfying to write with, and always easy to locate at the beginning of class.
Streaming Environment: a) Test out the quality and speed of your connection with Zoom in your
favorite location for streaming (e.g. dorm rooms do not always have the best receptivity/connections).
Dr. Russel or I am happy to test it out with you!); b) Make sure you are in an environment in which you
can comfortably speak out loud without feeling self-conscious or bothering others; c) When you are
leading group discussion, I recommend sitting together with your group and Zoom from the same
computer; d) Our classroom will always be available for streaming on the big screen to participate in
class together, if that is your preferred Zooming environment. We will perform a test run the first week
of class so all students are familiar with how to get online, project, and adjust settings, etc.
3. Course objectives
Upon completion of the course, students will have developed the written, oral, and recall skills to be
able to:
● Articulate central themes of the Jewish experience over time
● Place course units within in a wider context of Jewish Studies as a field
● Converse, with historical and ethnographic accuracy, about a range of contemporary social issues for
Jews
● Write brief, clear, detailed essays that connect diverse lectures and readings, displaying a command of
facts and examples to support arguments
● Produce relevant notes during lectures


● Engage comfortably in discussion and debate in both the online and face-to-face seminar classroom
4. Important note on physical classroom etiquette and vibe during guest lectures:
Regular attendance in both online and live portions of the course is not only the key to your own success
as a student in this course, but also for the quality of the course as a dynamic whole. Arriving late and
leaving early disrupts guests lecturers and class flow, so make every effort to arrive to class a few
minutes early so get situated with a notebook and pen. Students will be asked to place their phones on
silent and deposit them at the front of classroom when they enter, and all course notes are taken by
hand in a notebook unless you provide a note from SSD. Please do not eat or make distracting, crinkly
snacking noises during guest lectures.
4. Overview of Grade Distribution
25% Attendance and participation
15% Discussion leadership and memo
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 1: Exile and Diaspora
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 2: Jewish Identity
20% Short paper (2-3 pages) unit 3: Jewish Ethics
Explanation of Grade Distribution
Attendance and participation (25%) Students are permitted 4 absences for both classroom and online
sessions, no questions asked. After that, their total overall grade is reduced by 2% following each,
subsequent absence. In addition to being polite, attentive audience members during guest lectures,
students will be graded on their regular, active, intellectually rigorous contribution to the seminar
component of the course, and on displaying evidence of careful reading of assigned texts.
Discussion leadership and response memo (15%): A group of 4 students, delegated in advance,
facilitate the discussion or an activity based on their reading memos. Each student will do this once
during the semester. I will generally provide the group with a shared grade unless there are individuals
who contributed significantly less or more to leadership and discussion. Take the time to communicate
with fellow group members to produce a smooth, organized, meaningful dialogue. Note that the best
practice is for discussion leaders to sit together and Zoom from a single laptop on the day of leadership.
The classroom is always open for your convenience during course hours.
How to write a reading response memo (V+, V, V- evaluation)
On the day that you lead discussion with your group, each individual in that group will write a separate,
1-page "memo" in response to the day’s reading. Completing the memo properly includes the following
steps :
a) Memo: A 200-250-word, clear, focused response to one of these prompts: What theme leapt out to
you? What bothered you in the reading or lecture? How was the reading or lecture related to more
general course themes, other course material and how? What content interests you most and why?
What quote stood out in your mind, and why? Your response must refer directly to both the week’s
lecture and reading, including page citations.
b) Questions: At the bottom of the page, include two questions for discussion, debate, or further
thought, related directly to themes in the reading. Come prepared to share your ideas in class.
c) Proofread and cite: Remember, even if the assignment is short, write clearly and proofread as
carefully as you would for any graded assignment. Include page citations and a literature cited at the
bottom of the page.


D) Submission: Send your memo to me via Canvas 11pm, the night before you lead discussion, and
have a copy handy during the discussion itself.
3 short papers (20% each). For each of the three short papers in this course, the prompt is the same: In
500-700 words, pose a question that can be addressed/answered by material in two of the lectures and
their readings in the unit. Please follow these requirements:
a) State your question clearly in bold font. These questions should be designed to be engaging,
thought-provoking or informative.
b) Address your question. The answer can be creative, and include reflections, reactions, critical
commentaries or overviews. However, the short papers will be rigorously graded on their writing
quality, as well as their attention to facts, examples and details from two lectures and their
accompanying readings, citing page numbers
d) Cite all references following the Chicago Manual of Style, and include a literature cited section.
5. Grading Scale
Grades in this course will be based on the following scale:
A     95-100%
         Excellent grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides relevant details and
         examples; draws clear and interesting connections, exceptionally original, coherent and well-
         organized; ideas clearly written/stated, outstanding classroom participation
A- 90-94
         Very good grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides relevant details and
         examples; draws clear connections; ideas clearly written/stated
B+ 85-89%
          Good grasp of some elements above, others need work
B      83-84%
         Satisfactory grasp of some elements above
B- 80-82%
         Uneven, spotty grasp of the elements above
C+ 75-79 %
         Limited grasp of the above
C 73-74%
         Poor grasp of the above
C-     70-72%
         Very poor grasp of the above
D 60-69%
         Little evidence of grasp of material, having done readings, attended
  class,                             or completed assignments
F 0-59%
         No evidence of having done readings, attended class, or
  completed                                     assignments, or plagiarized.
6. Notes on Grading Policy and Support for Students:
Complete written assignments on time: I am committed to returning assignments to you promptly so
you can benefit from my feedback while material is fresh in your mind. I do not grade papers or exams
until I have the entire printed set in front of me. For these reasons, I do not accept late assignments.
Bring a hard copy at the beginning of class on the day it is due. If you anticipate a problem, or have a


history of deadline problems, meet with a consultant at the learning or writing center to help you plan
ahead.
The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Grading policy: I am very happy to discuss how you may improve your work, and will read early drafts,
but I will not reconsider grades on papers. I grade all the papers in a set to ensure that I am applying
the same standards, and I make every effort to be fair.
Plagiarism and copying: Although this course is designed for creative, individual work and synthesis of
ideas from various sources, any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be
the student's own work. Should copying occur from another student, both the student who copied work
and the student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the
assignment.
Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
disciplinary action. Here are University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of
plagiarizing: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/faculty/plagiarism/preventing.html
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Using office hours, getting help: I check email regularly, will usually reply to emails within 24 hours for
basic questions. Feel welcome to take advantage of office hours (by appointment).
7. University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. In this
course, that means we will all work to ensure that the discussion space is shared relatively equally
among the participants, and to maintain an atmosphere of respect for each other’s perspectives and
arguments, especially when there are strong disagreements.
Students with disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Please contact me as early in the semester as possible to let me know if you need anything to participate
fully.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, students are required to notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will certainly give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.


8. Course Schedule: The syllabus below represents my current plans and objectives. As we go through
the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class. Such changes, communicated
clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
Note 3 short paper deadlines:
Paper#1 due: Thu. 2/20
Paper#2 due: Thu. 4/2
Paper#3 due: Thu. 5/7
Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class. Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
   Date       Main                       Readings to complete before class                    Evaluati
              Topics                                                                             on,
                                                                                              work to
                                                                                                do at
                                                                                               home
                                                   UNIT 1
                                            Exile and Diaspora
  T        Intro to
  1/21     the course
           and what
           makes it
           different
  Th       Discuss     Simon Schama’s “The Story of the Jews” (2014). Part 1: “The
  1/23     Schama      Beginning” https://utexas.kanopy.com/video/beginning
           *Student
           group 1


T     No Zoom     Discussion Board Assignment will be posted to Canvas
1/28  meeting:
      Discuss     Schama, Part 2: “Among Believers”
      Board       https://utexas.kanopy.com/video/among-believers
      Shama       and Part 3: “A Leap of Faith” https://utexas.kanopy.com/video/leap-
                  faith
Th    First Zoom Schama, Part 4: “Over The Rainbow”
1/30  Meeting:    https://utexas.kanopy.com/video/over-rainbow5
      Finish       and Part 5: “Return”
      Schama     https://utexas.kanopy.com/video/return-0
      *Student
      Group 2
T 2/4 Dr. Martha Note that each of these readings are short (1 page or so): 1. The
      Newman     Chronicle of Solomon Bar Simson (Posted on Canvas)).
      “Jews and  2. Ephraim Ben Jacob, “The Ritual Murder Accusation at Blois” 1171
      the        https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/primary-texts-from-the-
      Crusades”  history-of-the-relationship/ephraim-ben-jacob-qthe-ritual-murder-
                 accusation-at-bloisq-may-1171
                 3. Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor “Refuting Ritual Murder
                 Accusations” 1236 https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/primary-
                 texts-from-the-history-of-the-relationship/frederick-ii
                 4. Odo of Chateauroux, On the Jewish Talmud (1247-8_
                 https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-resources/primary-texts-from-the-
                 history-of-the-relationship/odo-of-chateauroux-on-the-jewish-talmud-
                 1247-1248
                 5. The Black Death and the Jews 1348 https://www.ccjr.us/dialogika-
                 resources/primary-texts-from-the-history-of-the-relationship/black-
                 death
Th    Zoom:
2/6   Discuss
      Newman
      and Shama
      *Student
      Group 3


T    Dr. Bob     Selections from The Atlantic
2/11 Abzug:      Monthly 1941 (posted on Canvas)
     “Jews in
     America:
     1940-41”
Th   “Partitions Economic and Political Weekly “Listening for Echoes: Partition in Three
2/13 in Global Contexts” Smita Tarwi Jassal and Eyal Ben-Ari
     Context”    Vol. 41, No. 22 (Jun. 3-9, 2006), pp. 2213-2220 (8 pages)
                 Published by: Economic and Political Weekly
     Note:
     Location
     Change
     RLP
     1.302D
T    Discuss Ab
2/18 zug and
     Partition
     Talk
     *Student
     Group 4
     Prepare for
     paper #1
                                     Unit 2 Jewish Identity
Th   Jewish                                                                              Paper
2/20 Student                                                                             #1 Due
     Experience
     Panelists
T    Dr. Amy     “Are Jews Indigenous to the
2/25 Weinreb: Land of Israel?” (Bellrose 2017).
     Indigenous
     Identity    “The struggle for indigenous


       and the      rights extends to Palestine”
       Land of      (Salhani 2016).
       Israel
                    “Official Definitions
                    of Indigeneity” (a compiled list).
Th     Discussion
2/27   of Jewish
       Student
       Experience
       and the
       Land of
       Israel
       *Student
       Group 5
T 3/3  Grumberg    “Confronting an ‘Impossible’ Identity: Poetry by Arab Jews in Israel”
       “Mizrahi    (Poems by Chetrit 1960 and Behar 1978)
       Jews and
       Poetry”     “Revisiting Bialik: A Radical Mizrahi Reading of the Jewish
       with Dr.    National Poet” (Chetrit 2010).
       Karen
       Grumberg
Th     Dr. Naomi Ana María Shua, The Book of Memories
3/5    Lindsrom:
       Jewish Life
       in Latin
       America
T      Zoom:
3/10   Discuss
       Grumberg
       and
       Lindstrom
       *Student
       Group 6
Th    Dr. Paula                                                                          Self-
3/12 Sanders,                                                                            paced
      Rice          “Jewish Women’s Lives in the Muslim World” Judith Baskin             Discussi
      University    https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/jewish-womens-lives-in-     on
                    the-muslim-world/                                                    Board
      "From                                                                              TBA
      Dependenc
      e to


      Autonomy:
      Jewish
      Women’s
      Lives in
      Medieval
      Egypt"
      Note:
      Location
      Change
      RLP 1.302D
      *Student
      Group 7
T      Spring
3/17   Break, No
       Class
Th     Spring
3/19   Break, No
       Class
T      Dr. Sarah  "Hebrew: Eliezer Ben-Yehuda &
3/24   Baker:     the Revival of Hebrew”
       The        (Fellman).
       Hebrew     “The Past and Future of Hebrew”
       Language   (from Fair Observer).
Th 3/ “Jewish     “Problems and Tasks of Jewish Folklore and Ethnology” (Patai 1946).
26     Folklore”
       with Dr.
       Itzik
       Gottesman
T      Zoom:
3/31   Discussion
       of
       Gottesman
       and Baker
       Student
       Group 8


Th    Zoom:                                                    Paper
4/2   Discussion                                               #2 Due
      of Identity
      Unit
      overall
      Student
      Group 9
T 4/7 Seriff on   Reading TBD                                  Ethics
      Jewish                                                   discussi
      Ethics and                                               on
      JS                                                       board 1
      Internship                                               on Seriff
Th    Passover                                                 Discussi
4/9   (Pesach)                                                 on
      overview                                                 Board
      self-paced                                               TBD
      assignmen
      t TBA
      Student
      Group 10
T     Dr. Jason   Reading to be assigned by guest lecturer TBD Student-
4/14  Lustig on                                                discussi
      the Ethics                                               on
      of “Fake                                                 board
      News and
      the Jews”
      Student
      Group 11
Th    Passover, Passover discussion Board TBD                  Ethics
4/16  self-paced                                               discussi
      assignmen                                                on
      t TBA                                                    board 3
      Student
      Group 12


T      Dr. Tatiana The Path to Genocide: https://www.ushmm.org/learn/introduction-to-
4/21   Lichtenstei the-holocaust/path-to-nazi-genocide/the-path-to-nazi-genocide/full-
       n           film
       Ethics of
       the
       Holocaust
       in Eastern
       Europe
Th     Dr.         Aftermath (Poland, 2014):
4/23   Tajtiana    https://www.dropbox.com/s/j9g10kepi61wvih/Poklosie%20%28Conve
       Lichtenstei rted%29.mov?dl=0
       n
       Ethics of
       the
       Holocaust
       in Eastern
       Europe
T      Dr.         Selections from the Hebrew
4/28 Jonathan      Bible (Tanakh):
      Schofer:     Exodus. 20; Exod. 21:28-29;
                   Exod. 21:35-36; Exod. 21:33-34;
                   Exod. 22:4; Exod. 22:5
                   Mishnah Baba Qamma 1:1,
                   Mishnah Sanhedrin 7:4 and 9:1;
                   Mishnah Avot 1:1-4 and 2:11
                   And
                   “The Redaction of Desire,” 28-
                   38. 45-46 (Schofer 2003)
Th    Ethics wrap- Discussion Board TBD
4/30 up
      discussion
      board TBA
      Student
      Group 13
T 5/5  Everything
       you always
       wanted to
       know
       about Jews
       and
       Judaism
       but were


    afraid to
    ask
Th  Closure,       Paper
5/7 Party,         #3 Due
    Evaluation
               ***
