            The University of Texas at Austin                          Department of Middle Eastern Studies
               ARA 621K Intensive Arabic III                             ‫السنة الثانية‬/ ‫اللغة العربية‬
                                       !‫أهﻼ وسهﻼ بكم الى الصف الثاني‬
 Instructor: Bruce Boville                     TA: Amy Broome                        TA: Blake Pye
 Email: bruce.boville@utexas.edu               Email:                                Email:
 Office: CAL 4                                 Office: HRH 3.102                     Office: HRH 3.102
 Office Hours: M 12-1, Th 1-2                  Office Hours: W 2:30-4:30             Office Hours: M 1:30-3:30
         This document contains important information and represents an agreement between the
          instructor and the students.
         You are responsible for knowing all the information contained in this document.
         You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
         CELL PHONES, TABLETS AND COMPUTERS OFF EXCEPT WHEN PERMITTED BY
                                                      INSTRUCTOR.
          LATENESS AND USING ENGLISH WITHOUT PERMISSION WILL AFFECT YOUR
                                       PERFORMANCE AND YOUR GRADE.
    ALL WRITTEN AND TYPED ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE DOUBLE-SPACED AND LEGIBLE.
                WE EXPECT TO BE INFORMED OF ABSENCES BEFORE CLASS BEGINS.
                                    NO GUM PLEASE. Beverages are permitted.
                            In Arab culture, if you bring food, you must offer to share it.
Required Course Materials - Used books are fine, web access is required
1. Brustad, Al-Batal, and Al-Tonsi. Al-Kitaab fii Tacallum al-cArabiyya: A Textbook for Arabic Part One. Washington,
     D.C.: Georgetown University Press. Third edition.
2. Brustad, Al-Batal, and Al-Tonsi. Al-Kitaab fii Tacallum al-cArabiyya: A Textbook for Arabic Part Two. Washington,
     D.C.: Georgetown University Press. Third edition.
3. Textbook companion website: www.alkitaabtextbook.com.You will need to have access to the companion
     textbook sites for both the Al Kitaab, Part 1 and Al Kitaab, Part 2. Access costs $25 per book, and is available to
     you for 18 months after purchase. Please see the class Canvas page for sign-up instructions.
4. Canvas: All communications for this course will be conducted through Canvas. Please note that all sections of Arabic
     III are linked on Canvas to facilitate communications and foster community among all second year Arabic students.
     If you have any questions about this, talk to your instructor.
5. Wehr, Hans. A Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.
     Searchable online: http://ejtaal.net/aa/#HW=489,LL=4_283,LS=2,HA=380
     Pdf available online: https://archive.org/details/Dict_Wehr.pdf
Course Objectives: Our goals this semester are:
    1) Speaking: As we continue to increase fluency, accuracy becomes more important. It is not enough just to
         speak, we want to speak in a way comprehensible to native speakers who are not Arabic teachers.


     2) Vocabulary: In al-Kitaab Part II, each lesson contains double or triple the number of new words compared to al-
         Kitaab Part I. This will require skills and effort on your part. We will show you how to develop the skills, effort
         comes from you.
     3) You will become grammar masters. Complex grammatical structures of Arabic beyond daily life will gradually
         play a bigger role in our materials.
     4) Listening: We will work on developing listening strategies with special focus on close listening (listening for
         details).
     5) Reading: Last year you learned to guess from context and ‫ ; جذر‬this year you will add more grammatical
         analysis to guess and construct the meaning of what you read. We will work on using an Arabic dictionary
         (Wehr is standard) efficiently and intelligently.
     6) You will be able to write more fluently, with ability to write in both informal and formal styles.
     7) Read and listen to pieces that address issues in Arab culture including marriage and family relations, Arabs and
         the diaspora, markets, and new media.
 Grade Distribution
                Daily Participation                                  20%
                Daily Homework                                       20%
                Quizzes (6, lowest score dropped)                    25%
                Presentations (3)                                    15%
                Essays (4 or 5)                                      10%
                Final Exam                                           10%
1.    Participation (20%)
You get full marks for:
      Speaking in Arabic, except when given permission to use English.
      Being fully prepared for class, ready to use and pronounce correctly new vocab and material. You will lose points
         for not having prepared well—and this includes listening, which is detectable via your pronunciation.
      Being an active and respectful participant in all class activities, helpful to classmates.
Points will be deducted for:
      Being late.
      Being uncooperative or having a negative attitude toward colleagues or activities.
      Being unprepared for class.
Your lowest three (3) participation grades will be dropped for grade calculation purposes.  Save these freebies for sick
days in case you need them. You will lose 1 participation point for every 5 minutes that you are late, and if you are late
20 minutes or more this will count as an absence. Zero points for absence no matter what the reason. Absence from
more than 10 class sessions or more —whatever the reason for the absence—will result in an “F” grade in the
course.
Religious holy days A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements
can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence pursuant to Sections 51.911 and 51.925
of the Texas Education Code. For the purposes of this course, the instructor must be notified by email of any foreseeable
absences due to religious reasons by the second Monday of the semester. The exact dates during which the student
anticipates being absent must be specified.
2.    Homework (20%)
Homework is due at the beginning of class on the day designated in the schedule.
Expect to spend an average of 2 to 2.5 hours each day of the week, including Saturday and Sunday.
                                                               [2]


Late homework will not be accepted after the fact. If there are extenuating circumstances that will prevent you from
turning in homework on time, contact your instructor before class to discuss.
Homework is graded on our assessment of the effort and focus you put into it, not what you get right or wrong. Please
email your instructors if something is not clear.
Receiving help on homework from anyone outside Arabic III is cheating and will be prosecuted. You are welcome to
work cooperatively with—not get answers from—your zumalaa’ in any section, but you must be an equal partner in the
work.
On each written assignment, please write HW # underneath your name, and double-space so we have space to give you
feedback. Please submit all hand-written assignments in pencil.
Homework on the al-kitaabtextbook.com companion website:
The work you do on this website is the single most important factor in your success in this class. Short cuts and cheating
will be prosecuted, but in the end, you will be cheating yourself most of all, and your quiz grades and participation grades
will suffer. It is cheating, and cheating yourself, to look at any of the answers before you submit your best effort. To
receive full credit for vocabulary and grammar drills, re-do the exercise until you get 100%. We will be checking
your attempts in order to gauge your effort and progress.
Homework Correction
Your instructors spend as much time reading and giving feedback on your waajib as you spend doing it. We do this
because your waajib is our most important means of giving you individual feedback. If we find that we are writing
the same things over and over, your grade will suffer, and communications with you will suffer. Office hours are ideal
for going over questions on waajib. Quick questions can often be answered right after class, time permitting.
You will be asked to correct and resubmit homework on an individual basis as your instructors deem necessary. In
this case, you will see Re-do instead of a grade, and you will receive a grade for the homework when you re-submit with
the corrections, within 2 days. Repeated instances of poor work will result in zero.
Grading Scale: 0 to 5 (5=excellent; 4=good but not your best effort; 3=barely passing; 2=poor; 1=very poor; 0=late or
not submitted).
Your three lowest homework grades will be dropped for grade calculation purposes.
3.       Quizzes (25%)
We plan to have 6 quizzes this semester, and exact quiz dates will be announced on your homework schedule at least a
week beforehand. If you think you will miss a quiz, contact your instructor as soon as possible. Requests for make-ups
will be considered on a case-by-case basis. Lowest quiz grade will be dropped.
4.       Presentations (15%)
Culture Video (5%): To continue your exploration of Arab culture that you began last year, be thinking of a topic to
explore in some depth on which you and 1-2 partners will make a video presentation (10 minute minimum). Details will
be posted on Canvas.
Skit (5%): You and a partner will prepare one skit (7-10 minutes) and present it in class together. Further information
about the skit's format and evaluation will be provided soon.
In-Class Presentation (5%): This will be an individual or pair presentation in class (3.5 minute minimum per person).
Additional information will be provided at least three weeks before the due date, near the end of the semester.
                                                             [3]


5.       Essays (10%)
We will devote one homework day each chapter to developing writing skills (which will also help your speaking skills
improve as well). Writing allows us to push ourselves with vocabulary and structure in ways that speaking does not,
because we can take time to think about better, more accurate ways to say things. Expect to submit writing on Friday of
every week.
Submission of essays: Essays will be only accepted if submitted on time, on paper, and in class. Essays submitted via
email will NOT be accepted or corrected. All drafts should be typed in a large font with double spacing so your instructor
can make comments. When you submit a final draft, be sure to submit the first draft with your final draft. Please include a
word count on all of your essays.
6.    Final Exam (10%)
There will be a uniform (all sections together) final exam scheduled for second year Arabic to be scheduled by the
Registrar’s Office. Once the date and time have been announced, you will be notified. This exam will evaluate listening,
reading and writing skills in addition to your ability to use vocabulary and grammar.
The listening comprehension section of the exam will be given on the last day of classes. The written section of the exam
will be during the final examination period. The Registrar’s Office will publish the Final Exam Schedule approximately
three weeks prior to the end of the semester. There is an officially scheduled make-up for the written final exam ONLY
for students who cannot attend the final exam owing to a conflict with another regularly scheduled UT exam. In order to
be placed on the Make-up Written Final Exam roster, you must, in advance, present a copy of your final exam schedule
indicating the conflict. (Once the Final Exam Schedule is published by the Registrar’s Office, students can access their
individual exam schedule at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/registrar/exam_schedule.WBX) Students whose names are not on
the roster will not be allowed to take the Make-up Written Final Exam and will receive a grade of 0 for that part of the
exam. DO NOT PLAN TO LEAVE TOWN UNTIL AFTER THE LAST DAY OF THE FINAL EXAMPERIOD.
                               Final Grade Calculation and Academic Credit
Your instructor will record your grades on Canvas on at least a weekly basis. It is your responsibility to check your
grades. If you notice any grade that you have a question about, please discuss it with your instructor as soon as possible.
If your question concerns a grade you received on paper, bring the assignment in question to your instructor to discuss it.
Number/letter grade equivalents are:
    Number        Letter      Number         Letter       Number       Letter      Number        Letter
    94 – 100         A        87 - 89.9       B+          77 – 79.9      C+       67 – 69.9       D+
                              84 - 86.9        B          74 – 76.9       C       64 – 66.9        D
    90 – 93.9        A-       80 – 83.9        B-         70 – 73.9       C-      60 – 63.9       D-
                                                                                                            (Below 60% = F)
Additional Notes on Final Grades and Academic Credit
     · Plus/Minus grading is in effect in this course.
                                                               [4]


     ·   Grades on the border between two letter grades may or may not be rounded up to the next higher letter grade, at
         the instructor’s discretion.
     ·   No Incompletes will be given for this course. Auditing is not permitted.
     ·   You must earn a C+ or higher to automatically continue to the 4th semester of Intensive Arabic at UT
         Austin.
     IN ALL CASES, FINAL DECISION RESTS WITH THE COURSE INSTRUCTOR.
                        Important UT and Departmental Policies and Regulations
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your own, or that you did not
participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. For the full UT Honor Code, please refer to the site for Student
Judicial Services found here: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/spot_honorcode.php
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent, or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking country, or 3)
who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to enrollment in this course must contact
the Arabic Coordinator, Dr. Olla Al-Shalchi at olla@austin.utexas.edu immediately to determine whether they can
be placed in this course. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Disabilities Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or
471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course
at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before
an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed. See website below
for more information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Use of Canvas This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and
announcements. Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu/ Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400
Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm. We strongly recommend that you subscribe to canvas notifications for
announcements and messages as Canvas will be the primary method of communication between the instructor and
students.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students All students should become familiar with the University's
official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes
in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current
with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and
instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-
232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                [5]


Emergency Evacuation
 The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
 Security,512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
          fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
          nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
      In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
          Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
      Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
          www.utexas.edu/emergency
Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault
It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin to foster a campus environment that is free from intimidation and one
in which students may be educated to their fullest potential. Therefore, the University will not tolerate any forms of
harassment, physical abuse, threats of violence, physical assault, or any form of sexual assault, including but not limited to
acquaintance or date rape. Title IX makes it clear that violence and harassment based on sex and gender is a Civil Rights
offense subject to the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to offenses against other
protected categories such as race, national origin, LGBTQ identity, etc. If you or someone you know has been harassed or
assaulted in any way, you can find the appropriate resources here:
Voices Against Violence Program
(512) 471-3515 for information, counseling and advocacy.
UT Austin Police:
http://www.utexas.edu/police/
Dean Of Students:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/
http://www.utexas.edu/ogs/student_services/ethics/harassment.html
Student Counseling & Health Services
http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Campus Carry
1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do not attempt to question
or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to handle this situation.
2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited, including some portions of
residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible for knowing the locations that exclude concealed
handguns and to plan their daily activities carefully.
3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus. "About" the person
means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag
must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must
completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
                                                               [6]


4. All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times when the consequence of your
activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are going to a Rec Sports area, have a class that
requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact with other students, you might expose the handgun. Remember that
there is no storage on campus except in a privately owned vehicle.
5. Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand those passions.
However, regardless of your opinion about the legislation, you are required to follow the laws laid out by the State of
Texas, and the policies of The University of Texas at Austin. We also ask that everyone show respect toward other
members of the university community who have different views.
Important Dates
September 4th is the last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration
require the approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
September 14th Last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare and extenuating
circumstances.
         Last day to drop a class for a possible refund.
         Last day a graduate student may, with the required approvals, add a class.
November 1st is the last day a graduate student may change registration in a class to or from a credit/no
credit basis. Also, it is the last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval, withdraw
from the University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons and 2) is
the last day an undergraduate student may change registration in a class to or from a pass/fail basis.
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). Senate Bill 1231:
“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student
a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
                                           !‫أهﻼً وسهﻼً في صفﻨا‬
                            How to Do Well in Your Second Year Arabic Class
                                          By Professor Kristen Brustad
   Things to Keep in Mind this Year
       Second year language study is your “teenage-hood” in language study. It can be frustrating at times
          because the higher levels of proficiency demand greater accuracy and you must more than double your
          vocabulary this semester, which in turn requires more mechanical practice. Know that your frustration
          will be temporary and that you are learning more than you can tell right now because you are developing
          skills that will help you reach an advanced level Progress at this level is often from plateau to plateau,
          rather than a steady climb. Keep at it!
                                                               [7]


       We move from “sprint training” to “marathon training.” Notice that sentences, texts, video passages and
        drills are getting longer as you reach the upper levels of intermediate proficiency. We will be building
        memory capacity and endurance. Push yourself to speak and write in longer sentences and paragraphs.
The following suggestions will help you get the most out of your course.
1. Be an active learner. The approach we use here at UT depends on you learning new material at home, and
encourages you to use analogy and logical thinking to master grammar a little bit at a time. You will learn better
and remember more when you are able to answer your own questions. Active learners often have questions that
reflect their engagement with the material. Take initiative in class and on homework: this effort will be
rewarded both in your grade and in your language ability. Feel free to write us questions on specific language
features in your daily homework—just remember to be specific.
2. Put yourself out there. Language learning requires you to make mistakes, both in your assignments and in
front of your peers. In this class, you will never be penalized for a mistake that you make when trying something
new. You will be corrected in class. Feedback from your instructors is intended to support you as you develop
your language proficiency, and not as criticism.
3. Personalize vocabulary. You will remember vocabulary when you “own” it. Make words relevant to your life
by thinking of what you can say about yourself with them. Write extra sentences that are meaningful to you so
that the vocabulary becomes “yours” and expresses something about your world.
4. Prepare for active participation in class by anticipating what you will do. You should soon be able to
predict what kinds of activities will be performed and how. As you study new material and complete
assignments before each class, think about how you will use the material. This will help you to prepare for the
activities we’ll do in class.
5. Study out loud, and repeat new words many times. The only way to train your brain and your mouth to
speak this language is by doing it aloud. Certain muscles need to be strengthened before they’ll be able to
produce some Arabic sounds correctly; studying aloud and exaggerating these sounds will help your muscles
develop! Pronounce new vocabulary words at least fifteen times, until you can say them easily and it feels
natural.
6. Guess. Think about how you acquired your native language: you did not use a dictionary. Rather, you learned
new words by guessing their meaning from context, and you learned how to produce sentences by imitating and
using patterns. As adult learners, we can take some shortcuts, but guessing skills remain central to language
acquisition. Do not leave blanks on the homework, but do not allow yourself to become frustrated; give it your
best shot, and move on. If you are not sure you have understood a sentence in the homework, write a translation
or a question on your homework for your instructor to check or answer.
7. Correct yourself. Good language learners learn from their own successes and mistakes and those of others.
Correcting mistakes is an essential part of the learning process. In this class, you will never be penalized for a
mistake that you make when trying something new. When your instructors and classmates are speaking, be an
active listener by listening both to what they are saying and how they are saying it. Correcting the mistakes of
others in your head or in your notebook is also good practice.
                                                          [8]


  8. Extend language learning beyond the classroom. Practice Arabic as much as possible. Study with
  classmates: ask each other questions, brainstorm about assignments, go over materials–and do this in Arabic as
  much as possible. Look out for films and cultural activities on campus and around town and go attend them.
  9. Develop your memorization skills for vocabulary learning. Experiment with different techniques,
  combining listening, speaking and writing together as much as possible. Try some vocab study techniques from
  the list on the next page.
                                         Vocabulary Study Strategies
                                     (Adapted from arabicteachers.wikispaces.com)
Use the words. Your goal in learning vocabulary is to be able to use it, right? The purpose of studying a new
language is NOT to be able to recognize vocabulary words on a page. That won’t help you when you’re actually
interacting with an Arabic speaker! Instead, use the words in phrases and sentences to describe what you see
around you.
Listen to the words. You want to be able to recognize words you know when you hear them in conversation. This
doesn’t just happen by studying the words on a page. “Tune” your ears to the sounds of Arabic by listening to your
vocabulary sets regularly.
Memorize language in “chunks.” Your brain organizes things in groups. When you learn new words, try to
organize them around basic concepts or webs. Re-organize your notes in a way that helps you relate the words
each other.
Be creative and have fun with the language. Draw a silly image that will remind you of a word, act out words
and phrases, handle and manipulate objects as you learn the words for them or make up songs or rhymes to help
you associate groups of words. Or, instead of drawing, create a mental image to associate with the new word.
Quiz yourself and your classmates. Study some new words in the morning, and then check to see if you can still
remember them in a few hours, the next day, and a week later. If you find some words are not sticking, try using
different techniques from this list to work on those words.
Write it out. Try saying each word aloud as you write it. Try writing sentences using the new words. The simple
act of writing the words can help to make the vocabulary stick, especially when combined with other strategies.
Writing out and using flash cards can be a great technique, too. Just keep in mind that you don’t only want to be
able to translate the words—you want to be able to use them. Flash cards are helpful, but aren’t enough on their
own.
Focus on what you can say with the words you have, rather than looking up brand new words. Looking up a
bunch of new words distracts you from the words that you are learning in your course. Use the words you are
learning creatively to get your point across. This not only helps the words to stick, but also is a great way to train
your brain to use circumlocution--to speak around topics and vocabulary you don’t have specific terms for.
                                      Principles for Group Activities
                                                          [9]


This class is a group effort! We can make much more progress as a class than as individuals by creating an
Arabic-speaking community, of which you will be a fully participating member. In our class community, respect for
each other at all times will ensure a positive and fruitful learning experience. We will spend at least 75% of class
time in small group or pair activities so that each one of you gets the maximum possible time to participate and
practice. During these activities, the instructor plays the role of a personal trainer. Learning a language is a lot like
going to the gym: the personal trainer guides you, but you have to do the work to get the benefit.
Please keep in mind the following principles for group work:
     Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them: each of us can learn from everyone else.
     Work with different people on a regular basis.
     Come prepared. Don’t be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to fully participate in the
        work. If you are not prepared for class, let your instructor know beforehand and s/he will arrange for you
        to learn by listening on that day.
     Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to finish. If you do the minimum, you will get only
        minimum benefit. Take advantage of class time by pushing yourself to be creative and say and write as
        much as you can, rather than trying to finish quickly.
     Speak in Arabic while you are engaged in the activity. If you feel frustrated, raise your hand and ask for
        help.
     When your group finishes the task, raise your hand to let the instructor know.
     The instructor may call time before everyone is finished. If your group does not finish, you may want to
        take a few minutes after class to study the rest of the exercise.
                                                           [10]
