                                           SED f386
                                Unique Number: 74490
                  Foundations in Positive Behavior Supports
                            and Classroom Management
                                    Online M/T/W/Th
Instructor:            Laura Rojeski, Ph.D., BCBA-D, LBA
                       Office: SZB 532G                                Mailbox: SZB 306
                       Email: lrojeski@utexas.edu
                       ** Email is the best way to contact me. I will respond to your email
                       within 24 hours. If I have not responded within this time frame, please
                       send me a reminder.
                       Office Hours: By appointment
Teaching Assistant: Ross Nesselrode
                       Email: ross.nesselrode@utexas.edu
                       Office Hours: By appointment
Course Description
This course provides students with an understanding of the basic principles of human behavior
and how these are applied in group and school settings. Students will develop a foundational
knowledge of Positive Behavior Supports, including but early childhood and school-age models.
These will serve as the basis for further exploration into effective classroom management
procedures that support students with and without disabilities. Students will learn to effectively
assess and evaluate behavior within a classroom context, and write successful behavior
intervention plans to manage identified target behaviors.
Course Objectives
    • Describe models of Positive Behavior Supports for early childhood and school-age
        children.
    • Understand and apply principles of human behavior to group and school settings.
    • Describe methods for identifying and assessing challenging behavior within group and
        school contexts.
    • Create effective behavior intervention plans based on results of functional behavior
        assessment.
    • Evaluate program effectiveness and make data-based decisions.
    • Describe effective classroom management procedures.
    • Understand how to best work with other staff members, as well as parents, in group and
        school settings.
    • Describe strategies for promoting maintenance and generalization in group and school
        settings.


Required Readings
There is one required textbook for this course:
O’Neill, R., Albin, R., Storey, K., Horner, R., & Sprague, J. (2015). Functional Assessment and
         Program Development for Problem Behavior (3rd ed.). Stamford, CT: Cengage
         Learning.
The rest of your required readings will be posted on Canvas. Anything listed as “Resource” or
“Optional” is there for your benefit and may be discussed in class, but will not be part of any
course assignments.
Canvas
This course will utilize Canvas. You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site
regularly for class work and announcements. As with all computer systems, there are occasional
scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notification of these disruptions will
be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work.
However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, we will make an
adjustment if it occurs close to the due date of an assignment. Canvas is available at
https://canvas.instructure.com/login. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400
or you can submit a help request here: http://www.utexas.edu/its/helpdesk. Office hours are
posted here as well, so plan accordingly.
Virtual Learning Platforms
As this is an online course, we will also utilize several other virtual learning platforms to support
your experience. These will primarily include Zoom (https://utexas.zoom.us), Perusall
(https://perusall.com), and Panopto (https://www.panopto.com). These platforms integrate into
Canvas and you’ll be able to access them from your Canvas page. If any other technology is
deemed appropriate to the course, the instructor will pass this information along to students
through Canvas.
Course Communication
Please feel free to message me in Canvas with any questions or concerns regarding assignments,
course content, etc. You are also welcome to email my personal email account listed at the top of
the syllabus. If you have a question about a specific assignment, please include the assignment
name in the subject of your message. If I have not responded to your question within 24 hours,
please send a follow up reminder email.
Class Attendance and Participation
As this is an online class, the majority of work can be completely asynchronously. However, the
class will have a once/week Zoom meeting. There will be two different times offered, and you
need only attend one. If you wish to be absent or have an extension on any assignments for the
observance of a religious holy day, please give notification at least 14 days prior to the
anticipated absence (or on the first day of class if the holy day falls within the first two weeks of
the semester).


For the weekly Zoom meetings, students should be prepared to discuss the assigned readings for
each class period. Class participation will be included in the determination of final grades.
In addition to learning the content of the readings, the goal of this course is for you to be able to
critically evaluate the material in terms of your own personal experiences. Some of you will have
more experience, some will have positive experience, some will have negative experiences, etc.
You should be able to consider these experiences in the light of the readings each week. You
should also focus on clarifying what you see as the critical points of the week’s readings. If you
have concerns about what you’ve read, you should identify and discuss these concerns as well.
Use the class assignments and the weekly Zoom discussion to bring up issues from the readings
you would like the group to help clarify or answer.
Important Dates for Summer Semester 2020
Please see the following website for a complete list of important dates in The University of
Texas at Austin calendar: http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars
Evaluation of the Course and Instructor
It is the policy of the College of Education that all organized courses be evaluated using an
appropriate Course Instructor Survey arranged through the Measurement and Evaluation Center.
Consequently, you will be given the opportunity to complete a student course evaluation in the
last week of the course. Student evaluations remain anonymous. Neither the instructor nor the
teaching assistant is to be present during the evaluation and neither is to see the answer sheets
until grades have been officially reported. Students have requested that they be given the
opportunity to complete the Course Instructor Survey at the beginning of the class period to
increase the likelihood that all students will participate in the evaluation process.
Students with Special Needs
At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations
should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) Office. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be provided,
students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Student Judicial Services website.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs


Course Requirements
Guided Readings
Students will complete readings using Perusall that include integrated questions and comments
for students to consider. These may be critical points for students to reflect on briefly,
comprehension questions, or anything else related to that reading. There will be guided readings
due every Monday and Wednesday of class.
4 points each (7 x 4 points each; 28 points total)
Applied Activities
Students will watch lectures recorded with Panopto and/or Google Slides, along with other
posted content (e.g., educational videos). Applied activities will be embedded within lectures and
any other content to ensure students are able to apply the knowledge they learned from the
previous day’s readings and class lectures. Application activities based on recorded lectures and
other content will be due every Tuesday and Thursday of class.
4 points each (7 x 4 points each; 28 points total)
Class Discussion
Students will be responsible for attending Zoom class discussions on Wednesday. Students will
have a choice of attending from 12-1 or from 6-7. Students are required to attend one session but
can attend either session. This will give students a chance to ask questions and engage in
discussion about course content.
2 points each (4 x 2 points each; 8 points total)
Pre – Post Assessment
Students will complete a pre- and post-test in this class. This is graded based on completion, not
on performance. It is meant to serve as a way for the instructor to ensure critical content is
understood by the end of the summer term. This is a closed book assessment, as we want to
honestly gauge where students begin and end with their knowledge base.
4 points each (2 x 4 points each; 8 points total)
Behavior Intervention Plan
Students will complete one behavior intervention plan (BIP) throughout the semester. Each day
of class, one small part of the BIP will be due, so that by the end of the semester, students will
have a completed BIP. Points will not be given for individual submissions, to allow students to
make changes based on feedback before submitting the final BIP at the end of the semester.
Details on this project will be posted to Canvas.
2 points each part (14 x 2 points each; 28 points total)


Grading Structure
Guided Readings            28 points
Application Activities     28 points
Class Discussion           8 points
Pre – Post Test            8 points
Behavior Intervention Plan 28 points
Total:                     100 points
Final Grades:
A = 90-100%
B = 79-89%
C = 68-78%
D = 57-67%
F = 56% or below


                                      Course Outline
 Date                            Topic & Readings                                     Assignments
6/4/20  Course Introduction & Syllabus                                            Syllabus Discussion
        Readings:                                                                 Board
           •   Course Syllabus
6/8/20  Models of PBS & Pre-Assessment                                            Pre-Test Due
           •   ECI & school-age models of PBS
                                                                                  Guided Readings Due
           •   Pre-assessment
           •   Determining the need for services                                  BIP #1 Due
        Readings:
           •   Carr, E., Dunlap, G., Horner, R., Koegel, R., Turnbull, A., &
               Sailor, W. (2002). Positive behavior support: Evolution of an
               applied science. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 4(1),
               4-16.
           •   Fox, L., & Little, N. (2001). Starting early: Developing school-
               wide behavior support in a community preschool. Journal of
               Positive Behavior Interventions, 3(4), 251-254.
           •   Bambara, L., Goh, A., Kern, L., & Caskie, G. (2012). Perceived
               barriers and enablers to implementing individualized positive
               behavior interventions and supports in school settings. Journal of
               Positive Behavior Interventions, 14(4), 228-240.
           •   Mitchell, B., Hatton, H., & Lewis, T. (2018). An examination of
               the evidence-base of school-wide positive behavior interventions
               and supports through two quality appraisal processes. Journal of
               Positive Behavior Interventions, 20(4), 239-250.
        Optional Readings:
           •   Cox, A., & Virues,-Ortega, J. (2016). Interactions between
               behavior function and psychotropic medication. Journal of
               Applied Behavior Analysis, 49(1), 85-104.
           •   Woodsen, L., & Harris, S. Teacher and student demographic
               variables which predict teacher referrals of males for special
               education evaluation. The Journal of At-Risk Issues, 21(1), 32-42.
6/9/20  Models of PBS & Pre-Assessment                                            Application Activities
           •   ECI & school-age models of PBS
                                                                                  BIP #2 Due
           •   Pre-assessment
           •   Determining the need for services
        Lecture and/or Content Activities Posted
6/10/20 Assessment                                                                Zoom Class Discussion
           •   Defining and measuring behavior
                                                                                  Guided Readings Due
           •   Methods of data collection
        Readings:                                                                 BIP #3 Due
           •   Wirth, O., Slaven, J., & Taylor, M. (2014). Interval sampling
               methods and measurement error: A computer simulation. Journal
               of Applied Behavior Analysis, 47(1), 83-100.


           •   Mudford, O., Martin, N., Hui, J., & Taylor, S. (2009). Assessing
               observer accuracy in continuous recording of rate and duration:
               Three algorithms compared. Journal of Applied Behavior
               Analysis, 42(3), 527-539.
           •   Borgmeier, C., Loman, S., & Strickland-Cohen, K. (2017). ABC
               tracker: Increasing teacher capacity for assessing student
               behavior. Beyond Behavior, 26(3), 113-123.
           •   Brawley, S., & Stormont, M. (2014). Investigating reported data
               practices in early childhood: An exploratory study. Journal of
               Positive Behavior Interventions, 16(2), 102-111.
6/11/20 Assessment                                                                Application Activities
           •   Defining and measuring behavior
                                                                                  BIP #4 Due
           •   Methods of data collection
        Lecture and/or Content Activities Posted
6/15/20 Functional Behavior Assessment                                            Guided Readings Due
           •   Assessment methods
                                                                                  BIP #5 Due
           •   Functional Analysis
           •   Determining Function
        Readings:
           •   O’Neill et al. (2015) Ch.’s 1 & 2
           •   Collins, L., & Zirkel, P. (2017). Functional behavior assessments
               and behavior intervention plans: Legal requirements and
               professional recommendations. Journal of Positive Behavior
               Interventions, 19(3), 180-190.
        Optional Readings:
           •   Oliver, A., Pratt, L., & Normand, M. (2015). A survey of
               functional behavior assessment methods used by behavior
               analysts in practice. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 48(4),
               817-829.
           •   Slaton, J., Hanley, G., & Raftery, K. (2017). Interview-informed
               functional analyses: A comparison of synthesized and isolated
               components. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 50(2), 252-
               277.
           •   Mueller, M., Nikosi, A., & Hine, J. (2011). Functional analysis in
               public schools: A summary of 90 functional analyses. Journal of
               Applied Behavior Analysis, 44(4), 807-818.
           •   Greer, B., Neidert, P., Dozier, C., Payne, S., Zonneveld, K., &
               Harper, A. (2013). Functional Analysis and treatment of problem
               behavior in early education classrooms. Journal of Applied
               Behavior Analysis, 46(1), 289-295.
6/16/20 Functional Behavior Assessment                                            Application Activities
           •   Assessment methods
                                                                                  BIP #6 Due
           •   Functional Analysis
           •   Determining Function
        Lecture and/or Content Activities Posted
6/17/20 Designing Behavior Programs                                               Zoom Class Discussion


           •   Behavior intervention plans
        Readings:                                                                 Guided Readings Due
           •   O’Neill et al. (2015) Ch.’s 3, 4, & 5
                                                                                  BIP #7 Due
           •   Robertson, R., Kokina, A., & Moore, D. (2020). Barriers to
               implementing behavior intervention plans: Results of a statewide
               survey. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 22(3), 145-
               155.
        Optional Readings:
           •   Mouzakatis, A., Codding, R., & Tryon, G. (2015). The effects of
               self-monitoring and performance feedback on the treatment
               integrity of behavior intervention plan implementation and
               generalization. Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 17(4),
               223-234.
           •   Foster-Johnson, L., & Dunlap, G. (1993). Using functional
               assessment to develop effective, individualized interventions for
               challenging behavior. Teaching Exceptional Children, 25(3) 44-
               48.
6/18/20 Designing Behavior Programs                                               Application Activities
           •   Behavior intervention plans
                                                                                  BIP #8 Due
        Lecture and/or Content Activities Posted
6/22/20 Implementing Behavior Programs                                            Guided Readings Due
           •   Educational programming
                                                                                  BIP #9 Due
           •   Creating data systems
           •   Evaluating program effectiveness
        Readings:
           •   Conroy, M., Sutherland, K., Vo, A., Carr, S., & Ogston, P.
               (2014). Early childhood teachers’ use of effective instructional
               practices and the collateral effects on young children’s behavior.
               Journal of Positive Behavior Interventions, 16(2), 81-92.
           •   Scott, J., Lerman, D., & Luck, L. (2018). Computer-based
               training to detect antecedents and consequences of problem
               behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 51(4), 784-801.
           •   Gerow, S., Rispoli, M., Ninci, J., Gregori, E., & Gagan-Burke, S.,
               (2018), Teaching parents to implement functional communication
               training for young children with developmental delays. Topics in
               Early Childhood Special Education, 38(2), 68-81.
           •   DeGirnnaro, F., Martens, B., & Kleinmann, A., (2007). A
               comparison of performance feedback procedures on teachers’
               treatment implementation integrity and students’ inappropriate
               behavior in special education classrooms. Journal of Applied
               Behavior Analysis, 40(3), 447-461.
        Optional Readings:
           •   Harding, J., Wacker, D., Berg, W., Lee, J., & Dolezal, D. (2009).
               Conducting functional communication training in home settings:
               A case study and recommendations for practitioners. Behavior
               Analysis in Practice, 2(1), 21-33.
           •   Rahn, N., Coogle, C., & Alexajo, H. (2017). Evidence-based
               practices to reduce behaviors of young children with autism.
               Young Exceptional Children, 20(4), 166-178.


           •   Vanselow, N., Thompson, R., & Karsina, A. (2011). Data-based
               decision making: The impact of data variability, training, and
               context. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 44(4), 767-780.
6/23/20 Implementing Behavior Programs                                            Application Activities
           •   Educational programming
                                                                                  BIP #10 Due
           •   Creating data systems
           •   Evaluating program effectiveness
        Lecture and/or Content Activities Posted
6/24/20 Classroom Management Strategies                                           Zoom Class Discussion
           •   Setting up for success
                                                                                  Guided Readings Due
           •   Group behavior management
        Readings:                                                                 BIP #11 Due
           •   Simonsen, B., Freeman, J., Myers, D., Dooley, K., Maddock, E.,
               Kern, L., & Byun, S. (2020). The effects of targeted professional
               development on teachers’ use of empirically supported classroom
               management practices. Journal of Positive Behavior
               Interventions, 22(1), 3-14.
           •   Oakes, W., Cantwell, E., Lane, K., Royer, D., & Common E.
               (2020). Examining educators’ views of classroom management
               and instructional strategies: School-site capacity for supporting
               students’ behavioral needs. Preventing School Failure, 64(1), 1-
               11.
           •   Herman, S., & Tramontana, J. (1971). Instructions and group
               versus individual reinforcement in modifying disruptive group
               behavior. Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 4(2), 113-119.
           •   Deshais, M., Fisher, A., & Kahng, S. (2019). A comparison of
               group contingencies on academic compliance. Journal of Applied
               Behavior Analysis, 52(1), 116-131.
        Optional Readings:
           •   Pokorski, E. (2019). Group contingencies to improve classwide
               behavior of young children. Teaching Exceptional Children, 340-
               349.
6/25/20 Classroom Management Strategies                                           Application Activities
           •   Setting up for success
                                                                                  BIP #12 Due
           •   Group behavior management
        Lecture and/or Content Activities Posted
6/29/20 Maintenance & Generalization                                              Guided Readings Due
           •   Maintaining & generalizing behavior change
                                                                                  BIP #13 Due
           •   Supervising in school settings
        Readings:
           •   Scalettta, M., & Tejero Hughes, M. (2020). Sustained positive
               behavioral interventions and supports implementation: school
               leaders discuss their processes and practices. Journal of Positive
               Behavior Interventions, 00(0), 1-12.


           •   Walker, V., Chung, Y., & Bonnet, L., (2018). Function-based
               intervention in inclusive school settings: A meta-analysis. Journal
               of Positive Behavior Interventions, 20(4), 203-216.
           •   Pennington, B., Simacek, J., McComas, J., McMaster, K. &
               Elmquist, M. (2019). Maintenance and generalization in
               functional behavior assessment/behavior intervention plan
               literature. Journal of Behavioral Education, 28(1), 27-53.
           •   Dickinson, S., Shaffer-Hudkins, E., & Raffaele Mendez, L
               (2020). Treatment for challenging behaviors: Are IDEA Part C
               interventionists using functional interventions? Journal of Early
               Intervention, 42(1), 31-48.
6/30/20 Maintenance & Generalization                                               Application Activities
           •   Maintaining behavior change
                                                                                   BIP #14 Due
           •   Generalizing behavior change
        Lecture and/or Content Activities Posted
7/1/20  Course Conclusion                                                          Zoom Class Discussion
                                                                                   Post-Test Due
7/3/20
                                                  Final BIP Due


                                             BACB Requirements
This course includes 3 hours measurement; 6 hours behavior assessment; 12 hours behavior-
change procedures; 6 hours personnel supervision and management (total 27 hours)
                                                  C. Measurement
 C-1     Establish operational definitions of behavior
 C-2     Distinguish among direct, indirect, and product measures of behavior
 C-3     Measure occurrence (e.g., frequency, rate, percentage)
 C-4     Measure temporal dimensions of behavior (e.g., duration, latency, interresponse time)
 C-6     Measure trials to criterion
 C-7     Design and implement sampling procedures (i.e., interval recording, time sampling)
 C-9     Select a measurement system to obtain representative data given the dimensions of behavior and the
         logistics of observing and recording
 C-10    Graph data to communicate relevant quantitative relations (e.g., equal-interval graphs, bar graphs,
         cumulative records
 C-11    Interpret graphed data
                                             F. Behavior Assessment
 F-1     Review records and available data (e.g., educational, medical, historical), at the outset of the case
 F-2     Determine the need for behavior-analytic services
 F-3     Identify and prioritize socially significant behavior-change goals
 F-4     Conduct assessments of relevant skill strengths and deficits
 F-6     Describe common functions of problem behavior
 F-7     Conduct a descriptive assessment of problem behavior
 F-8     Conduct a functional analysis of problem behavior
 F-9     Interpret functional assessment data
                                         G. Behavior-Change Procedures
 G-1     Use positive and negative reinforcement procedures to strength behavior
 G-2     Use interventions based on motivating operations and discriminative stimuli
 G-3     Establish and use conditioned reinforcers
 G-14    Use reinforcement procedures to weaken behavior (e.g., DRA, FCT, DRO, DRL, NCR)
 G-15    Use extinction
 G-16    Use positive and negative punishment (e.g., time-out, response cost, overcorrection)
 G-17    Use token economies
 G-18    Use group contingencies
 G-19    Use contingency contracting
 G-20    Use self-management strategies
 G-21    Use procedures to promote stimulus and response generalization
 G-22    Use procedures to promote maintenance
                                    H. Selecting and Implementing Interventions
 H-1     State intervention goals in observable and measurable terms
 H-2     Identify potential interventions based on assessment results and the best available scientific evidence
 H-3     Recommend intervention goals and strategies based on such factors as client preferences, supporting
         environments, risks, constraints, and social validity
 H-4     When a target behavior is to be decreased, select an acceptable alternative to behavior to be established
         or increased
 H-5     Plan for possible unwanted effects when using reinforcement, extinction, and punishment procedures
 H-6     Monitor client progress and treatment integrity
                                    H. Personnel Supervision and Management
 I-4     Train personnel to competently perform assessment and intervention procedures
 I-5     Use performance monitoring, feedback, and reinforcement systems
