American Sign Language I (ASL f601D)
Course Syllabus
Department of Linguistics
University of Texas at Austin
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/linguistics/asl_program/ASL-Program.php
Lecturer: Michael F. Wynne, Jr.                          Class Hours: M-Th 12:00-3:45p
Date: Summer 2019 (Session I)                            Office Location/Hours: CLA 4.626/ M/W/F
E-mail: mwynnejr@mac.com                                 11a-12p
Course Number: 82320
Location: RLP 4.222
Online course information and assignments available through Canvas: canvas.utexas.edu
Course Description: This course aims to support a student’s learning of American Sign
Language (ASL) and is appropriate for students who have no previous knowledge of the
language. Students work on developing perceptual, attentional, manual, and non-manual skill
necessary to learn ASL, and successfully manage various uncomplicated communicative tasks in
straightforward social situations. The course introduces the student to vocabulary and grammar
for introducing oneself, exchanging personal information, talking about surroundings, giving
directions, and describing various activities. The course also includes the teaching of information
about Deaf Culture, history, values, social norms, communication norms, and the role that those
norms play in the Deaf community.
Course Goals:
This course is intended to support a student’s ability to achieve the following by the end of the
semester:
     a. manage a basic vocabulary in ASL, with particular focus on signs for communicating
         information about oneself and about school life
     b. manage basic grammatical structures in ASL, including the use of manual (i.e., the hands)
         and non-manual (i.e., the torso, face, etc.) features
     c. comprehend short dialogues and narratives produced in ASL
     d. produce short dialogues and narratives in ASL
     e. demonstrate ASL conversation, facilitating/regulating behaviors such as attention getting
         techniques, turn taking signals, leave-taking patterns, etc.
     f. demonstrate an elementary knowledge of Deaf Culture, including being able to identify
         markers of Deaf Culture in artifacts and behaviors.
     g. demonstrate knowledge of historical topics as they relate to the Deaf community, such as
         important figures and institutions in Deaf Culture and the role of technology in Deaf
         Culture
Required Materials:
     • Signing Naturally, A Student Workbook and Videotext, Units 1-6 (Smith, Lentz, &
         Mikos, 2008)
     • Introduction to American Deaf Culture (Holcomb, 2012)
     • Marco Polo Video Chat Application on a mobile device


Course Requirements and Weights:
    A. Exams (2): 30%
    B. Quizzes (+/- 5): 30%
    C. Assignments: 30%
    D. Electronic Portfolio: 10%
    No extra credit will be offered.
A. Exams
The course includes two comprehensive exams that contain receptive and expressive portions (2
exams with 2 parts each.) Make-up exams will only be given in extenuating circumstances (i.e.,
an emergency arises and the instructor is notified immediately and documentation is provided or
the instructor is notified in advance of a planned religious holiday absence, etc.). Exams are
computer-based and will be administered in CLA 4.222. Additional information about exams will
be provided in class.
B. Quizzes
There will be three types of quizzes in this course:
1. Comprehension quizzes: These are based mostly on a student’s ability to understand ASL.
   Questions might also be based on the understanding of information from the Signing Naturally
   books or videos or linguistic information discussed in class.
2. Quizzes about cultural information that are based on in-class discussions, readings (from the
   Signing Naturally books or from Introduction to American Deaf Culture), or the viewing of
   videos/movies outside of class time.
3. Quizzes about information such as glossing/transcription conventions, how to correctly
   produce an ASL video assignment, or information that is contained in the syllabus.
Some quizzes will be announced beforehand, while the others will not be (i.e., pop quizzes).
Make-ups for quizzes will not be allowed. If you miss a quiz, you will earn zero points for that
assignment. More information on quiz format will be provided in class.
C. Assignments
Each student will need to devote multiple hours per week on outside assignments and hybrid
learning activities. This time is vital for optimal acquisition of ASL, and homework assignments
constitute a notable portion of each student’s grade. It is suggested that students plan time in their
schedules each week to participate and complete all of these assignments. Additional details
about each of the assignments will be provided in class.
D. Electronic Portfolio
Throughout this course each student will create and maintain an electronic portfolio of select
assignments.      The portfolio will also include self- and peer-evaluations of progress and
descriptions of the portfolio for the instructor. Much of the content will be produced in ASL,
although there will be some written information included. Students are required to create and
maintain a portfolio through which the instructor can monitor their progress. Due dates for
specific parts of the portfolio will be provided as they approach, and the complete portfolio
evaluation will be due at the end of the course semester.
Attendance:
Students should plan on attending class daily, inasmuch as the material covered in class and
participation in class discussion are vital to your performance in this course. Attendance will be
taken every class. Because this course involves interactive activities, absences and/or early


departures from class will not be tolerated. For any unexcused absence, this results in one whole
letter grade reduction (i.e. from an A to a B) and a letter grade reduction for each absence
thereafter (if you started with an A the first absence brings you to a B, for each absence after that,
B-, C+, C, C- and so on).
After the first 5 minutes of class and up to the first 15 minutes equates to a tardy, the same can be
said of early departures at the same amount of time at the end of class time. 2 Tardies/Early
Departures = 1 Absence, which then results in following the same grade reduction policy that
applies to all unexcused absences.
If an emergency or illness causes a student to be absent, the student must provide the instructor
with appropriate documentation (e.g., a note from a physician in the case of an illness) by the
following class and the instructor will take that into account when calculating participation based
on absences.
Participation in UT-sponsored sporting events: Students must bring an official notification of the
upcoming event to class before the actual event, in order for the absence to be excused.
Observance of Religious Holy Days: students must notify the instructor at least 24 hours prior to
holy days. If you must miss a class, a quiz, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will have an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time before or after the absence. See UT policy on this matter at: http://www.utexas.edu/provost/
policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf
Participation:
It is essential that students make every effort to attend every class on time and be prepared to
participate in class activities. Attention to classroom activities is imperative, behaviors such as
using pagers/cell phones, laptops, or doing work for another purpose other than class will not be
tolerated. Because this is an ASL course, we aim to encourage the development of signing skills,
this also means that talking or voicing during class will not be allowed.
Assignments:
Students will complete a variety of assignments for this course with primary focus on developing
productive language skills. This includes developing and creating video projects as well as
giving presentations in class that demonstrate proficiency in target language skills in ASL. For
more information on when specific assignments are scheduled, please refer to the course
schedule. Late assignments will not be accepted, if you fail to submit assignments on time, they
will not be considered for grade.
At Home
Language learning, in particular, requires continuous practice. Since it is a process that relies on
active participation on the part of the learner, do not expect to master the material simply by
coming to class three times a week.
Studying
You should not limit your work at home only to out of class enrichment activities, which count
for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis, since attempts
to memorize large amounts of material quickly before quizzes are not normally successful. You
should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take not of any items you may
not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions and resolve issues
before quizzes.
Practice


Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as watching videos of vocabulary
and/or studying handouts/slides gone over in class. This type of studying is not usually sufficient
in a language course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t
develop the automaticity necessary to successfully complete quizzes and video compositions
within a limited time frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to
actively engage with course material by producing signs yourself as well as viewing relevant
videos.
In Class
Your class meetings are an important opportunity for you to interact with your classmates and
your instructor. Participation is an essential component of the course and does not refer
exclusively to attendance. Please keep in mind the following elements of our language courses:
Interaction
Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and rely heavily
on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will be pair
work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the facilitator.
All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.
Focus
The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class. Cell Phones,
laptops and outside reading materials are NOT allowed in class, as they limit your participation
and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.
ASL
In order to improve your expressive communication skills, you must practice both receiving and
producing ASL! Therefore, your instructor will communicate almost exclusively in ASL (written
English may be used at the instructor’s discretion), which will not only help you learn new
vocabulary and grammatical structures, but will also increase your comfort level over the course
of the semester. In turn, you are expected to reciprocate and use ASL for activities as well as for
basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom, asking the instructor to
repeat something, etc.) Don’t be shy! You’ll never be graded on the accuracy of your
productions in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.
Course grades will be based on the following total percentages:
A = 93.45% - 100%        A- = 89.45% - 93.44% B+ = 86.45% - 89.44%
B = 83.45% - 86.44% B- = 79.45%-83.44% C+ = 76.45% - 79.44%
C = 73.45% - 76.44% C- = 69.45% - 73.44% D+ = 66.45% - 69.44%
D = 63.45% - 66.44% D- = 59.45% - 63.44% F = 59.44% and below
Notes:
There will be No pass/fail grade; this course is based on letter grade only.
Rounding up to the nearest whole percentage is done at the instructor’s discretion.
University Notices and Policies:
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students


Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students
are responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible to keep the university informed about
changes to your e-mail address. Students should check their email regularly (i.e., daily)
to stay current with class information. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating email addresses at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of
the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site at http://
deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Documented Disability Statement:
If a student requires special accommodations, they must contact the Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) within the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement (471-6259 or 471-4641 [TTY] for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
Upon registration with the SSD office, students will be given letters to present to their
instructors in order to discuss appropriate accommodations. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity.ddce/ssd/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If a student is worried about someone who is acting strangely, they may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss their concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), AND the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Students should be
aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
〈        Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of the classroom and the
         building. The nearest exit door may not be the one that was used when a student
         entered the building.
〈        If a student requires assistance to evacuate, please inform the instructor in writing
         during the first week of class.
〈        In the event of an evacuation, students should follow the instructions given be the
instructor.
〈        Students should not re-enter a building unless they have been given instructions by
         the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
         Services office.
Course Schedule:
*Course schedule subject to change, all changes will be communicated in class or on Canvas.


Dates                           Topics                             Resource & Materials
6/6 (Online)                    Introduction to the Course: Course Syllabus Quiz
                                Requirements, ASL Lab,
                                Technology and ASL, Course
                                Syllabus overview
6/10 (First class meeting)-6/13 Unit 1: Personal Information,      ASL video formatting
                                Getting to know you,               guidelines, Google Drive,
                                introducing yourself, asking       Electronic Portfolio Overview.
                                who, specifying where, giving
                                commands, and numbers in           SN Unit 1
                                ASL.
6/17-6/20                       Unit 2: Exchanging Personal SN Units 1 & 2
                                Information: giving
                                information about yourself,
                                narrating experiences with
                                languages, leisure activities,
                                identifying people, and
                                numbers in ASL
                                Unit 3: Discussing living SN Unit 3
                                situations, real world
                                orientations, giving
                                commands, basic directions,
                                and number signs with time.
6/24-6/27                       Monday/Tuesday - Unit 3            SN Units 1-3
                                Tuesday - Exam Review Day
                                W e d n e s d a y - E x a m 1 Mid-term Exam Week
                                (Receptive)
                                Thursday - Exam 1
                                (Expressive)
7/1-7/3                         Unit 4: Talking about family, SN Units 4 & 5
                                negation, numbers involving
                                ages, relationships, family
                                members.
                                U n i t 5 : Te l l i n g a b o u t
                                activities, agreement verbs,
                                and frequency of activities


7/8-7/11 (Last class day) Monday/Tuesday - Unit 5       SN Units 1-5
                          Tuesday - Exam Review Day
                          W e d n e s d a y - E x a m 1 Exam Week
                          (Receptive)
                          Thursday - Exam 1
                          (Expressive)                  Final Deadlines:
                                                            - Expressive Exam
                                                                Video due Thursday,
                                                                July 11th at 3:45pm
                                                            - Portfolio Evaluations
                                                                due Thursday, July
                                                                11h at 3:45pm
