Mohammad Mohammad
Spring 2020
Email: ​mamohammad@austin.utexas.edu
Office: CAL 415
Office Hours: TBA
                       Arab Political Speeches in War and Peace
The course is designed as an upper division Arabic language course. This is a
content-based course that invites advanced students of Arabic to approach modern
Arab cultures and societies through a critical reading of memorable political speeches
by notable orators such as Gamal Abdel Nasser, Anwar al-Sadat, Yasser Arafat,
Saddam Hussein, and Hassan Nasrallah among others. Such speakers have marked
Arab collective memory at decisive historical moments in the Arab Israeli conflict and
nationalist anti-colonial movements. The class will particularly look at the social and
historical contexts surrounding each speech as well as the rhetoric devices used by
orators (such as persuasion, intent signals, metaphors, code switching) in order to
form a clear understanding of the stylistic properties of the 20​th​ century Arab rhetoric
tradition.
Oration has been central to Arab history and literary tradition since pre-Islamic times.
Contemporary Arab history has known great military, political, intellectual, and
religious orators that addressed in their political speeches vital questions relating to
nationalism, war, and peace. In this course, advanced students of Arabic will have the
opportunity to immerse themselves in the stylistic and linguistic complexity of
famous political speeches and engage with the social and historical contexts that led
to their consecration in the Arab collective memory.
Course Objectives: ​The course aims at enhancing the students’ capacity to read,
interpret, and write about Arab modern political rhetoric. In the course of developing
their writing skills, the students will acquire an intricate knowledge of historical
milestones in the contemporary Middle East.
Course Materials​: The course materials include speeches that will be studied closely
as well as selected studies in Arabic that address the development of Arabic oratory
tradition and the historical contexts surrounding the given speeches. All readings will
be posted on BB. The course will equally rely on audio-visual material that will assist
students in their learning process.
                                                                                           1


Grading​: The students will submit weekly written assignments about class readings.
Students will also be graded based on their participation in class discussion (seminar
and small group work), oral presentations, vocabulary quizzes, and a final project.
Grades are distributed as follows:
Participation:                            20%
Written weekly reports: 40%
A Speech I liked/hated: 10%
Final project ( a ten-minute speech to be delivered in front of the class) due on the last week
of classes:       30%
Requirements​: advanced proficiency in Arabic and upper division or graduate status.
Registration will be restricted, placement exam required.
Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies:
Number/Letter grade equivalents are:
Number        Letter      Number      Letter       Number      Letter      Number        Letter
94 - 100           A      87 - 89.9       B+       77 – 79.9        C+     67 – 69.9         D+
                          84 - 86.9       B        74 – 76.9        C      64 – 66.9         D
90 – 93.9          A-     80 – 83.9       B-       70 – 73.9        C-     60 – 63.9         D-
(Below 60%F)
Attendance Policies:
        ●   If you are absent from class you will receive a “0” for that day’s participation.
            Your ​lowest 2 grades for participation will be dropped when calculating your
            final grade at the end of the semester​.
        ●   More than four absences—whatever the reason—will result in an "F" for the
            course​.
        ●   Please inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as possible ​before—not
            after—​the class you will miss. The absence will not be excused but informing your
            instructor of an absence helps considerably in planning for daily class activities.
Tardiness Policy
                                                                                                2


Arriving late to class is disruptive, so please make every effort to be in class and ready to
    start working when class begins. Participation points will be deducted for tardiness as
    follows: arrival during first 5 mins. of class = 1 Pt.; during first 10 mins. = 2Pts.; during first
    15 mins. = 3Pts.; during first 20 mins. = 4Pts. If you arrive more than 20 mins. late for class
    you will receive a “0” for that day’s class participation and it will count as an absence in
    applying the absence policy.
Important UT and Departmental policies and regulations that apply to this course
Important Dates
For details and dates see:
http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/13-14
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your
own, or that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code.
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent or 2) who have had schooling in an
Arabic-speaking country or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT
prior to enrollment in this course must take the departmental placement examination for Arabic
before beginning their study of Arabic at UT. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic
dishonesty.
Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester
and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an
exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be
needed. See website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Religious holy days.​ A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in
advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an
assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                                                                      3


Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your
e-mail address are available at ​http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html​.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal​.
Emergency Evacuation
The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
  Safety and Security,512-471-5767, ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/​ :
     ▪    Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
          evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
          requires exiting and assembling outside.
     ▪    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
          building.
     ▪    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
          the first week of class.
     ▪    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     ▪    Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
          Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
          Services office.
     ▪    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
          can be found at: ​www.utexas.edu/emergency
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
     (6). Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher
     education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped
                                                                                                    4


courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number
                                                                                            5
