                                 MKT 337 COURSE SCHEDULE
                                 PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING
                                FIRST SUMMER SESSION 2020
                                     MTWTH 12:00 – 2:00 PM
                                        UNIQUE NO. 71980
Instructor:            Professor Herbert A. Miller, Jr.
Office Hours:          2:00 – 3:00 PM Th and by appointment.
Web Page:              Canvas. Class messages will be posted on Canvas as well as your grade.
                       Be sure to link your email address to Canvas so you promptly receive
                       important messages.
Email:                 Herb.Miller@mccombs.utexas.edu
                       Please state the name of the course you are in, i.e. MKT 337, and the
                       class time in the subject line of your e-mails.
TA:                    Olivia Lu
Office Hours:          2:00 – 3:00 PM Th and by appointment.
Telephone:             309-648-5440
Email:                 olivia.lu@utexas.edu
FYI:                   No TA office hours will be held until the 4th class day.
                       Prof. Miller will NOT begin official office hours until the 4th class day.
                       If you need to speak with Prof. Miller before then, please contact him
                       via email.
REQUIRED TEXT
Essentials of Marketing, 16th Edition by William Perreault, Joseph Cannon, and E. Jerome
McCarthy (ISBN: 9781260405323)
Supplementary in-class lecture material from external sources will also be presented. Attending
class is key to your success in this course.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
The primary objective of Marketing 337 will be to introduce you to the basic concepts, practices
and tools of marketing. The course has a broad scope, is contemporary in outlook, and managerial
in orientation. Regardless of the field you ultimately choose to pursue, this course should give you
a strong grounding in the marketing discipline.
For marketing majors, you will find that this course provides a strong foundation for your future
studies and work opportunities. As we will quickly learn in class, however, “marketing” is not just
for marketing majors. It is not simply a function or a department. Instead, marketing is a process
which allows an organization to create and deliver value for customers – hopefully more value
than competitors offer – and therefore provides the engine for organic growth of an organization.
No matter what field you study in college and what career you eventually pursue, your success in
                                                  1


business will be largely determined by your ability to deliver more value to customers than your
competitors.
More specifically, in this class you will have the opportunity to…:
1. …understand that “marketing” is the discipline that drives how organizations can achieve
    superior organic growth.
2. …explain and apply the marketing process (i.e., developing promising configurations of
    insights, strategies, and execution) that gears the organization for growth
3. …analyze and apply the marketing mix instruments (i.e., key tools and concepts pertaining to
    product management, price management, communication management, and sales management)
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course is designed to introduce business students to the principles of marketing as they relate
to the whole business enterprise. This course will be focusing on the understanding and application
of key marketing concepts. Memorization of the material in the text will not be sufficient.
Attendance in lectures and the participation in discussions during class will cement the concepts,
allow you to apply them to real business problems, and prepare you for the exams.
I will provide insight into the way in which customer wants and needs are transformed into a firm’s
strategies and tactics. This course will consist of class lectures, textbook, speakers, films, articles,
and cases all designed to give you a comprehensive understanding of marketing.
1. To provide you with knowledge of the history of marketing activities and the evolution of the
    modern marketing system.
2. To heighten your awareness of the interaction between business and society as it relates to
    marketing activities.
3. To expand your understanding of the marketing system and basic marketing vocabulary.
4. To develop your understanding of basic marketing activities and ways that marketing relates
    to other business activities.
5. To sharpen your analysis of business strategy and tactics from a marketing person’s perspective.
6. To provide you with a framework for developing marketing strategy and a working
    understanding of tools and tactics useful in implementing marketing strategy.
NATURE OF THE COURSE
The course will be taught through an online lecture format. I will personalize the class with outside
information, guest speakers, films, and personal business experiences. In addition to this material,
the course will include discussions of articles on “current events” related to marketing. You will
be responsible for all speakers, films, and personal business examples covered in each class.
Several guest lecturers may be invited to class. They have special marketing expertise that will
enrich the course content. There may be questions on examinations or quizzes from material that
is presented by the guest lecturers.
As much as possible I will try to involve you in all the course material by asking for your opinions
and comments on topics as they are covered in class. Please feel free to ask questions in class in
order to enhance your learning and understanding of marketing concepts. As we cover different
                                                   2


aspects of marketing, you will probably notice examples of marketing in the world around you. I
encourage you to keep up with current events in business and marketing by regularly reading the
popular business press, such as Business Week, Financial Times, USA Today (money section),
Fortune, Forbes, and The Wall Street Journal.
Business Week, USA Today, and Forbes are free to access the majority of content. Fortune is
behind a paywall. University of Texas students can access The Wall Street Journal online and
Financial Times online for free (though the Financial Times articles are delayed 30 days for
students) by following the link below:
https://guides.lib.utexas.edu/market/CNews
We will cover a great deal of information throughout the semester. In addition, each new topic in
the course builds on previously covered material. It is essential that you remain current in your
assignments, reading the appropriate text chapters prior to the class in which the relevant material
will be covered. This will both enhance your understanding of the lecture material and enable you
to comment and contribute in class.
The class lecture will consist of PPT slides covering material in the textbook, PPT slides from
outside sources, videos, articles, guest speakers, personal marketing experiences, and current
examples of marketing practices. You will be responsible for all material covered in class,
including PPT slides not included in the Canvas postings.
I would like to learn more about each of you personally. Please, feel free to take the time to “visit”
me or your TA during virtual office hours.
ONLINE CLASS REQUIREMENTS
This class is facilitated through the online services provided by the Liberal Arts Instructional
Technology Services (LAITS). For this class, students must have a laptop or desktop computer
with:
    1.  A webcam and microphone;
    2.  2GB memory/RAM;
    3.  Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows);
    4.  Chrome (highly recommended), Safari, or Firefox, and;
    5.  5mpbs internet connection speed (test your internet connect speed here).
These requirements are necessary for a quality and functional online class experience for all
students. It is your responsibility to ensure that your laptop or desktop computer meets these
requirements throughout the semester. Students who are unable to meet these requirements are
not qualified to take this class. For questions about these requirements, please email your TA
before the 4th day of class.
LAITS tips for the best class experience:
    1. Close all unnecessary browser windows and tabs and programs, for example:
                                                 3


        - Streaming music (Pandora, Spotify, etc.)
        - Social media sites
        - Youtube or other video sites
        - Online/Offline Gaming
    2. Clear the browser's cache before class (here's how)
    3. Check your computer is free of viruses, malware, and spyware (UT recommendations)
If you need additional help, look for live chat support during class or send an email outside of class.
You can test your laptop’s connection to a sample online lecture and review the technology
requirements here.
Exams will be conducted using Proctorio. Students must install the Proctorio extension on Chrome
in order to successfully use Proctorio. Students may be required to record themselves during
their examinations and other related classroom situations using Proctorio. This is a
requirement to take the class. All recordings will be handled in accordance with university policy
and applicable student privacy laws such as the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act.
Follow the link below to learn more about how to install the Proctorio extension and use Proctorio
to take tests.
https://cdn.proctorio.com/guides/canvas/test-taker/getting-started.pdf
Just as unexpected, uncontrollable situations arise which affect a person’s ability to attend class in
person, situations may arise which affect your ability to access the class remotely. If you are having
internet connectivity trouble which are significantly affecting your ability attend the class lecture,
please immediately notify your TA.
A good recommendation for online classes is to have a space dedicated solely to your classroom
experience, such as a desk or table. Your classroom space should be relatively quiet and free of
distractions. You may wish to remove personal items from the view of the webcam and keep a
neutral background.
CLASS POLICIES AND EXPECTATIONS
Class sessions will include lecture, discussion, test, and other activities. The class sessions will be
based on content from the textbook, assigned readings, guest speakers, and videos. The keys to
having a successful experience in this class include:
    1.   Commit yourself to learn the concepts presented in this class. Don’t simply memorize
         vocabulary words.
    2.   Be present at every class. At least ¼ of the questions on all exams will be based on lectures,
         other in-class activities, and the ensuing discussions that take place in class.
    3.   Stay current with Canvas. Look at Canvas announcements for weekly updates, import
         class notices, and grades. It is your responsibility to check Canvas regularly.
    4.   Take notes during class on all material, including the videos and speakers.
    5.   Please turn off your cell phone ring tone and remain on mute unless you have a question.
                                                    4


6.  Participate in class discussion and ask questions, particularly with guest lecturers.
7.  The material in this class builds on itself. Do not get behind. Read assigned chapters and
    articles prior to the class in which they will be discussed. This will provide you with an
    overview of the concepts and vocabulary so that our class lecture discussion will be much
    more meaningful.
8.  Observe the marketing principles we discuss in class you journey through your daily life:
       •   Read articles in the business press (e.g. Wall Street Journal, Business Week, etc.)
           and think about the marketing implications for you, other consumers, the
           organizations, the industry, the economy, and society.
       •   Think about the reasons why you buy a certain brand of clothes, beverages, or cars.
       •   Consider why products you buy are priced the way they are.
       •   Observe how many forms of advertising you encounter every day.
       •   Consider how diverse consumers can be and the effect this has on marketing
           strategy.
       •   Reverse engineer the marketing efforts you are exposed to and understanding how
           these efforts utilize (or don’t utilize) the marketing principles we discuss in this
           class.
9.  Conduct yourselves professionally. This includes “arriving” to class on time, turning off
    your cell phones, remaining on mute during lecture unless you have a question, refraining
    from personal conversations during class, remaining focused on the material presented
    instead of distractions, and being respectful of your classmates, guest speakers, the TA
    and your instructor.
    In general, students are expected to conduct themselves in accordance with the University
    of Texas Code of Conduct and the Honor Code. You can review the Code of Conduct and
    the Honor Code at the link provided:
    https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
    Students who engage in unprofessional conduct or conduct against the University of Texas
    Code of Conduct may be subject to disciplinary action, including but not limited to
    temporary removal from the classroom setting.
10. I have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts damage the reputation of
    the University of Texas and the degree and demean the honest efforts of the majority of
    students. The minimum penalty for act of academic dishonesty will be a zero for that
    assignment or exam.
                                              5


GRADING
Your grade in the course will be determined on the basis of two examinations. Each exam will
include 40 multiple-choice questions counting 2.5 points each. The questions will cover all the
material covered in the TEXTBOOK (TEXT AND GRAPHS), CLASS LECTURES, CLASS
SPEAKERS, FILMS, ARTICLES AND CASES DISCUSSED IN CLASS. You are
responsible for everything covered in the previously stated areas. There will be no curves
given on the exams; however, if questions are judged to be worthy of consideration an adjustment
may be given, to ensure fairness.
All exams will be available for review for ONLY two weeks following the posted grades.
After the two-week period, the exams are no longer available for review.
(Because of the size of the class, we cannot extend this beyond the stated time frame).
Final grades will be assigned based on your semester average as follows:
                             Semester                       Grade
                              Average        Grade          Points
                              93-100           A             4.00
                               90-92           A-            3.67
                               87-89           B+            3.33
                               83-86           B             3.00
                               80-82           B-            2.67
                               77-79           C+            2.33
                               73-76           C             2.00
                               70-72           C-            1.67
                               67-69           D+            1.33
                               63-66           D             1.00
                               60-62           D-            0.67
                             59 or less         F            0.00
Decimals will not be rounded up. (e.g. 89.7 average will be considered an “B+”, not an “A-”).
THIS CLASS IS NOT PASS/FAIL. YOUR GRADES WILL BE RECORDED.
VERY IMPORTANT!!!…In calculating your final course grade, you must use the below stated
“grading formula/percentages” – NOT CANVAS!!! CANVAS IS ‘NOT’ AN ACCURATE
WAY TO DETERMINE YOUR OVERALL COURSE GRADE, ONLY THE BELOW
STATED GRADING FORMULA/ PERCENTAGES IS CORRECT. If you have any
questions, please contact me or your class TA.
To be fair to all students, grade changes or additional extra credit opportunities will not be
considered. There will be no exceptions. No arguments about +s or –s because this would
remove the benefits of the +/- system, which was introduced to insure a more accurate
grading system. The way to get the grade that you want is by EARNING it during the
semester.
                                                6


CLASS EXAMS, ASSIGNMENTS, & PROJECTS
Examinations (40% of Final Grade)
There will be two exams, each comprising 20% of your course grade. The exams will include
both multiple-choice and short answer questions. Exams will cover assigned chapters in the
textbook, other assigned readings, lectures, class exercises, class discussions, videos, and guest
speakers. You are responsible for everything covered in the previously stated areas. The
emphasis on these exams will be on the application of concepts. Understanding of text material
and knowledge of definitions are expected since they may be test material.
The exams will be conducted through Proctorio. I will refer any suspected violations of academic
dishonestly to the Office of the Dean of Students for investigation. An ‘F’ in the course will be
the recommended penalty in most cases of exam cheating or other scholastic dishonesty.
Each exam will ONLY be provided during the regular class period on the dates specified above
at the start of our regular class time of 12:00 PM. Please consult the calendar and establish that
the exam dates/times will not conflict with your schedule during the first day of class. You must
take the exam on the date and time indicated above and in the class calendar.
No alternative test dates or times will be provided except as required for those students
presenting a letter of accommodation from the Dean of Students SSD office, students observing
religious holy days, and students dealing with health emergencies. No make-up dates are
offered for students who miss an exam. Remember that if you miss an exam, you will be given
a zero.
Exam grades will be posted on Canvas as soon as possible after the exam. The TA will provide an
opportunity for you to review your exam, find out exactly which questions you missed and to
discuss any of the questions on the exam for one week following the date of the exam during posted
office hours only. After reviewing your exam, you may submit a written appeal on any question
for which you believe there is some cause for review. Appeals must be submitted by the announced
deadline, generally within 1 week after the grades are posted. No grade discussions of any kind
(other than to correct data entry or calculation errors) will occur at the end of the semester.
Class Attendance (5% of Final Grade)
Class lectures will be recorded and available online for students to access; however, students are
expected to attend class on a regular basis. Attendance will be taken periodically through formats
such as in-class polling and students will be awarded up to 5 points for regular class attendance.
Class attendance is essential and expected. All class meetings will be held as scheduled unless it
is announced otherwise. You are expected to be in class on time to eliminate disruption of class
discussions, class speakers and lectures.
Religious Holy Days & Health Emergencies: If you must miss a class, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holiday, please email me by the 4th class day so that
alternative arrangements can be made. I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                   7


If you experience a health emergency or are the primary caregiver of a person experiencing a
health emergency, please email me as soon as possible with a doctor’s note so that alternative
arrangements can be made. I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Class Discussion (10% of Final Grade)
Students will be awarded up to 10 points for class participation during class discussions
regarding articles discussed in class, guest speaker questions and in-class article summary
assignments. Points will be awarded based on the quality of the contribution (from 0 - 1 points
per contribution up to a total of 10 possible points).
Article Summaries (15% of Final Grade)
Students will be asked to write and turn in five summaries on articles provided to them via
canvas. These articles will be discussed in class as a part of the subject being lectured on that
day. Article summaries should be no more than 2 pages double-spaced in Times New Roman
font size 12 with 1” margins.
Articles, the write up deadlines, and information how to write an article summary will be posted
to Canvas. The write ups will be due by the start of class (8:00am) on the day it is due. Please
submit via Canvas. Late article summaries may be unaccepted.
Personal Branding Brochure (10 % of Final Grade)
You will be asked to develop a personal branding project in order to better market yourself and
distinguish yourself (from the competition). Strong branding strategies have shown to outperform
less recognized ones by 73%. Building a solid personal brand makes you more visible to the
recruiters, during campus interviews and leaves a lasting impression.
You have four options for your personal branding project, and you must choose two. Your projects
must all demonstrate that your personal brand meets the need of a potential employer. Further
instructions, templates, and samples will be provided on Canvas. You may select from the
following projects:
    1. Personal Branding Brochure. You will create an informative personal branding brochure
        with good organization.
    2. Personal Website. You will create a personal website using Weebly, a drag-and-drop
        website builder.
    3. LinkedIn Profile. LinkedIn is an integral part of networking these days. You will create or
        revise a LinkedIn profile to reflect your personal brand.
    4. Video Resume. You will create a 1 to 3-minute video resume reflecting your personal brand.
        Your video and audio recording should be high quality and thoughtfully edited.
Marketing Research Project Paper (20 % of Final Grade)
The research paper can be about any marketing topic such as social media, sales promotion of a
product or service, a new channel strategy, retailing, pricing, distribution strategy, demographic
data such as the new emerging Hispanic or Asian demographic, consumer behavior pattern,
                                                  8


ethical marketing, advertising, customer service, etc. This should give you a general as well as
specific idea of what to do a research project on. It should be related to the subject of marketing.
The project should be 6-7 pages, 1.5 spaced in Times New Roman font size 12 with 1” margins.
There are no exceptions for late papers. Papers may be analyzed for plagiarism through
software such as Turnitin. Additional information about the research project, including the
structure of the paper, will be uploaded to Canvas.
CLASS GRADE CALCULATION
Exam #1                 20%            Chapters 1-9 & Lecture/Speakers /Videos/Articles/Other
                                       Class Content
Exam #2                 20%            Chapters 10-15, 17, 18 & Lecture/Speakers/Videos/
                                       Articles/Other Class Content
Class Attendance        5%             Based on class attendance.
Class Discussion        10%            Class discussion of article summaries/guest speaker
                                       engagement
Article Summaries       15%            Five 2-page article summaries
Personal Branding       10%            Demonstration of marketing by building personal brand.
Project
Project Paper           20%            6-7 Page Marketing Research Topic Paper
                                       NO EXCEPTIONS FOR LATE PAPERS
Two MKT DEPT                           2 points will be added to your “lowest exam grade”
Research Studies                       for each extra credit study you complete, for a possible
                                       total of 4 points.
MEETING YOUR GRADE GOALS
First, review this syllabus and the course requirements carefully. There are many opportunities
provided to help you succeed in this course. However, you must take advantages of them
throughout the semester. Please note that grades are based on your inputs, not your effort, nor
your improvement. I expect each of you to have the time management skills to evaluate course
requirements, complete them on time, and accept the consequences of your choices.
Please see the instructor or TA for guidance early in the semester if you are not meeting your
grade goals. Your TA will not provide notes for missed classes! A buddy system where a fellow
student can take notes for you and you for them due to an absence is a smart idea.
                                                   9


It is always disappointing to hear from students at the end of the semester who did not take
advantage of the available resources during the semester and are a point away from a higher
grade. Do not be the one of them! All choices – even ‘right’ ones – have consequences, so
skipping class/studying less to meet other legitimate life needs will not excuse you from
receiving the grade you earn in this class. The instructor will not discuss or consider any grade
changes at the end of the semester (regardless of special circumstances, improvement, good
intentions, needs, desires, etc.) so please put your effort into this class throughout the semester
and accept the consequences of your choices.
EXTRA CREDIT MARKETNG DEPT RESEARCH STUDIES
You can earn a total of four (4) extra credit points which will be added to your lowest exam
grade by completing two (2) research studies through the marketing department. If you complete
one study, two (2) points will be added to your lowest exam grade. If you complete two (2)
studies, four (4) points will be added to your lowest exam grade. You can only participate in two
studies. This could make a difference in your overall course grade, so do plan to participate.
You can earn the extra credit points in the course by participating in research studies through the
Marketing Department Subject Pool. You may not participate in the same study twice. You will
receive this credit for any extra credit opportunities offered via the Marketing Department
Subject Pool website at:
http://mccombs.sona-systems.com
You should have received an email with login information by June 10th. If you have any
questions, please email Larissa Garcia (below).
You are strongly encouraged to participate in these studies. It is a good way to get exposed to
marketing research, and it is valuable to understanding marketing and consumer behavior. These
opportunities are offered throughout the semester, but will end before July 3rd, so plan ahead.
Below are instructions on how to access these online studies:
           Click the session you have signed up for. You will be taken to a page with the study
           description. Below the description, you will see an orange button that says “View
           Study Website”. Click this button, and you will be redirected straight to the study
           website.
Questions regarding extra credit? Email Larissa Garcia, the Behavioral Lab Coordinator, at
larissa.garcia@mccombs.utexas.edu
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
Letter should be brought to the attention of the TA at the beginning of the semester to arrange
accommodations. This must be submitted within two weeks of the start of the semester.
                                                  10


OTHER
TA: Your TA should be contacted on all grade, review, test, speaker, article, textbook, and
absence issues, etc. Feel free to copy me on all email correspondence. Your TA will NOT
provide notes for missed classes!
Students who use TA office hours regularly to ask questions about course material or simply to
ask directions regarding study methods tend to do better in class.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
Marketing 337 will operate in full compliance with the Policy Statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty for the College of Business Administration, which is described in detail at
http://bevo2.bus.utexas.edu/udean/strudents/handbook/dishonest.html. By enrolling in this class
you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the
application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is
your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and /or dismissal from the University.
You should refer to the Student Judicial Services Web site at
http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sis/ or the General Information Catalog to access the official
University Policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty.
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the McCombs School of Business.
By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all of the faculty responsibilities described in
the document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student
responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this
class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification.
FINAL THOUGHTS
Please take advantage of the opportunities in this course. I am here to help you learn as much as
possible about marketing strategies and concepts. Please keep in mind that this is a dynamic
course that incorporates the growth and changes in the field of marketing. Marketing requires
you to integrate, to be imaginative, and to be decisive in situations with limited information.
Develop a mindset that allows you thinking as a way of life. Remember, you will be able to use
the skills and knowledge you have learned in this class in whatever path you take in your career.
At the same time, I will give you valuable insight into the real world that will benefit you as you
pursue a career in an increasingly global marketplace.
Foremost, this course should be very enjoyable. You will get out of this class what YOU put
into it. If you will commit yourself to preparation, apply yourself to the tasks at hand, and then
open yourself up to learn and succeed. I think you will find this one of most enjoyable practical
courses you will take in your college career. It will DEFINITELY help you get Ahead in Life.
                                                   11


All aspects of the delivery of this course, including the class lecture, are the intellectual
property of the professor. Any unauthorized reproduction, transmission, transcription or
duplication of any aspect of the delivery of this course is strictly prohibited.
                               MKT 337 COURSE SCHEDULE
                                FIRST SUMMER SESSION 2020
  Th    June 4        Introduction to Principles of Marketing                        Introduction
                      Marketing Value to Customers                                   Chapter 1
                                                                                     In-Class Film
  M     June 8        Marketing Strategy Planning                                    Chapter 2
   T    June 9        Evaluating Opportunities                                       Chapter 3
                      Article Summary Due & Class Discussion
  W     June 10       Marketing Strategy Segmentation & Positioning                  Chapter 4
  Th    June 11       Consumer Behavior                                              Chapter 5
                      Article Summary Due & Class Discussion
  M     June 15       Business Customers and Buying Behavior                         Chapter 6
   T    June 16       Marketing Information                                          Chapter 7
                      Article Summary Due & Class Discussion
  W     June 17       Product Planning                                               Chapter 8
  Th    June 18       Product Management and New Product Development                 Chapter 9
  M     June 22       Exam #1: Chapters 1-9, Article Summaries, Guest                N/A
                      Lectures, & Other Class Content
   T    June 23       Place and Development of Channel Systems                       Chapter 10
  W     June 24       Distribution, Customer Service, and Logistics                  Chapter 11
  Th    June 25       Retailers, Wholesalers, and Their Strategy Planning            Chapter 12
                      Article Summary Due & Class Discussion
  M     June 29       Promotion-Introduction to Integrated Marketing                 Chapter 13
                      Communications
   T    June 30       Personal Selling and Customer Service                          Chapter 14
                      Guest Speaker
  W     July 1        Advertising and Sales Promotion                                Chapter 15
  Th    July 2        Pricing Objectives and Polices                                 Chapter 17
                      Article Summary Due & Class Discussion
  M     July 6        Price Setting in the Business World                            Chapter 18
   T    July 7        Personal Branding                                              Lecture
  W     July 8        Ethics in Marketing                                            Lecture
  Th    July 9        Exam #2: Chapters 10-15, 17, & 18, Personal Branding,          N/A
                      Ethics, Article Summaries, Guest Speakers, & Other Class
                      Content
                      Marketing Research Project Paper Due
                      Personal Branding Project Due
                                                12
