                                                                                                            1
                     Sociocultural Influences on Learning (ALD 327/AFR 372D)
                                                Spring, 2020
                                           Unique Numbers: 09500
                                        University of Texas at Austin
                                    Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
                                     Tuesday/Thursday 2 pm – 3:30 pm
                                                  SZB 426
Instructor: Alex J. Armonda
Office Hours: Tuesday, 12:00 pm – 1:30 pm or by appt.
Office: SZB 528E
Email: armonda@utexas.edu
Disclaimer: This syllabus should be seen as a living document. The instructor retains the right to revise
the syllabus at any point in the Spring 2020 semester as deemed necessary.
REQUIRED TEXTS
    •    ALD 327 Course Reader*
    •    Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Students,
         2nd Edition**
    •    Angela Valenzuela, Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics of Caring**
* Course reader available at Jenn’s Copy and Binding.
**Books available through the UT Co-op. Physical copies required.
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is devoted to exploring the relationships between education, culture, and society. It will pay
particular attention to historical and contemporary structures of social and educational inequality as they
relate to issues of race, class, gender, and power considered more broadly. Students in this course will:
examine processes of power and control in education, as they are expressed in curriculum, policy, and
pedagogy; investigate schooling as a means of ideological and material reproduction; and theorize
teaching as a form of intervention in these processes. Course material will pay special attention to the
experiences and educational conditions of those who have been historically marginalized within U.S.
schools. By the end of the semester, students will become familiar with a variety of sociological,
philosophical, and political understandings of education in U.S. society, understand relationships of
power within society and how these relations are articulated within schools, and develop the foundational
knowledge necessary for working with youth from culturally and experientially diverse backgrounds.


                                                                                                               2
POLICIES
Attendance: Students will not be penalized for missing one class session, provided that it does not
coincide with the date of an assigned presentation. For each additional absence, students will lose 5 points
from their final course grade. Students are subject to a Fail if they accrue more than three unexcused
class sessions.
Academic Integrity: All work must be your own. If referring to ideas or information from others, make
sure that you cite the source. No credit will be given for work that violates this rule, and additional
measures may be taken in cases of flagrant plagiarism.
Late Work: Reading Responses will not be accepted if turned in after the deadline. All other written
assignments will lose 5 points each day after the deadline.
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING BASIS
Note: Extended guidelines for the following assignments are provided at the end of this syllabus.
Reading Responses (20 points)
Each Monday, you will respond to a series of guided questions related to the arguments of the assigned
readings for the coming week. The prompts will provide space for you to engage, describe, extend, and
challenge our authors’ key ideas.
There are 12 opportunities to complete the 10 Reading Response assignments required. You may earn
extra credit by completing additional Reading Responses.
Your responses are due by 11:59 pm on the Monday before our first class of the week. No late
assignments will be accepted. Responses will be completed and submitted on Canvas.
Autobiographical Essay (10 Points)
In this essay you will reflect on your life experience as it relates to the topics and ideas covered in class.
You will describe how your own identity and development have been influenced by the social and
cultural processes in education we are studying, and you will analyze your own experiences to explain
their importance and meanings.
The Autobiographical Essay is due on February 28 by 4:00 pm. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Service Learning (Required)
This course includes a 15-20 hour service learning component which you must complete in order to
receive credit for the class. It is your responsibility to contact one of the sites on the Service Learning
Opportunities list (or an equivalent site) to complete your volunteer service learning. The supervising
staff member at your site will be asked to sign off on a form certifying that you have completed your
required hours.
Signed form is due by May 7 in class. These must be turned in by hand.


                                                                                                            3
Service Learning Analysis (20 Points)
This assignment consists of four reflections on your experiences at your service learning site. Each of the
reflections will focus on a different topic, and in each you will combine close observation with careful
interpretation and analysis.
Service Learning Analysis is due on April 24 by 4 pm. It will be turned in on Canvas.
Class Discussion Lead (10 Points)
In small groups, you will undertake a discussion lead at the beginning of one Thursday class session. This
should combine elements of presentation alongside provoking discussion questions for the class. It should
be planned to last around 30 minutes.
You will be asked to turn in a lesson plan prior to the session you are assigned to lead.
Presentations must be related to the topic and readings of the week, examining their key themes in
relation to a current issue within U.S. schooling or society more broadly. This is an open-ended and
creative assignment. You should take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening the discussion for your
classmates.
Final Essay Abstract (5 Points)
This abstract will detail your working thesis, argument, or central idea for your final essay. It will
describe your methods (which articles you intend to engage with, what you intend to analyze, etc.), and
explain what your paper will reveal about your growth and changing understanding throughout the
semester.
Final Essay Abstract is due on May 1 by 4 pm. Abstracts will be turned in on Canvas
Final Essay (25 Points)
In this essay (6-7 typed double-spaced pages), you will develop an analytical reflection on a specific
topic or theme from our course material. The assignment is critical in nature; you will problematize,
question, extend, or provide commentary on a concept, argument, or idea as presented in our course
literature.
The Final Essay is due on May 11 by 4:00 pm. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Participation (10 Points)
Participation is a graded component of your grade in this course. Besides the reading responses, it is how
I assess that you are keeping up with the reading assignments. It is important that you carefully read all
assigned readings prior to class, and that you bring the readings with you to class.
Both attendance and participation in class is important to facilitate your own learning and that of others.
Our discussion depends on all voices being shared and heard.


                                                                                                             4
Assignment                                                  Points
Reading Responses                                           20
Autobiographical Essay                                      10
Service Learning Analysis                                   20
Group Discussion Lead                                       10
Final Essay Abstract                                        5
Final Reflective Essay                                      25
Participation                                               10
Total                                                       100
Grade Scale
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F
University Notices and Policies
Academic Integrity: University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.


                                                                                                             5
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
     •   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
         (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative
         text conversion, etc.).
     •   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field
         trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given
         day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     •   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video
         phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
         http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated, or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
         •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
              nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
         •    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
         •    In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.


                                                                                               6
  SCHEDULE
Week & Class  Theme                  Readings                              Assignments Due
Dates
1             Introduction to Course    1. Syllabus & Class Norms          Review Service
                                                                           Learning Sites
(Jan. 21, 23)                           2. Baldwin: A Talk to Teachers
                                            (Handout)                      Select weeks for
                                                                           group presentation
2             Critical Race Theory      1. Yosso: Whose Culture Has        Reading Response 1:
              and Deficit Thinking          Capital? (Course Reader)
(Jan. 28, 30)                                                              Jan. 27
                                        2. Weiner: Challenging Deficit
                                            Thinking (Course Reader)
3             Urban Educational         1. Noguera: selections from City   Reading Response 2:
              Crisis Reconsidered           Schools and the American
(Feb. 4, 6)                                                                Feb. 3
                                            Dream, pp. 1-58 (Course
                                            Reader)
4             Critical Pedagogical      1. McLaren, Chapter 5: pp. 131-    Reading Response 3:
              Foundations                   154 (Handout)
(Feb. 11, 13)                                                              Feb. 10
                                        2. Freire: Chapter 2 from          Deadline to select
                                            Pedagogy of the Oppressed      service-learning site:
                                            (Course Reader)
                                                                           Feb. 13
5             Tracing Neoliberal        1. Hursh: Assessing No Child Left  Reading Response 4:
              Educational Reform            Behind and the Rise of
(Feb. 18, 20)                                                              Feb. 17
                                            Neoliberal Education Policies
                                            (Course Reader)
                                        2. Giroux: Teachers as
                                            Transformative Intellectuals
                                            (Course Reader)
6             The Corporatizing of      1. Dumas: ‘Waiting for Superman’   Reading Response 5:
              Social Justice and the        to Save Black People (Course
(Feb. 25, 27)                                                              Feb 24
              Myths of Mastery              Reader)
                                                                           Autobiographical
                                        2. Britzman: Cultural Myths in the Essay Due:
                                            Making of the Teacher (Course
                                            Reader)                        Feb. 28, 4pm, Canvas


                                                                                              7
7             Gender,                  1. Thorne: selections from Gender    Reading Response 6:
              Performativity, and         Play, pp. 49-88 (Course Reader)
(Mar. 3, 5)                                                                 Mar. 2
              Schooling
                                       2. Butler: Performative Acts and
                                          Gender Constitution (Course
                                          Reader)
8             Gender & Sexuality:      1. Fine: Sexuality, Schooling, and   Reading Response 7:
              Violences, Silences, and    Adolescent Females (Course
(Mar. 10, 12)                                                               Mar. 9
              Resistances                 Reader)
                                       2. Mayo: The Tolerance that Dare
                                          Not Speak Its Name (Course
                                          Reader)
9
(Mar. 17, 19) SPRING BREAK –              Begin Gutierrez/Rogoff and
              NO CLASSES                  Valenzuela readings
10            Schooling Between        1. Gutierrez and Rogoff: Cultural    Reading Response 8:
              Culture and Politics        Ways of Learning (Course
(Mar. 24, 26)                                                               Mar. 23
                                          Reader)
                                       2. Valenzuela, Chapter 2: pp. 33-
                                          60 (Book)
11            Popular Culture and      1. Robinson: The Lego Movie,         Discussion Post and
              Transformative Praxis       Review in The Journal of Social   1 Response on
(Mar. 31)                                                                   Canvas:
                                          Studies Research (Course
              GUEST LECTURE:
(Apr. 2)                                  Reader)                           Apr. 2
              Heath Robinson, Dept.
              of Social Studies
              Education
12            Toward a Politics of     1. Valenzuela, Chapter 3: pp. 61-    Reading Response 9:
              Caring                      113; Chapter 5 (partial) pp. 161-
(Apr. 7, 9)                                                                 Apr. 6
                                          181 (Book)
13            Workshop Day                Discuss final paper ideas with
              (Optional Class)            Alex and classmates
(Apr. 14)
(Apr. 16 –
NO CLASS)


                                                                                               8
14            Decolonial Perspectives    1. Simpson: Land as Pedagogy        Reading Response
              for Pedagogy                   (Course Reader)                 10:
(Apr. 21, 23)
              GUEST LECTURE:             2. Suina: The Pueblo People and     Apr. 20
              Aaron C. Pyle, Dept. of        the Dominant Culture (Course    Service Learning
              Educational Leadership         Reader)                         Analysis Due:
                                                                             Apr. 24, 4 pm,
                                                                             Canvas
15            Rethinking Student &       1. Solórzano & Delgado Bernal:      Reading Response
              Teacher Resistance             Examining Transformational      11:
(Apr. 28, 30)
                                             Resistance (Course Reader)      Apr. 27
                                         2. Kumashiro: Toward a Theory       Final Essay Abstract
                                             of Anti-Oppressive Education    Due:
                                             (Course Reader)
                                                                             May 1, 4pm., Canvas
16            From Culturally            1. Ladson-Billings, Chapters 2-3:   Reading Response
              Relevant to Culturally         pp. 17-58 (Book)                12:
(May 5, 7)
              Sustaining Pedagogy                                            May 4
                                         2. Paris & Alim: What Are We
                                             Seeking to Sustain through      Service Learning
                                             Culturally Sustaining Pedagogy? Form (Signed) Due:
                                             (Course Reader)
                                                                             May 7
17            Final Essay Due         No Class Meeting                       Final Essay Due:
(May 11)                                                                     May 11, 4 pm,
                                                                             Canvas


                                                                                                          9
Reading Responses
Each Monday, you will respond to a series of guided questions pertaining to the arguments of the
assigned readings for the coming week. This response should be specific and composed in accordance
with scholarly norms. The prompts will provide space for you to engage, describe, extend, and challenge
the authors’ key ideas.
Access Reading Responses through the assignments/modules page on canvas.
Your responses are due by 11:59 pm on the Monday before our first class of the week. No late
assignments will be accepted. There are 12 opportunities to complete the 10 required Reading Responses.
This means that you may earn extra credit by completing up to two additional Reading Responses.
Evaluation
    •   Responses should attend to the issues, ideas, or passages emphasized in the guiding questions.
    •   Responses should be approximately 300-400 words.
    •   If you are having technical difficulties with Canvas, email your response directly. Emailed
        responses must be received by 11:59 pm on Monday to receive credit.
    •   Avoid using long quotations from the text, since you need the space for your own comments and
        analysis.
    •   Your response should focus on the key points of the text, rather than on general speculations. Be
        specific in your writing.
    •   Ten reading responses will be required during the course; each is worth 2 points.


                                                                                                          10
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay (5 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on your own life experience as it relates to
the topics and ideas we have been considering in class. The question for you to respond to in this
assignment is:
     •   Who are you, and how has your identity been influenced by, and constructed in relationship
         to your educational experiences?
“Educational experiences” includes school, but can also include other educational experiences in your
family, with peers, or in other contexts. This essay is concerned with how your development is connected
to the educational, social, and cultural context you have come from. Along the way you should consider
how some of the racial, class, cultural, and gender understandings, differences, and processes that
we have discussed have affected you (and also, if you want, how you have responded). You should
provide specific descriptions of experiences to make your essay more vivid, and should analyze these
experiences to explain their importance and meanings. (You do not need to tell your whole life story.)
It is important to connect your description to the topics and ideas we have been concerned with in class.
APA required for in-text citations and works cited page.
The Autobiographical Essay is due on February 28 @ 4:00 p.m. Assignments are to be turned in on
Canvas.
Evaluation
This essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) Specific discussion of personal experience and identity
2) Depth of analysis and insights
3) Connections drawn to ideas and topics considered in the course with proper citations


                                                                                                            11
Group Discussion Lead (Presentation and Lesson Plan)
In small groups, you will lead a class discussion at the beginning of one Thursday class session. This
presentation should be related to the topic and readings of the week, but should discuss how the week’s
readings (themes, argument, content, etc.) relates to a contemporary educational or social issue. This is an
open-ended and creative assignment, which asks you to take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening
the discussion of it to the class.
You will complete a lesson plan for this assignment. The lesson plan will include objectives, directions,
and a description of the activity you are cultivating for the class. Activities can range from analyzing an
episode of a TV show, a piece of curriculum, a popular song, a film, a news piece, or anything along
those lines.
Engage with the reading, but do not simply summarize it. This is not a book report, but rather an
opportunity for you to build an activity that extends your classmates’ thinking around the central themes
of our course. Plan your time carefully for about 30 minutes.
Guidelines
    •    Lesson plan must be turned in prior to the session you are leading.
    •    You will come up to the front of the class for the presentation.
    •    Powerpoint/Prezi is good, but not required; however, it helps to have a visual aid (handouts,
         posters, etc.)
    •    Build time in your presentation for a short activity. This can be a discussion activity, gallery
         walk, or anything else along those lines.
Evaluation
Presentations will be evaluated on:
1) Depth of analysis and creativity of presentation/activity
2) Quality of planning and collaboration among presenters
3) Insights offered on topic and/or readings of the week
4) Opportunities provided for classmates to engage with activity and meaningfully extend understanding


                                                                                                            12
Service Learning Analysis
This assignment consists of four brief reflections (2-3 typed double-spaced pages for each) on your
experiences at your service learning site, in which you will explore aspects of the work you are involved
in, the organization itself, and your own responses and accomplishments. Each of the reflections will
focus on a different topic, and in each you should include the following two elements:
1) Description: Provide specific and detailed description of what you see, hear, and learn. Try to create
a vivid picture in the reader’s mind of the place or actions you are observing.
2) Interpretation: Reflect upon the meanings of the events and processes you have described. Drawing
on our course readings and class discussions, suggest what you think might be some of the reasons for
what you have described, as well as its effects and significance.
Service Learning Analysis is due on April 24 @ 4 pm. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Reflection 1: Organization Context
Describe the context and mission of the organization you are working with, and your own thoughts about
it. Consider the communities served by the site, the range of participants, the needs it aims to address, the
mission or values of the organization, and its structure and setup. You can draw from conversations with
staff, observations, organization literature, etc.
     Ø Interpretation questions: Why has this organization chosen to focus on their particular mission?
         What are some of the key challenges associated with the central projects that this organization has
         taken on? What are your initial impressions of the structure and relationships at the site?
Reflection 2: Your Role and Relationships
Document the specific role and tasks you have at the organization, your relationship to participants and
staff, and your feelings about your service learning at this early stage. Describe specific responsibilities,
interactions, events, or projects that give texture to your individual experience as a volunteer, rather than
focusing on the organization as a whole.
     Ø Interpretation questions: How does it feel to you so far to be engaged in this project? What is
         exciting about your experience? What is difficult? How are you negotiating the relationships
         you are involved in with participants?


                                                                                                        13
Reflection 3: Asset-Based Description
In class we have emphasized the importance of an asset-based perspective on students and communities
(as opposed to a deficit perspective). Focusing on the students/participants you have been working with,
describe the strengths and resources that they bring from their experience, families, and/or communities,
including the specific interactions that demonstrate these assets.
    Ø Interpretation questions: What strengths and resources allow this person(s) to persist and progress
         in their lives and/or learning? What understandings have you gained from working with them?
         How can the assets they bring with them from their family/community help to challenge deficit
         perspectives that might be applied to them or to their community?
Reflection 4: Social Justice Commitment
Consider the ways that your site is committed to a project of social justice that aims to transform the
social conditions for the communities it serves. Describe whether the staff and participants see the work
they are involved in as reaching beyond the amelioration of individual cases to broader change, and the
ways in which they enact this commitment.
    Ø Interpretation questions: What does social justice mean to this organization? In your view, does
         the work of this site move toward this goal? Has your participation altered your own
         understandings and views of social justice?
Evaluation
The Service Learning Analysis will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) Carefulness and specificity of descriptions of site and experiences
2) Depth and interest of interpretive comments and connections to course literature
3) Evidence provided of engagement with service learning organization
4) Clarity and coherence of writing


                                                                                                       14
Final Essay
In this essay (6-7 typed double-spaced pages), you will develop an analytical reflection on a specific
topic or theme from our course material.
This essay should have a clearly developed argument (thesis), and should engage specifically with
course concepts and readings that have made a difference to you personally.
The assignment is critical in nature; you will problematize, question, extend, or provide commentary on a
concept, argument, or idea as presented in our course literature.
You may choose to write a critical analysis on a pop-culture artifact (film, book, etc.), a piece of
curriculum, or other similar text, provided that you use the theories from our course to frame your
argument.
In referring to course texts, make sure you use specific references, including quotations, in APA style.
Do not summarize the texts; instead, they should serve as tools to help you work through your own ideas.
The Final Essay is due May 11 by 4:00 pm. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Evaluation
The final reflective essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) Depth and interest of reflections, analysis, and ideas
2) Specific engagement with course readings and concepts with proper citations
3) Organization and coherence of argument
4) Clarity and coherence of writing
