Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                               SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
course:            LAR 381 R / ARC 380C
unique number: 01644 / 00954
type of course:    seminar
credits:           3
instructor:        Phoebe Lickwar
schedule:          Thursdays 1:00 - 4:00pm
location:          WMB 5.112
semester:          Spring 2019
Catalog Description
Advanced topics in media and interpretation, such as freehand drawing, measured drawings, aspects of computer
graphics, geographic information systems, and photography.
Course Description
Photography and the Urban Landscape introduces students to the use of photography as a method of visual
research and visual thinking, a practice of critical inquiry that is both analytical and generative, and a way to develop
new knowledge about urban landscapes. Readings, discussions, and visits to the Harry Ransom Center are intended
to familiarize students with the work of contemporary photographers who are investigating the urban landscape.
Students will choose a site to investigate over the course of the semester, developing their own visual practice
through short assignments and sustained observation. Students may choose any urban site in the Austin area,
including a studio site or subject of research for another class.
Prior experience in photography is welcome but not required. This course is particularly useful for students in the
School of Architecture interested in incorporating photography as a visual method in their work. Students must have
access to a digital camera (SLR, Mirrorless, iPhone or android equivalent).
Learning Objectives
•    To develop a visual practice, using photography as a method of sustained visual inquiry
•    To develop skills in visual thinking, including camera use, editing, and sequencing
•    To learn about a variety of approaches and methods being employed by contemporary photographers to
     develop new knowledge related to urban landscapes
Course Structure
The course is structured around three activities: 1) Weekly Case Studies and Readings, 2) Photographic
Assignments, and 3) Visits to the Ransom Center.
Weekly Case Studies and Readings
Each week students will choose one of the case studies listed in the course schedule and complete a written
response. Students will bring to class a selection of one to five images from the case study on a thumb drive. These
images and ideas recorded in the written responses will form the basis for our class discussions. All case studies are
available on reserve at the Architecture & Planning Library. Many, but not all weeks there are also supplementary
readings intended to guide your photographic work. These readings are either available on Canvas or found in the
required text: Spirn, The Eye is a Door.


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                              SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Photographic Assignments
We will review progress on photographic assignments through weekly digital pin-ups. It is expected that students will
visit their sites regularly and have new images to show each week. Critiques are designed to provide feedback for
work in progress as well as review of completed assignments.
Ransom Center Visits
We will have five visits to the Ransom Center over the course of the semester (January 31, February 21, March 28,
April 11, May 9). We will be looking at the work of notable photographers and discussions will focus on
understanding this work within the context of the weekly course topic. On days when we are visiting the Ransom
Center, we will meet at 1pm in the reception area on the second floor of the Center.
Attendance
With the exception of faculty exemption or an excused absence, class attendance is mandatory. Students with three
[3] unexcused absences may be dropped from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than
three [3] unexcused absences is a full letter drop in the final grade for the course. Students should contact the
instructor prior to class if they expect to be absent or late.
Absences based on religious observances must be arranged fourteen [14] days in advance. Any work missed during
that time must be turned in within one week [7 days] of the absence. A student who fails to complete missed work
within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Attendance is expected for all lectures, field trips, studio sessions, and discussions. If a class meeting has to be
rescheduled, it will be done in a timely manner, with the intention of accommodating the majority of the course
participants' schedules.
Grade Percentages
Class Participation                    20%
Weekly Case Study Assignments          30%
Photographic Assignments               50%
Grade Evaluation
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic areas.
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of each
grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of issues. Work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over
the semester.
Each student will be assessed according to the effort expended in the following primary areas [each weighted .33]:
           Intent: project has clear conceptual intent [idea] that addresses the assignment’s stated objectives;
           Development: project rigorously examines, tests, and refines conceptual intent and spatial implications
           through the effective and appropriate use of representation models and sketches;
           Resolution: project is complete conceptually, spatially, and technically, as demonstrated through the verbal
           and graphic presentation.
Assignments are to be completed in the time allowed. With the exception of a medical or personal emergency, late
work will be reduced by one letter grade per each 24 hour period after the stated assignment deadline.
                                                                                                                     Page 2


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                          SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Grade Scale
Final grades will be computed in accordance with School of Architecture and University Academic Policies as
follows:
           grade    quality       performance level                                             points
           A        excellent     Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness,     4.0
                                  appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor,
                                  craft, and personal development. Student pursues
                                  concepts and techniques above and beyond what is
                                  discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
           A-                                                                                   3.67
           B+                                                                                   3.33
           B        good          Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued,     3.0
                                  and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and
                                  suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
                                  required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
                                  demonstrates potential for excellence.
           B-                                                                                   2.67
           C+                                                                                   2.33
           C        required      Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions           2.0
                                  made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor.
                                  Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
           C-                                                                                   1.67
           D        poor          Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, 1.0
                                  model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation
                                  are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate
                                  the required design skill and knowledge base.
           D-                                                                                   .67
           F        unacceptable Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met.         0.0
                                  Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will
                                  be assigned when you have excessive unexcused
                                  absences.
           X        excused       Issued only in the case of compelling, nonacademic
                    incomplete    circumstances beyond the student's control. Simply not
                                  completing work on time is an inadequate cause for
                                  assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
                                  consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an
                                  agreement as to a new completion date. According to
                                  School of Architecture policy, studio work must be
                                  completed before the second week of the next design
                                  semester in which the student is enrolling.
All grades are subject to deductions for absences, late work, and late arrivals.
                                                                                                             Page 3


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                                SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the grade to be
reduced, remain unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an individual basis, not as a comparison
with other students' grades.
Coursework Submission
Course material submitted for evaluation will be retained by the Program for professional accreditation. Material that
is not necessary for accreditation will be returned to the student within one academic semester.
At the semester’s end, all final work must be submitted as digital files utilizing a UTBOX or another cloud based
service. Individual vector based files should be submitted as high quality pdfs; individual raster based images should
be submitted as 300 dpi tiffs. Complete boards should be submitted as high quality pdfs. File names should conform
to the following nomenclature: 19_LAR_381R_lastname_assignment_title
Examples: 19_LAR_381R_lastname_Light Study_Image 01.tiff
A student’s Final Grade will be withheld until documentation has been submitted.
Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honest, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Plagiarism or violations of academic integrity in any form will be handled according to measures as outlined by the
General Information catalog and the University. All course related work submitted for evaluation is to be original and
prepared without unauthorized assistance. Work that is supplemented from ideas not originating from the student
should clearly cite the parent source.
Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action, including the receipt of
a failing grade for the course, and possible dismissal from the University. Since such infractions harm the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
Faculty: Phoebe Lickwar
Office Location: XXXX
Office Hours: Thursdays, noon-1pm
Primary Contact: plickwar@utexas.edu
Office hours will be maintained at scheduled times, as well as by appointment, in order to discuss issues related to
the schedule, evaluation, coursework, etc. Please do not hesitate to notify the instructor of impending schedule
conflicts with other classes.
E-mail Correspondence
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading
their email for university and course-related information and announcements. Students must keep the university
informed about changes to their e-mail address (see http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php). Students
should check e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
can be time critical.
                                                                                                                   Page 4


Graduate Program in Landscape Architecture                                                             SYLLABUS
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
When composing email, include “LAR 682T” in the subject line along with the topic of your inquiry. Emails should
address the instructor and be professional in tone. The instructor will endeavor to reply in a timely manner or will
address your question in class.
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512.471.6259 or
512.471.4641. See also http://www.deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
Contact the BCAL to discuss your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512.232.5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                                                                 Page 5
