ANT 325L (31765) Ethnographies of Emotion
CLA 5.118 Wed 3-6
Katie Stewart (kstewart@mail.utexas.edu)
Office CLA 4.408 office hours M 2-3, Wed 1-2, or by appt.
This course uses ethnographic writing to explore the ways in which shared emotions and
sensibilities animate and define social and cultural life. It is a writing workshop and
carries the writing flag. We will build conceptual skills through the process of working
with words, both by building voice as writers, learning to write clearly, succinctly and
with conviction, and by reading and listening to others’ writing and learning how to
compose responses.
You will write seven 500 word pieces, each written in four drafts, using the elbow
method outlined in Peter Elbow’s Writing Without Teachers, keep a daily writing journal
for the first seven weeks, and write a final essay by editing 3-5 of your short pieces. In
seminar, each person will read their work aloud while the others listen carefully and take
notes developing their own creative lines of thought in response. After four readings, we
will discuss the four pieces together. Learning to be good readers or listeners is part of
the process of learning to be good writers. Finally, there will be workshops on
ethnography, auto-ethnography, editing, voice, affect and emotion, and what constitutes a
life or a world.
Ethnography, meaning writing difference, is detailed descriptive writing about the
entanglements of forms, forces, practices, media, materialities, sensibilities and structures
in some world or scene of life. Its objects of analysis are not dead and fixed but moving
and mixing so it writes about the angles, possibilities, and problematics. The world it
describes is one actively filtered through the author as one who participated in and
observed.
Readings
Mary Karr. The Art of Memoir.
Kathleen Stewart. Ordinary Affects.
Peter Elbow. Writing Without Teachers. (on canvas)
Ta-Nehisi Coates. Between the World and Me.
Rebecca Solnit. A Field Guide to Getting Lost.
Greg Bottoms. Pitiful Criminals.
Requirements and Structure of the class
Everyone starts with 100 points. Points will be subtracted if you fail to complete
assignments or show inadequate development in your written essays.
1. Regular attendance and participation. 14% of the grade (one point off for every
unexcused absence). If you are absent for a good reason, talk to me.
2. Free-writing journals turned in for the first 7 weeks. 7% of the grade. (one point off
each week you miss).
3. Seven 500 word pieces, each written through four drafts, the final draft read aloud in
workshop. Please bring all four versions to be checked. 49% of the grade.


4. Final essay editing together 3-5 of the short weekly essays. 30% of the grade.
Week 1 Aug 29
ethnographic research workshop
workshop on brainstorming to produce your first paper topic
practice the Elbow method
Week 2 Sept 5
Read: Elbow. Writing Without Teachers, chapters 1-3
Turn in daily free-writing journal.
Bring four drafts of your 500-word piece. Read the final draft.
Workshop on descriptive writing.
Week 3 Sept 12
Read: Ta-Nehisi Coates. Between the World and Me.
Turn in daily free-writing journal.
Bring four drafts of your 500-word piece. Read the final draft.
Workshop on subject-positioning.
Week 4 Sept 19
Read: Elbow. Writing Without Teachers, chapter 4, 5, appendix essay, and appendix.
Turn in daily free-writing journal.
Bring four drafts of your 500-word piece. Read the final draft.
Week 5 Sept 26
Read: Mary Karr. The Art of Memoir
Turn in free-writing journal.
Bring four drafts of your 500-word piece. Read the final draft.
Workshop on voice.
Week 6 Oct 3
Read: Kathleen Stewart. Ordinary Affects.
Turn in daily free-writing journal.
Workshop on emotion and affect.
Week 7 Oct 10
Read: Greg Bottoms. Pitiful Criminals.
Turn in daily free-writing journal.
Bring four drafts of your 500-word piece. Read the final draft.
Workshop on describing a world.
Week 8 Oct 17
Read: Mary Karr. The Art of Memoir (2cd half)
Turn in daily free-writing journal.
Bring four drafts of your 500-word piece. Read the final draft.


Week 9 Oct 24
Read: Rebecca Solnit. A Field Guide to Getting Lost. (1st half)
Bring notes inspired by all of the readings. What more/else might do with your writing?
Workshop on auto-ethnography. Class will break into two groups.
Week 10 Oct 31
Read: Rebecca Solnit. A Field Guide to Getting Lost. (2cd half)
Bring four drafts of your 500-word piece. Read the final draft.
Week 11 Nov 7
Select 3-5 of your pieces to compose a final paper. Bring a list of your writing and editing
challenges in the effort to combine the pieces without losing their singularity.
Editing workshop
Week 12 Nov 14
Bring a first attempt to carefully edit together your 3-5 pieces. Look for, and create, links,
resonance, parallels between them so that an idea emerges in their combination. Rewrite,
rewrite, rewrite (at least 5 times) over the next two weeks.
Class will break into two groups to hear and work through each student’s efforts.
Week 13 Nov 21 (no class. Thanksgiving break)
Week 14 Nov 28
Read final essays.
Week 15 Dec 5
Read final essays.
Rubric for the 500 word pieces
Please put your name on it.
Write four drafts, using the elbow method - 45 minutes of fast writing followed by 15
minutes of hard editing eliminating all but the sentences or sentence fragments you think
are true (really express your thought, or start to develop it). Bring all four drafts to
class. They don’t have to be printed; you can show them to me on your computer.
The writing should be descriptive and ethnographic. It should be about some aspect of a
world – anything from a conversation, a political economic structure, a moment in your
life entangled in forms, objects, and sensibilities. The style of the writing is up to you
(creative, social scientific, memoir, blog, etc).
Remember you are not just reporting dead facts but composing an account in relation to
an existing composition of ways of living and being, translating creative processes
already in play. You can include descriptions of people, language, places, situations,
bodies, events, or objects. Work with the details of particulars (what did that character
actually say, what color was the water in the ocean that day). Your paper may assemble


different kinds of significance (explicit meanings or values, unspoken but visceral bodily
preferences for how close someone stands to others in line, or a regional taste for hot
food, differences in gender or race, “big picture” descriptions of city-wide infrastructures
or intimate details of everyday life in a moment. Ethnographic writing tries to describe
some kind of world “out there” but it is also filtered through you as the one who
participated in and observed what you’re describing and then worked to recompose it in
words.
Be a composer. Actively produce a picture of what you’re trying to describe. Be creative.
Be detailed and precise.
Be clear (don’t use jargon and try eliminating all the words you don’t need). Try, at first,
writing in very short sentences. You can later add some longer sentences into the mix to
create a rhythm to the writing as a whole. Be direct. Try to approach your object of
description from several different angles; these might describe a different aspect of what
you’re describing (its materiality, its history, its status as an icon for some group, etc) or
they might describe some alternate possibilities of what emerge from this thing, or what
could happen to it, or how it might effect other things (the possibilities resonant in it).
Try to write for an audience – your classmates and perhaps also the people you are
writing about (what would they think/say about what you’ve written? Would they
recognize themselves in it or be interested in the thoughts you’ve had?). Try to hear your
words, your voice. Try reading your piece aloud.
