Introduction to Information Studies
Dr. Blaha
Unique Number 77580
Summer 2020
Syllabus
     The syllabus for 304D includes goals for the course, the grading policy, an overview of
assignments, and a list of writing tips and resources you may find helpful. If, at any time
throughout the semester, you have questions about the syllabus, please contact your
instructor for clarification.
Contact
Instructor:      Craig Blaha
Office Hours:    by appointment (video or phone chat)
Office:          UTA 5.456
Email:           (please contact me using Canvas) craig.blaha at utexas.edu
TA:              TA Pool Email: ta_pool@ischool.utexas.edu
Course Goal
     This course will introduce students to the field of information studies. Students will
explore the foundations of the field, professions in the field, and issues within those
professions.
     This course carries the Writing Flag, which means you should expect a substantial
amount of writing throughout the semester in order to meet the university requirements
for this flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in
an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester,
complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor, Tas, and
peers to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one of
your essays, and you will be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion (60%) of your grade to come from your written work.
Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.
     Prerequisite: none.
Course Objectives
     Students will be able to:
     • Demonstrate an understanding of major topics, identify key issues, and discuss
         important terms in information studies
     • Examine numerous perspectives related to professions and issues in information
         studies and formulate independent arguments based on these perspectives
     • Relate perspectives and issues in information studies to both their personal and
         professional lives
     • Fulfill the university requirements of a writing flag course
                                                                                              1


Course Materials
    INF 304 does not have a textbook or course packet. Instead, all readings will be
available through Canvas, UT’s Library, or through the World Wide Web.
    This course is a web-based course, so students will need regular access to the following
materials:
    • Internet – If you do not have access to a personal computer, you may use the
         iSchool lab (UTA 1.210) while enrolled in this course. You do not need to sign up for
         an iSchool account. The iSchool lab has both Macs and PCs, as well as lots of great
         software. I encourage you to check out the lab!
    • Email – You can open an email account through UT, Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo, etc. if
         you do not already have one. Make sure you register your official email account with
         the university, and connect that email to Canvas. This part is really important, since
         ALL communication will be through Canvas. I suggest you make sure Canvas
         announcements get forwarded to an account you check regularly since this is how I
         will communicate with you throughout the semester . All correspondence for this
         course will use Canvas, and "I didn't get the email" is not accepted as an excuse for
         missing an assignment!
    • Microsoft Word – You will submit essays as Microsoft Word documents. The
         Campus Computer Store sells software, including Microsoft Office, to UT students
         and faculty at a discount. Since your written work will receive considerable
         feedback, only Microsoft Word documents will be accepted. I love open source
         software, but in order to provide feedback in a timely manner I need everyone to
         use Word.
    • Adobe Acrobat Reader – Several articles we will read are in .pdf format so you will
         need Adobe Acrobat Reader (you most likely already have it).
Course Format
    This course is Web-based, so there are no class meetings. The course is divided into
modules in order to help us build community and learn from each other as we work our
way through the semester. I will release a few modules at the beginning of the semester in
order to give you about two weeks to complete each module. Each week after the start of
the semester I will release a new module. We will all work together through each module,
with the discussions and quizzes focused on the module due that week.
    You can do the work whenever you want throughout the week as long as you submit
everything no later than the designated date and time for each assignment. I recommend
setting up a few 3-hour time blocks each week that will help you keep up with the class.
    Each module will focus on one topic within information studies, and will be composed of
the following activities:
    • Online lecture - Each module begins with an online “lecture” that will include a
         combination of both written material, links to articles outside of canvas, and videos.
         Complete each lecture (including the external articles linked within the article)
         before proceeding to the assigned readings. While reading, take notes on questions
         you might have, interesting points made by the author, or concerns you may have
         related to the topic.
    • Readings – There are citations provided at the beginning of each module, and all
         readings are available through Canvas, UT Library Online, or through the World
         Wide Web. See the “Course Materials” section for more information.
                                                                                                2


     •   Discussion – Students will engage in discussions about the lecture, readings, and/or
         related topics each week using the discussion board section set up by the instructor.
         You will find more information on discussions in the “Assignments” section of this
         syllabus.
     • Quiz – an open book review of what we covered that week.
     In addition, students will write three essays, with a fourth optional essay, which are
described in the “Assignments” section below.
Grading Policy
304 uses the traditional UT Austin undergraduate grading scale:
                          A         94 – 100
                          A-        90 - 93
                          B+        87 - 89
                          B         83 - 86
                          B-        80 - 82
                          C+        77 - 79
                          C         73 - 76
                          C-        70 - 72
                          D+        67 – 69
                          D         63 - 66
                          D-        60 - 62 (minimum for pass/fail
                                students to pass)
                          F         Below 60
     The course grade is divided into three different assignment groups: discussions, quizzes,
and the work related to your essays. The weight of each of these groups is described below,
and the groups will be described in more detail in the “Assignments” section below:
     Discussions:                20%
     Quizzes:                    20%
     Essays:                     60%
     Each of the three required essays must be turned in to pass the class. If you do not turn
in any one of the three essays, you will receive an F in the class, regardless of the grade
Canvas displays. You might as well turn them in on time and earn some points! You can turn
in an essay late in order to pass the class, but you will not receive points for late
submissions.
     Grades for essays, quizzes, participation, and weekly discussions will be posted in
Canvas. You will need your UT EID and password to log in. I usually have each assignment
that was submitted by the deadline graded within a week, and essays graded within two
weeks, so you should be able to keep up with your grade on a regular basis. If you have any
questions about your grades at any point, definitely let me know!
Late Grading:
     All work is due before the deadline listed on the due date. Late discussions will not be
graded.
     Canvas records the exact time you upload, so make sure you give yourself plenty of time
for the document to upload before the deadline. I will use Canvas' recorded time as the
                                                                                               3


official submission time. If the deadline is midnight and Canvas lists 12:01 AM as the time
you uploaded your assignment and marks it late, then you will not receive credit.
     No essays will be accepted for a grade after the deadline except in the case of a
verifiable medical emergency. If you do miss the deadline, you will still need to turn in an
acceptable essay to pass the class! A computer virus, a computer crash, athletic events, and
thunderstorms are not verifiable medical emergencies.
     There is no final exam for this class.
Assignments
Discussions
     This semester will include a discussion for each module as well as an occasional
discussion for different essays, depending on what the class might be struggling with. For
some discussions, Canvas will divide the class into a number of randomly assigned
discussion groups. Discussions will be graded on a 4-point scale; two points for your
original submission and one point for each of your responses to two other students. You
must complete all three parts of the submission (original post and two responses) and meet
the minimum requirements to receive credit. If you submit a great original post and only
respond to one peer, you can only earn three points.
     2 Points: For most original discussions, your submission should be at least 200 words
long and make it clear to the instructor or TA that you have read the assigned reading for
that week. Detailed instructions are listed on each discussion assignment.
     2 Points: In addition, students must respond to the submissions of two other students.
These responses should be at least two sentences long and should move the conversation
forward. Responses of "I agree. This happened to me once." or similar short responses will
not receive credit. Maximum effort!
     Remember that these word limits are articulated in order to help you understand the
minimum amount of effort required to avoid failing. They don’t represent the minimum
effort required to get an A!
Quizzes
     Each module also includes a quiz to help you review what we discussed in that module
and in the assigned reading. Quizzes are open book, so consider them more of a review than
a “test of knowledge”. Quizzes time out after 3 hours, so set aside an appropriate amount of
time to work through the quiz. It usually takes students less than an hour to complete the
quiz.
     The first essay module will discuss the writing conventions and process I expect from
you in this course. Not all of the information in this section will be new to everyone, but I
hope that each of you will get something out of this section.
     This module will also discuss plagiarism. I know you are each already familiar with how
to avoid plagiarism, but please be extra cautious in this class. Every semester I have had
students fail the class, receive zeros, and be referred to Student Judicial Services for
including content from other sources without proper citation. The process of finding,
documenting, and referring students who plagiarize takes a TON of my time, and I would
rather spend that time working with students to improve their writing than working with
you to create a black mark on your permanent academic record. Avoid plagiarism and we
will both enjoy the class more!
Essays
                                                                                              4


     Students will complete three essays and one optional essay revision. Each essay will be
evaluated using the traditional undergraduate letter grade scale listed above (A – F).
Writing your essay at the last minute usually results in a poor grade. Each essay is intended
to help you focus on a different writing skill while reviewing the course material. The first
essay will focus on using evidence to support your argument, the second on structuring
your paper, and the third on grammar and general writing skills.
     For the first essay, for example, 80% of your grade will be based on whether you include
two well formatted APA quotations and two well formatted citations that use paraphrasing.
The other 20% I will determine by the quality of your writing according to these criteria:
         1. Grammar and spelling
         2. The clarity of thought demonstrated in your essay
         3. Your use of resources (including citation)
         4. The structure of the essay and how well you followed writing conventions
         5. The overall quality of the essay
     The first two essays will include a research/preparatory step, the submission of your
draft, and a peer review component. The third essay only includes a draft submission; no
preparatory step or peer review. The fourth essay is an optional substantial revision of one
of your other three essays, using the feedback from your peers, the TAs, and me.
     In addition to these steps, your essay will be sent through Turnitin. I STRONGLY
encourage you to review the Turnitin score and address any issues before the submission is
due. I use the Turnitin score as an indicator of potential problems; Turnitin will highlight
what it thinks are problematic areas, and I typically take a closer look and decide if I agree.
If you choose not to review these highlighted areas and either leave a note explaining why it
isn’t a problem or to make a change and address the issue, you run the risk of failing the
assignment and receiving a referral to Student Conduct and Academic Integrity. Most people
never have a problem with this but use the tool to your advantage to help you avoid
plagiarism!
Essay Topics
     The essay topics are selected to encourage you to synthesize the materials in the
modules. My hope is you will reflect on what you learned in each group of modules and
build on those ideas to develop an essay that addresses the prompt. The prompt is designed
to get you thinking about the topic, but I hope you will take your own personal experiences,
undergraduate major, and future career goals to decide how to take the information in the
modules and make it more interesting to you (and me!)
     1. First Essay Prompt: Information and communication technology (ICT) is a term
         used to describe the variety of different tools we use to communicate with each
         other. These tools include mobile devices, laptops, the Internet and everything the
         Internet makes possible from social media to self-driving cars. Why is information
         and communication technology important now and into the future?
             a. The main goal of this essay is for you to demonstrate your skill in using
                  evidence to support an argument. I often see student essays that talk about
                  "the explosion of the Internet" or how we can learn anything at "the touch of
                  a button" (avoid both of these expressions!). What these students really
                  mean to do is to offer specific examples of the number of people who have
                  Internet access now as compared to ten years ago, or to discuss the
                  reliability of information you can find from a specific source, such as
                  Wikipedia, and both the positive and negative aspects of that easy
                                                                                                5


               access. Essay 1 will focus on using evidence to “show” your reader that
               something is true rather than “tell” your reader it is true.
           b. The essay 1 module tells you how to cite outside sources as well as the how
               to cite the course modules both in text and in your reference page, so make
               sure you pay attention to that information!
           c. Essay 1 will include a peer review component.
   2. Second Essay Prompt: Why is the organization, management, preservation, and
       access to information important?
           a. Essay two helps you focus on the structure of your essay. The use of
               introductory and concluding paragraphs, as well as the appropriate use and
               construction of paragraphs are the main goals of this essay.
           b. Use the Librarianship, Archives and Preservation, Museums and
               Conservation, and Records Management modules as the foundation of your
               essay. You do not need to cite or refer to all of them, but your writing should
               reflect a synthesis of the ideas in these modules.
           c. Feel free to use any current events, personal experiences, or other ideas to
               make this essay your own. The prompt allows you to use a number of
               different lenses. For example; are the activities listed in the prompt
               important to a functioning democracy, business success, a professional
               sports organization, cultural heritage, or fighting oppression? Any one of
               these topics should give you plenty of material to discuss in five pages, and
               there are a lot of other possible directions to take this essay.
           d. Essay two will also be peer reviewed.
   3. Third Essay Prompt: Your Choice
           a. For the last essay, choose any topic we have touched on in class and examine
               this topic in depth. I encourage you to focus your investigation on a topic
               related to your major or to your future career. For example, in the past I
               have had students who heard about this “blockchain stuff” and used this
               essay as an opportunity to learn more about it, especially from a security
               and privacy point of view. I have also had students decide to conduct a
               competitive intelligence report on a company they were hoping to work for.
           b. The third essay will focus on grammar, colloquialisms, ambiguous pronouns,
               and other language conventions. See the module for details on the language
               and tone I am looking for you to avoid in your essay.
           c. As with essays one and two, use the modules as a foundation for your essay
               (citing appropriately), but feel free to include current events, information
               from your major, or anything else you find relevant or interesting.
   4. Fourth Essay: Revision
           a. This is an optional assignment; if you don’t turn it in, you will earn whatever
               grade Canvas has listed for you at the end of the semester. If you would like
               to earn a higher grade, you can choose one of your earlier essays and revise
               it. The highest grade toward that assignment will be counted as your final
               grade. For example, if you earn a B+ on Essay Two and submit a revised
               version of that essay and earn an A, your grade for Essay Two will be an “A”.
               Your revision should represent a substantial effort; it should be very easy for
               me to tell what changes you have made.
Essay Format
                                                                                              6


     Remember to include a title page and bibliography for each essay. These pages DO NOT
count toward the five-page minimum. Title pages should include your name, the date, the
number and title of your essay, and the class number and section. Your essay must be
submitted to Canvas as a word doc, and the file name needs to start with your last name. For
example, my first essay would be BlahaEssay1.doc. Without this title page and these naming
conventions, your essay may not be graded! I typically download all of the essays and run
them through the plagiarism checker, so an essay titled “essay2.doc” will get tossed in the
virtual circular file. A pdf will not be graded, you will receive a zero on the assignment.
     You must cite all sources within the essay and provide complete citation information in
a bibliography page, including any module readings or the online lecture. Students caught
plagiarizing will suffer strict academic consequences. All citations should use APA format.
For more information on APA, please see the Purdue University OWL
guide: http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/
     All essays will be submitted to Canvas and will be passed through Turnitin or another
plagiarism check software. The results of this software analysis are not the only method I
use to determine whether something is plagiarized. As I said earlier, plagiarism is my least
favorite thing to deal with in this course. Avoid it!
     The essay requirements include a five-page minimum, which means exactly that; if your
essay is 4 ¾ pages long, you don’t receive credit! Make sure you exceed the minimum and
save us both some frustration. If you expand the margins and increase the point size from
the word defaults and more than double spaced in order to take up more space, you won’t
receive credit. Don’t leave it up to me, write the full amount and make us both happy!
Essay Submission
     Submit all assignments using Canvas. Assignments submitted via email will not be
counted (I lose track of them – I get hundreds of emails a day, so I ask that you use Canvas
both for communicating with me and submitting your assignments so we both have a
record).
     A tutorial for submitting documents is located
here: http://edutech.ctl.utexas.edu/submitting-assignments/
     All essays must be in Microsoft word format, saved as .doc or .docx. 11-point font
(whatever the default is for Word, usually Cambria), double spaced with one-inch margins. I
personally prefer open source software, but Canvas and Turnitin work best with Microsoft.
Peer Review
     I will use Canvas to assign peer reviews for the first and second essays.
     This peer review process is important not only because it gives you the opportunity to
help your classmate improve their writing, but it also helps you improve your own critical
thinking and writing skills by critically analyzing your peer’s work. More details on the
specific expectations for each peer review will be included with each assignment.
     The way Canvas handles peer-review does not allow for the reviewer to receive points
for their effort (madness!). For the first essay I will include a separate assignment called
“Essay 1 Peer Review” that does not allow you to submit anything. Please understand this is
just for me to keep track of your peer review efforts in a transparent way – I want you to be
able to see that you have earned these points, and to be able to contact me if you have any
questions about your grade.
     The details of the peer review process for the second essay is described in Canvas.
Plagiarism
                                                                                             7


     I have already discussed plagiarism and we will cover it more closely during the
semester, but I thought it was important to include this text from Undergraduate Studies:
     Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is
considered plagiarism, a serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe
penalties. Copying someone else’s work, buying a paper and submitting it as your own,
copying and pasting text (even with changes), or borrowing images from an online source,
are some examples of plagiarism. Even if you plagiarize accidentally, you can be held
responsible and penalized.
     Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional.
When you are unsure about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor (who is
already an expert in the discipline) what is appropriate in the context of your assignment.
Consultants at The University Writing Center can also help you determine whether you are
citing sources correctly—and they have helpful guides online for using direct
quotations and paraphrasing. Reviewing those skills will help you feel confident that you
are handling sources professionally in your writing.
     You can read the University’s definition of plagiarism and other forms of academic
dishonesty in Sec. 11–402 of the Student Conduct Code. For more information, visit
the Dean of Students’ site.
Resources
Style Manuals
     Students will need to cite all sources for their essays in APA format. Purdue University
Online Writing Lab (OWL) offers a great overview on how to do
this.http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl Style manuals are located under Research and
Citation.
U.T. Writing Resources
     You are fortunate to attend the University of Texas, where you have access to one of the
largest research libraries in the world! Take advantage of all the wonderful resources
available through the U.T. system.
     • Undergraduate Writing Center – located in FAC 211
     • UT Library Online's (UT LOL) homepage – You can find library information,
         resources, and receive virtual assistance from a reference librarian!
     • Full text articles and essays – Databases offering a plethora of articles and essays,
         available in both in HTML and .pdf format and from many disciplines
     • Social Sciences Citation Index – An outstanding resource for finding articles and
         information on citation rates for many articles
     • Databases arranged by subject – You can locate articles within specific disciplines.
Other Writing Resources
     •   The Citation Machine – A free Web site that can translate citation information into
         proper format for both APA and MLA style. A helpful and time-saving resource.
     •   Online Writing Lab – Purdue University provides an excellent online writing lab,
         including information about avoiding plagiarism, citing resources, and avoiding
         grammatical errors.
                                                                                              8


University Policies
Academic Integrity
    Please abide by the University’s policy on academic integrity. All work you submit must
be your own. "Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating and plagiarism...
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. University policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced." From: The
University of Texas: General Information, Appendix C.
Special Needs
    The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. To determine if you qualify, please
contact the Dean of Students at 471-6259; 471-4641 TTY. If they certify your needs, we will
work with you to make appropriate arrangements.
Religious or Holy Day Observance
    "A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the
absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence.”
(http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi04-05/ch4/ch4g.html)
Email
    “Electronic mail (e-mail), like postal mail, is a mechanism for official University
communication to students. The University will exercise the right to send e-mail
communications to all students, and the University will expect that e-mail communications
will be received and read in a timely manner.”
(http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi04-05/app/appn.html). Both the
instructor and the TA will reply to student emails within 24 hours on weekdays and 48
hours on weekends barring a rare and extenuating circumstance.
    I look forward to working with you all this semester. If you have any questions,
comments, or concerns, do not hesitate to email me!
                                                                                              9
