Summer 2019                          ME n330 Fluid Mechanics                      Unique # 76505
                                           Course Syllabus
Instructor:             Dr. Raghav Mahalingam
                        ASE 4.124
                        Email: raghavmahalingam@austin.utexas.edu
                        Office hours: By Appointment
Teaching Assistant: TBD
Text:                   Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics, 7th edition, by Munson, Young, and
                        Okiishi, John Wiley and Sons, 2013.
Additional reading: Fundamentals of Aerodynamics, 4th, 5th or 6th ed.
                        John D. Anderson, McGraw Hill
Web Page:               Canvas (canvas.utexas.edu). All course timelines and material can be
                        accessed from the calendar page for the course on Canvas.
Prerequisites:          M 427K (Advanced Calculus), ME 326 (Thermodynamics), EM 306S
                        (Statics and Dynamics). Minimum grade in each is C-.
Co-requisite:           ME 130L Fluid Mechanics Laboratory
Grading:                1 Midterm                     30%
                        1 Final                       50%
                        10 Homework                   20%
                            Letter grades will be assigned as follows:
       Score     90-100    85-89     80-84    75-79    70-74   65-69    60-64   50-59     <50
      Grade        A         B+        B       B-       C+       C        C-      D         F
Topics:
We will follow a lecture plan as outlined below. Depending on how the semester progresses,
there may be deviations from this plan. The dates on Canvas will reflect the most current
situation, so please make sure to check Canvas on a regular basis.


Policy regarding unethical conduct:
Zero tolerance policy towards unethical conduct in exams and homework. It is OK to discuss
homework problems. However, the work you submit in your name MUST be yours! Persons not
complying with these guidelines will be subject to disciplinary action.
Reading Assignments: Reading assignments should be completed before class. Lectures will
focus on the more difficult aspects of the material assuming that you have learned the
fundamentals from your reading.
Homework: Homework has to be submitted on Canvas. Late homework will not be accepted,
unless given permission prior to submission deadline.
Goal: Fluid Mechanics is a fundamental topic in mechanical engineering. The goal of this course
         is to give you an understanding of the physical mechanisms involved in fluid flows,
         including forces generated by flow interactions with solid bodies. Predictions of flows and
         resulting forces is a key part of this course, i.e. this is a problem solving course.
Knowledge, skills and abilities students should have before entering this course:
Knowledge and skill to understand and use differential and integral calculus
Understand the meaning of physical quantities employed in Thermodynamics
Ability to apply basic laws of Thermodynamics to compute various items
Understand the meaning of physical quantities employed in Newtonian Mechanics
Ability to apply basic laws of Newtonian Mechanics to compute various quantities
Knowledge, skills and abilities students should gain from this course:
Knowledge of physical quantities important to fluid flow
Ability to apply fundamental laws in control volume form to engineering situations
Knowledge of fluid flows in pipes and around objects
Ability to apply basic laws of fluid mechanics to compute various quantities
Impact on subsequent courses in curriculum:
Knowledge needed to understand heat transfer, design of thermal systems, and all other Thermal Fluid
Systems area courses
ABET EC2000 Program outcomes achieved:
Ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying principles of
engineering, science, and mathematics.
Ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies.
Ability to use the techniques, skills, and modern engineering tools necessary for engineering practice.
Special Notes:
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259,
471-4241 TDD or the College of Engineering Director of Students with Disabilities at 471-4382.
