                    ANT 324L: Development, Security, and Society
                    Jason Cons: SAC 5.138; jasoncons@utexas.edu; 512.232.3832
                           Tuesdays & Thursdays: 12:30-2:00 PM, RLP 0.112
                       Office Hours: Tuesdays, 2:00-4:00 pm or by appointment
So if, as it seems, talk about security is often unintelligible, then perhaps we need to ask after the
conditions of this unintelligibility. — Mark Neocleous, Critique of Security
This course provides students with analytic tools to make sense of the relationship between
security, international development, and society. Specifically, it makes two different inquiries
into this relationship. The first is historical. This course investigates a specific moment: the
period following the Cold War and extending to the present when meaningful distinctions
between the notion of “development” and “security” began to break down. To this end, the
course explores the various dynamics of security paradigms such as “human security,”
“environmental security,” “the development-security nexus” and other terms that describe a
period in which the question of security is increasingly focused on individuals, as opposed to on
states. The course explores the implications of this shift from state to individual in a range of
different contemporary contexts. Second, this course explores debates that have emerged in
critical security studies about what this shift means and what it helps us to understand about the
relationships between states and individuals, between security and development, and between
the Global North and the Global South. Through a series of ethnographic studies, the course
explores the concept of “empowerment” in development, new forms of humanitarian
                                                                                                      1


intervention, debates around climate security, vital-systems security, the architecture of
security, and more. In doing so, the course introduces students to a series of key sites where
new forms of security, insecurity, and policing measures are being tested and contested around
the globe.
                                      Course Teaching Assistant
•    Kenza Yousfi: kenzayousfi@utexas.edu
                                       Assignments and Grades
The following is a breakdown of how I will evaluate your performance in the class. More in-depth
descriptions, rubrics, and prompts will be provided with each assignment.
•    Class Participation: 15% — Active, informed, and respectful participation in section discussions and
     small group work
•    Framing Papers: 20% — You will write four brief framing papers over the course of the semester.
•    Mid-Term Exam: 30% — There will be a mid-term exam covering core concepts in the course.
•    Final Project: 35% — There will be a final paper assignment that asks you to bring course materials to
     the analysis of a case. The case materials will be provided by the instructor.
I use the following cutoffs for grade assignments:
Grade Cutoffs
         A                 94%
         A-                90%
         B+                87%
         B                 84%
         B-                80%
         C+                77%
         C                 74%
         C-                70%
         D                 65%
         F                 <65%
Course Format
This course combines lectures, discussions, and small group work. We will cover a range of different
materials in a number of different ways. I expect your full, active, and professional participation in class
both class and sections. This means:
. Attending all class meetings
. Showing up on time (persistently showing up late will negatively affect your participation grade)
. Respectfully engaging with the course instructor, TA, and your peers
. Being responsible for all of the assigned reading and materials: this means that if you miss a class, it is
   your responsibility to do the reading and get class notes from one of your peers
Learning Objectives/ Goals:
                                                                                                              2


Upon completion, students will be able to:
   • Understand and explain the origins of key debates around contemporary security
   • Explain a series of key theoretical and analytical concepts central to the anthropology of security
   • Identify and analyze key challenges and complexities related to addressing speciﬁc problems
   • in the anthropology of security
   • Analyze and understand different research approaches to the study of security and insecurity
   • (e.g., ethnographic vs. macro-political analysis)
   • Communicate clearly about contemporary relationships between security, development, and society
       in both spoken and written forms.
                                       Part 1: Opening Salvos
Week 1: Course introduction
January 22: Introduction: What is Development? What is Security? and What is Society?
January 24: What is an Anthropology of Security?—Split Discussion
   • Daniel Goldstein. 2010. “Toward a Critical Anthropology of Security.” Current
       Anthropology.
   • Limor Samimian-Darash and Meg Stalcup. 2017. “Anthropology of Security and Security
       in Anthropology: Cases of Counterterrorism in the United States.” Anthropological
       Theory.
                     Part 2: Historicizing the Present—Human Security
Week 2: Histories of Human Security
January 29: The Political History of Structural Adjustment
   • Philip McMichael. 2012. “Instituting the Globalization Project.” In Development and Social
       Change: A Global Perspective. Sage.
January 31: The Decade of Humanitarian Failure
   • GREEN GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE JANUARY 30 BY 11:59PM
   • Kaldor, M. 2007. “A Decade of Humanitarian Intervention, 1991-2000.” In Human
       Security. Polity
Week 3: The “Human Security” Paradigm
February 5: The Call for Human Security
   • Amartya Sen. 1999. “Introduction” and “The Perspective of Freedom.” In Development as
       Freedom. Anchor.
   • Haq, M. 1995. “New Imperatives of Human Security. In Reflections on Human
       Development. Oxford.
                                                                                                         3


February 7: Who is the “Human” in Human Security?
   • RED GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE FEBRUARY 6 BY 11:59PM
   • Mark Duffield. “Human Security and Global Danger.” In Development, Security, and
       Unending War. Polity.
       Part 3: Theorizing Security (or What We Talk about When We Talk Security)
Week 4: Security Frameworks
February 12: Biopower/Biopolitics
   • Michel Foucault. 2003. “Lecture 11: March 17, 1976.” In Society Must Be Defended.
       Picador.
February 14: Security as Speech Act
   • BLUE GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE FEBRUARY 13 BY 11:59PM
   • Barry Buzan (et al). “Security Analysis: Conceptual Apparatus.” In Security: A New
       Framework for Analysis. Reinner.
Week 5: Security/Secrecy/Affect
February 19: Security as/and Secrecy
   • Joe Masco. 2010. “‘Sensitive but Unclassified’: Secrecy and the Counterterrorist State.”
       Public Culture.
February 21: Security as Affect and Ritual Practice—Split Discussion
   • GREEN GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE FEBRUARY 20 BY 11:59PM
   • Deepa Kumar. 2017. “See Something, Say Something: Security Rituals, Affect, and US
       Nationalism from the Cold War to the War on Terror.”
   • Joe Masco. 2014. “Biosecurity Noir: WMDs in a World Without Borders.” In The Theater
       of Operations: National Security Affect from the Cold War to the War on Terror.
Week 6: Anticipating the Future
February 26: Anticipation as a Mode of Governance
   • Vincanne Adams, Michelle Murphy, and Adele Clarke. 2009. “Anticipation:
       Technoscience, Life, Affect, Temporality.”
   • Ben Anderson. 2010. “Preemption, Precaution, Preparedness: Anticipatory Action and
       Future Geographies.” Progress in Human Geography.
February 28: Emergencies and Vital Systems—Split Discussion
   • RED GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE FEBRUARY 27 BY 11:59PM
   • MID-TERM EXAM DISTRIBUTED: DUE MARCH 7 AT 11:59PM
                                                                                              4


  •   Stephen Collier and Andrew Lakoff. 2015. “Vital Systems Security: Reflexive Biopolitics
      and the Government of Emergency.” Theory, Culture, and Society.
  •   Jerome Whittington. 2016. “Modernist Infrastructure and the Vital Systems Security of
      Water: Singapore’s Pluripotent Climate Futures.” Public Culture.
 Part 4: Locating Security—Development, Empowerment, and the Fortune at the
                                  Bottom of the Pyramid
Week 7: The Concept of “Empowerment”
March 5: Cultures of Market Led Development
  • Julia Elyachar. 2002. Empowerment Money: The World Bank, Non-Governmental
      Organizations, and the Value of Culture in Egypt.” Public Culture.
March 7: Empowerment as Development
  • Ardhana Sharma. 2006. “Crossbreeding Institutions, Breeding Struggle: Women’s
      Empowerment, Neoliberal Governmentality, and State (re)Formation in India. Cultural
      Anthropology.
Week 8: Fortunes at the Bottom of the Pyramid
March 12: Social Business—Money from the Poor?
  • CK Prahalad. 2010. “The Market at the Bottom of the Pyramid.” In The Fortune at the
      Bottom of the Pyramid: Eradicating Poverty through Profits. Wharton.
  • Muhammad Yunus. 1999. “A Bank for the Poor is Born.” In Banker to the Poor: Micro-
      Lending and the Battle Against World Poverty. Public Affairs.
March 14: Cracks in the Façade—Split Discussion
  • BLUE GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE MARCH 13 BY 11:59PM
  • Lamia Karim. 2011. “The Social Life of Debt.” In Microfinance and Its Discontents: Women
      in Debt in Bangladesh.
  • Jason Cons and Kasia Paprocki. “Contested Credit Landscapes: Microcredit, Self-Help and
      Self-Determination in Rural Bangladesh.” Third World Quarterly.
                   Part 5: Locating Security—New Humanitarianisms
Week 9: The Humanitarian Present
March 26: Humanitarian Management in the Development Security Nexus
  • Vanessa Pupavac. 2012. “Global Disaster Management and Therapeutic Governance of
      Communities.” In Development Dialogue—The End of the Development-Security Nexus?
      The Rise of Global Disaster Management.
                                                                                              5


   •     Mark Duffield. 2012. “Risk Management and the Bunkering of the Aid Industry.” In
         Development Dialogue—The End of the Development-Security Nexus? The Rise of Global
         Disaster Management.
March 28: Complex Emergency on the Ground—Split Discussion
   • GREEN GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE MARCH 27 BY 11:59PM
   • Elizabeth Dunn. 2012. “The Chaos of Humanitarian Aid: Adhocracy in the Republic of
         Georgia.” Humanity.
   • Vivian Choi. 2015. “Anticipatory States” Tsunami, War, and Insecurity in Sri Lanka.”
         Cultural Anthropology.
Week 10: Military Humanitarianisms
April 2: “Soft” Power
   • Inderpal Grewal. 2017. “American Humanitarian Citizenship: The ‘Soft’ Power of Empire.”
         In Saving the Security State: Exceptional Citizens in Twenty-First Century America. Duke
         University Press.
April 4: “Soft” Power (but with Guns)
   • RED GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE APRIL 3 BY 11:59PM
   • Peter Singer. 2010. “Strange Brew: Private Military Contractors and Humanitarians.” In
         Disaster and the Politics of Intervention. Columbia.
               Part 6: Locating Security—Environmental & Climate Security
Week 11: Securing Mother Nature
April 9: Environmental Violence
   • Excerpt: Robert Kaplan. 1994. “The Coming Anarchy.” The Atlantic.
   • Nancy Peluso and Michael Watts. 2001. “Violent Environments.” In Violent Environments.
         Cornell.
April 11: Securitizing Climate—Split Discussion
   • BLUE GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE APRIL 10 BY 11:59PM
   • Carol Farbotko. 2010. “Wishful Sinking: Disappearing Islands, Climate refugees and
         Cosmopolitan Experimentation.” Asia Pacific Viewpoint.
   • Christian Parenti. 2011. “Last Call for Illusions.” In Tropic of Chaos: Climate Change and
         the New Geography of Violence.
Week 12: Development as Climate Security
April 16: Thinking through Resilience and Adaptation—Split Discussion
                                                                                                  6


   •    Ben Orlove. 2009. “The Past, the Present and some Possible Futures of Adaptation.” In
        Adapting to Climate Change: Thresholders, Values, Governance.
   •    Jeremy Walker and Melinda Cooper. 2011. “Genealogies of Resilience: From Systems
        Ecology to the Political Economy of Crisis Adaptation.” Security Dialogue
April 18: Troubling the (Climate) Future—Split Discussion
   • GREEN GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE APRIL 17 BY 11:59PM
   • Kasia Paprocki. 2019. “All That is Solid Melts into the Bay: Anticipatory Ruination and
        Climate Change Adaptation.” Antipode.
   • Jason Cons. 2018. “Staging Climate Security: Resilience and Heterodystopia in the
        Bangladesh Borderlands.” Cultural Anthropology.
                    Part 7: Locating Security—Architectures of Security
Week 13: Frontier Architectures
April 23: Vertical Politics
   • Eyal Weizman. Preface and Introduction. In Hollow Land: Israel’s Architecture of
        Occupation. Verso
April 25: Counterterror in Non-Places
   • RED GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE APRIL 24 BY 11:59PM
   • Mark Maguire and Réka Pétercsák. 2018. “Airports, From Vital Systems to Nervous
        Systems.” In The Routledge Handbook of Anthropology and the City.
Week 14: Walls
April 30: Why Want Walls?
   • Wendy Brown. 2010. “Desiring Walls.” In Walled States, Waning Sovereignty. Zone
   • Reece Jones. 2016. “Borders and Walls: Do Barriers Deter Unauthorized Migration?”
        Migration Policy Institute.
May 2: Walls versus Walling
   • RED GROUP FRAMING PAPERS DUE May 1 BY 11:59PM
   • TBD
                                       Course Conclusion
Week 15: The Final Week
May 7: Where Do We Go from Here?
   • FINAL PAPER ASSIGNMENT DISTRIBUTED
                                                                                              7


May 9: Conclusion
                                     Course Policies and Procedures
Course readings and syllabus
I believe that a course and its instructor should be adaptable. This means that readings and course
activities may change to suite course developments, forward fruitful discussions, or to address student
interests. For this reason, the readings in this syllabus should be regarded as provisional. For any given
week, the readings will be available on Canvas.
While readings may, from time to time change, the course policies and procedures listed in this syllabus
will not. It is your responsibility to know them.
Reading Policy
All of the course readings for this class can be found on Canvas.
In some classes, we will spend significant time discussing particular readings. In others, we will treat them
as background. In all cases, if there is something you don’t understand in the material, it is your
responsibility to make sure that you gain an understanding of it by asking questions and raising issues.
You are expected to arrive at class ready to discuss any and all of the required course readings.
Policy on Plagiarism
I strongly believe that learning is a collaborative venture. I encourage you to study with your peers, meet
to discuss readings with them, and, on particular assignments, to work together with them. That said, the
work that you produce for this course must be your own. There are no exceptions to this rule and no
legitimate excuses for violating it.
In event that you fail to acknowledge others' work or that you are caught overtly plagiarizing from online
or written sources, you will receive a zero on the assignment and may be subject to disciplinary
procedures. See below (following course readings) for links to the University Policy on Academic integrity
Email and Office Hours policy
Please, feel free to contact me and/or your TA via email. I prefer that you contact me directly rather than
through Canvas. Please also keep in mind that we are as busy as you. Make sure you consult the course
syllabus, other handouts, your peers and the course Canvas site before sending an e-mail. Note that e-
mail should not be seen as an alternative to meeting with me or your TA during office hours. Nor should
e-mail be used as a mechanism to receive private tutorials or to explain material that was covered in
classes you missed (those are your responsibility to obtain from your peers). We will endeavor to respond
within 24 hours, though we do not respond to email on the weekends or after 5pm, so plan ahead.
Contacting us the night before an assignment is due is, by definition, too late.
My office hours are your time and you are welcome to drop by at any time during them. Because, at
particular times in the semester, many of you will want to see me, I do recommend setting up an
appointment ahead of time. Also, if you have a regular class conflict during my office hours, I am more
than happy to set up an appointment with you at another time, however, I ask that you do not just drop
by my or your TA’s office outside of office hours without checking first. We may be there, but we will be
working on other things with pressing deadlines.
                                                                                                             8


Late Policy
I adhere to the following late policy on assignments:
.  Framing Papers are due by 6am the day of class. Late assignments will not be accepted.
.  Assignments turned in up to 12 hours late will be penalized by 1/3 of a letter grade.
.  Assignments turned in between 12 and 24 hours late will be penalized a full letter grade.
.  Assignments turned in between 24 and 48 hours late will be penalized two full letter grades.
.  Assignments more than 48 hours late will not be accepted.
Writing Policy
While this is not a writing flag course, there are assignments that will require that you write and
communicate clearly.
     •    I have extensively detailed my policy on citation and bibliography on my website:
          http://www.jasoncons.net/formatting-and-referencing-papers.html
     •    I have also provided advice for student writers that is applicable not just in my courses, but in any
          course you are likely to take as an undergraduate:
          http://www.jasoncons.net/advice-on-writing.html
Attendance Policy
Attendance at all course and section meetings is required. There will be an attendance sheet available
when you come into class.
You are permitted two unexplained course absences per semester. After that, each absence will reduce
your overall participation grade by 3.33% (i.e., by 1/3 of a letter grade). If you have a legitimate reason to
miss class, it is your responsibility to let me and your TA know by email before class.
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. We will develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are
listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
     learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
     isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
                                                                                                              9


•    You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
     teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
•    You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
•    Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
     and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
•    You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
     excluded.
•    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
     standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make
appropriate changes to my records.
                                UNIVERSITY POLICIES & RESOURCES
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed
six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259
(voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
• Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
• Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
• Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.”
                                                                                                             10


This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the following
web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning,
use these to help you succeed in your classes
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage
of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing.
The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance.
http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and
prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth
and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
                                    Important Safety Information
BCAL
                                                                                                          11


If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                           12
