           Adv 373 ( 06625)/PR 377K(07085) – Integrated Brand Promotion Campaigns
                         Spring 2020 – M 11:00 am- 2:00 pm – BMC 4.212
Dr. Isabella Cunningham
Isabella.cunningham@austin.utexas.edu
BMC 4.330
Office Hours M 9:30 – 11:00 or by appointment
Teaching Assistant: Sally Lim
h.sally.lim@utexas.edu
Office hours:
BMC 4th floor carrels
Course Description:
   ADV 373 and PR 377K are the capstone courses in the undergraduate advertising and public relations
programs. This class integrates all of the course work in both majors and is the course in which students
learn the most and have the most fun working in agency teams on a real project.
   In order to provide students with an appreciation of what should be included in an integrated brand
promotion (IBP) campaign plan, a major campaign development project and a series of individual and
task group projects are used during the semester. The major focus of the course is on the development
of an IBP campaign plan for a real client.
   In this class, students work as members of agency account teams. Experiencing the rewards and
learning to cope with the problems of working in small groups is an important part of the class. A set of
task group assignments focusing on various aspects of campaign planning is spread across the semester.
Advertising and public relations are all-weather, team sports.
   In addition to an emphasis on developing and presenting a complete campaign, the course is given
direction and supplemented through the use of client meetings, lectures, handouts, and recommended
readings.
   Finally, note that this course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent investigation
and presentation of your own work.
Course Objectives:
   The objective of the course is to provide students with an in-depth understanding of the process of
planning, presenting and implementing complete IBP campaigns. The emphasis in the course is on each


individual learning-by-doing. That is, by working with other students to develop and present a complete
campaign for a real client.
   Secondary objectives of the course are to increase each student’s level of competence and
professionalism. Specifically, the course is designed to help students sharpen the following skills:
strategic and critical thinking; planning; organizational; written and verbal communication; time
management; interpersonal; and, task group (bringing out the best in others in a diverse group work
setting).
Course Strategy
   To achieve the course objectives, students will utilize:
       • A major account team campaign development project which
         mirrors the work environment on both the client and agency
         sides of the advertising and public relations business.
       • Task group assignments and crash projects to help focus on key
         components of the strategic planning process.
        • Supplemental readings, to provide a common framework to structure understanding of the
        strategic IBP planning process.
Required Text
   Jon Steel, Perfect Pitch: The Art of Selling Ideas and Winning News Business (AdBooks, 2007).
Available from Amazon.com for $16.80 new or $12.60 used + shipping.
Student Evaluation
   Each student’s performance will be assessed by evaluating:
      • Their problem solving and applications skills through assignments,
       crash projects and research projects;
      • Their account team’s performance based on their plans book, team presentations,
         and call reports; and,
      • Their contribution to team performance through peer evaluations.
   Each student’s letter grade at the end of the course is determined by performance in six areas. The
six areas and the relative importance of each are:
                             • Client campaign project . . . . . 45%*


                                 • Crash projects1 (?) . . . . . . . . . .   15*
                                 • Perfect Pitch exam . . . . . . . . . .    15
                                 • IBP presentation . . . . . . . . . . . .  10*
                                 • Individual assignments (3) . . . .        10
                                 • Class participation . . . . . . . . . .    5
                                                                            100%
                          *Individual grades adjusted to reflect peer evaluations.
    At the end of the semester a weighted points total will be calculated for each student. Letter grades
using a +/- scale will be determined on a relative performance basis, that is, each student’s points total
in relation to all other students’ totals.
Special Notes
    Our client has volunteered their time and assistance to contribute to the educational goals of our
department. All materials furnished by our client are to be treated as strictly confidential. The plans,
ideas and other materials prepared for our client become their property and may be used at their
discretion (see required release form).
    The advertising and public relations business is characterized by attention to details and deadlines.
All written work must be prepared using a personal computer and a high quality printer. Late work is not
accepted for any reason whatsoever. Demonstrating creativity, enthusiasm and hard work should be
each student’s objective during this course and beyond.
Course Outline
    This tentative course outline indicates the dates when assignments are due, topics will be discussed,
client meetings will be held, and so on. If changes in the schedule are necessary, students will be held
responsible for such changes, which will be announced in class.
Date               Class Activities/Assignments
1/27               Introduction/orientation/team building exercise
                   Handouts: Crash Project #1 – due 1/28 by 5 pm
                   Crash Project #2 – due 1/31 by 5 pm
                   Other handouts: List of questions on Steele’s book
                   January 27 MEMO; January 21 MEMO.
2/3                Steel Chapters 1-3 (read/discussion)
1
   Crash projects are tasks you must respond to under time pressure. Typically, they involve rescheduling other
activities already planned or underway. Three levels of crash projects will be utilized: RED! -- your response is due
in 24 hours; Pink -- your response is due in 48 hours; and, Amber -- your response is due in 72 hours. Murphy’s
Law of Crash Projects: They always come at the time when you are most busy with regular stuff.


     Client Orientation/assignment
     Research discussion- account planners identification
2/10 Crash project #3-due Thursday 2/13 by 5 pm
     Steel Chapters 4-9
     January 27 MEMO – Group work & leadership
     Peer evaluation MEMO & example – due Monday 2/17 (in class)
2/17 Essay exam on Steele’s book
     Work on primary research – planning and development
2/24 Research presentation based on Crash Project #3
     Form Agency Groups
     Assignment #1 due in class
3/2  Initial consideration of IBP campaign planning
     Foundations of integrated business proposition
3/9  Situation analysis reports and assessment
     Presentation on presentations
     Assignment #2 – due in class
     SPRING BREAK
3/23 Agency IBP presentation
     Plansbooks
3/30 Online meetings with HD team – 15 minutes/group
4/6  Work on campaign (group meetings with Dr. Cunningham) per request
4/13 Individual account team meetings
4/27 Campaign development
5/4  Final client presentation-15 minutes each group+10 minutes Q&A
     (Pending client confirmation)
5/11 Assignment #3 – Postmortem and final peer evaluation


University Policy:
       1. All students must agree to read and abide by The University of Texas at Austin
           Policy on Academic Integrity:
           http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
           If you have any question about what constitutes plagiarism or any other form of
           scholastic dishonesty, ask me or any other member of the faculty. Students are
           responsible for their own conducts and for reporting any violations to their
           instructor or other members of the Stan Richards School faculty.
       2. University of Texas honor Code – The core values of The University of Texas at
           Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, individual opportunity, and leadership. Each
           member of The University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
           honesty, trust, fairness and respect toward peers and community.
       3. Document Disability Statement – The University of Texas at Austin provides upon
           request appropriate accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For
           more information contact Services for students with Disabilities at (512) 471-6951
           (voice or (512) 232-2937 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
       4. This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
           students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can
           expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects,
           and receive feedback from your instructor to improve your writing. You will also
           have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to
           read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion
           of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag courses meet the Core
           Communication objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
           Personal Responsibility established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
           Board.
       5. Religious Holy Days Observance Policy/ Military Duty/ Excused Absences – The
           Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a
           student from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations,
           for the observance of religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
           whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
           absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment
           from which the student is excused, within a reasonable period of time after the
           absence.
           If you are in the military and are called for duty for a short time, we will also work
           with you.
           Please read UT’s policy below:


   http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html-
   attendance
   The only other excused absence from class is for an official UT event that requires
   travel or missing a class (UT sports teams, other UT academic teams, TAG, PRSSA).
   You are required to contact Dr. Cunningham in advance to discuss the absence and
   provide necessary documentation.
6. Counseling and Mental Health Services – Taking care of your general well-being is
   an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing
   thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are
   options available for support:
   Visit: Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) M-F 8-5/ SSB 5th floor
   (512) 471-3515 – cmhc.utexas.edu
   CMHC Crisis line – 24/7 (512) 471-2255 cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
   CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is Abby Simpson, LCSW
   CMA 4.134 – (512) 471-7642. (Please leave a message if she is unavailable).
