                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:        SW 327                          Instructor: Rosalie Ambrosino, PhD
                                                       Email: rambrosino@utexas.edu
 Unique Number:        88685                           Office: SSW 3.104A
 Semester:             Summer 2019                     Phone: 210-241-0391
 Meeting Time/Place: MTWR 2-4 p.m.                     Office hours: M and R 12:30-1:45 p.m.
 Meeting Place:        SSW 2.118                       and by appointment
      HUMAN BEHAVIOR AND THE SOCIAL ENVIRONMENT
         (W- Fulfills the writing flag requirement; Required BSW Course)
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course explores the biopsychosocial and cultural functioning of human beings across the life
span using an ecological-systems lens and major developmental theories as a framework to guide
the processes of engagement, assessment, intervention, and evaluation. Using the generalist social
work lens, this course integrates content from other human behavior courses. The students will
gain an understanding of what physical, mental, social and economic justice hazards can
adversely impact individuals’ growth and development during their lifetime. Frameworks
incorporating an eco-systems/developmental perspective, including systems/ecological and
psychosocial (life span development) frameworks, are used to conceptualize stages of human
growth and development, with a primary focus on adolescence, early adulthood, the middle years,
and the aged adult within an intergenerational family context. The impacts of the family, social
groups, organizations, communities, and society on individuals during these stages of the life span
are also discussed.
This course emphasizes empirically based research reflecting a risk and resilience perspective in
making client assessments and recommending appropriate interventions. This contributes to a
social worker’s ability to understand and critically analyze the interactions among individuals,
families, groups, organizations, and communities.
Students will be able to understand how personal values are reflected in socio-cultural contexts,
such as culture, race and ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, age, class, and religion, and how
they can influence human behavior. Increasing access to resources, reducing risks, and
considering ethical dilemmas involved in dealing with human behavior are also considered.
Course prerequisites include Social Work 310 and 312 and either Psychology 304 (Child
Psychology) or Child Development 313 (Child Development). Social Work 325
                                                                                                    1


 (Foundations of Social Justice) is also required as part of this curriculum area and usually
 is taken concurrently with SW327.
 This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
 experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
 regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
 from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
 revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work.
 You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written
 work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications Objectives of Critical Thinking,
 Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
 Education Coordinating Board.
 II.      STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
 By the end of the course, the student will be able to:
 1) Explain the unique perspective that social work has in viewing the relationship between the
      individual person and environment in comparison to other helping professions;
 2) Explain and apply basic principles of learning theories and the systems/ecological
      and psychosocial frameworks and analyze individual, family, group, organizational,
      community, and societal dynamics from each of these perspectives;
 3) Describe biological, social, cultural, psychological, and spiritual aspects of
      adolescent, early adult, middle adult, and older adult developmental states within the
      context of the broader environment;
 4) Describe the dynamics of social groups, organizations, communities, and societies, and the
      ways that they can impact individual development and behavior;
 5) Explain ways that ethnicity, culture, gender, sexual orientation, class, disability, and other
      factors contribute to human development and their implications for social work practice
      in engagement, assessment, intervention, and evaluation;
 6) Describe relevant research and identify and conceptualize additional research needs
      relating to human behavior and the social environment;
 7) Apply information and theories related to human behavior and the social environment to life
      situations in a manner consistent with social work values and the promotion of social and
      economic justice;
 8) Use critical thinking skills in writing an academic literature review on a human
      development question of interest;
 9) Explain and apply basic principles of learning theories and the systems/ecological and
      psychosocial frameworks to guide the processes of engagement, assessment,
      interventions, and evaluation;
 10) Apply information and theories related to human behavior and the social environment to life
      situations in order to determine the ways social systems promote or deter people in
      maintaining or achieving health and well-being.
EPAS Competencies
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on Social
Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the UT SHSSW
engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s Educational
                                                                                                   2


Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of knowledge,
skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following competencies:
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 6.1: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other multidisciplinary theoretical frameworks to engage with clients and
constituencies.
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 7.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in the analysis of assessment data
from clients and constituencies.
Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 8.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in interventions with clients and
constituencies.
Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 9.2: Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social environment, person-in-
environment, and other interdisciplinary theoretical frameworks in evaluating practice with
individuals, families, and groups.
III.     TEACHING METHODS
This course is designed to provide the student with a meaningful learning environment that will
facilitate mastery of knowledge and skills in the area of human behavior in the social
environment. The class will be conducted using an active learning approach, an approach
asserting that the learning process is one in which reciprocity between the instructor and
student(s) is a necessity. Teaching methods include a combination of group discussion, small
group critique and feedback, audiovisual presentations, case study analyses, readings,
experiential exercises, and informal lecture. Students are expected to be open to learning and
actively engaged in class discussion and activities, to take appropriate personal risks, and to
demonstrate both critical thinking and self-reflection throughout the course. Classes are
designed to encourage student participation, input and discussion.
IV.      REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
Hutchison, E.D. (2017). Essentials of human behavior: Integrating person, environment, and the
         life course (2nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Additional readings from other books and journal articles are listed in the course schedule
section of the syllabus and posted on Canvas.
                                                                                                 3


V.        COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Your grade for this course will be based on the following requirements:
1. Concept papers: Students will write two 3-4 page concept papers during the semester,
   applying concepts covered in class and readings to various scenarios. See syllabus
   appendix for specific assignment guidelines. (20% of grade)
2. Case analysis: Each student will write an independent case analysis based on one of the case
   studies in the text designated by the instructor. This case study will be submitted in two
   installments, first in draft form. After receiving feedback, students will revise their drafts and
   combine them into a final case analysis due at the end of the semester. See syllabus appendix for
   specific assignment guidelines. (45% of grade)
3. Literature review matrix: Students will prepare a literature review matrix, summarizing at
   least 3 peer-reviewed journal articles that can be used to support the assessment portion of
   their case analysis. See syllabus appendix for specific assignment guidelines. (5% of grade)
4. Case presentation: Students will be assigned to small groups to develop and give a 30 minute
   presentation based on one of the case studies in the text. Dates of group presentations will
   depend on assigned cases. (10 percent of grade)
5. Final Exam: Students will complete a take-home final examination applying concepts
   learned in the course to a film viewed in class. See syllabus appendix for specific
   assignment guidelines. (10% of grade)
6. Class participation: Students will be expected to attend class regularly, participate
   actively in class discussion, and be an active member of their case presentation group.
   (10% of grade)
Summary of Semester Assignments and Grade Breakdown
         Assignment                                                 Date Due                   % of Grade
         Concept papers                                             June 13 and 20             20
         Literature review matrix                                   June 24                     5
         Case analysis/ Installment 1/draft                         June 27                    15
         Case analysis/ Installment 2/draft                         July 5                     15
         Case analysis/final submission                             July 13                    15
         Group case presentation                                    Depends on case            10
         Film application/take home final exam                      July 13                    10
         Participation                                              NA                          10
        TOTAL                                                                                  100 points
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and above                  A                74.0 to 76.999                    C
        90.0 to 93.999                  A-               70.0 to 73.999                    C-
        87.0 to 89.999                  B+               67.0 to 69.999                    D+
        84.0 to 86.999                  B                64.0 to 66.999                    D
        80.0 to 83.999                  B-               60.0 to 63.999                    D-
        77.0to 79.999                   C+               Below 60.0                        F
                                                                                                          4


VII.     CLASS POLICIES
1. Instructor Contact: If you wish to make an appointment to see me, cannot attend class, or
   have a question about the course, please call or text me at 210-241-0391 (cell) or come to my
   office hours. You can also send an email to me at rambrosino@utexas.edu. I check my e-mail
   and phone messages regularly and will respond as quickly as possible.
2. Attendance: This course is interactive in nature, with students learning from each other as
   well as from readings and other course assignments. It also is important for social work
   practitioners to be punctual in both attendance and in meeting deadlines. Therefore, class
   attendance is expected, as is submitting assignments on time. Students may miss two class
   periods without penalty. Those do not attend class on a regular basis (missing more than two
   classes without a valid excuse, e.g., medical documentation) or do not participate actively as a
   member of their case presentation group will receive a lower grade in the course. Two points
   will be deducted from your final grade for each class session missed beyond two. Your
   participation grade will also be impacted, since you cannot participate if you are not present.
3. Submission of Papers and Late Assignments: Assignments must be submitted on Canvas in
   word documents by 11:59 p.m. the day that an assignment is due. All assignments must be
   turned in on the due date. Changes in work schedules, personal celebrations, transportation
   problems, computer/ printing problems, etc. are not considered legitimate reasons for missing
   an assignment deadline. Late assignments will result in a deduction of 5% for each day it is
   late. Any legitimate adjustments in due dates must be discussed with the instructor at least 24
   hours PRIOR to the regularly scheduled due date unless there is a valid documented reason for
   not being able to meet this requirement.
4. APA & References: The School of Social Work uniformly requires APA editorial style as the
   standard format for all written assignments. Details of APA style are included in the
   Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association. Information on APA style and
   format can be found at the Learning Resource Center (LRC) in the School of Social Work and
   on the UT library website. Another excellent source is Purdue University’s Online Writing Lab
   (OWL). Appropriate referencing is required. Failure to use quotation marks for direct quotes
   or citations for indirect quotations and/or others’ ideas constitutes plagiarism and may result in
   receiving no credit for the assignment. All assignments in this course may be processed by
   TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an archived database of published work to check
   for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to determine if a paper is the student's
   original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member will make the
   final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
5. Course Feedback: Students will have two formal opportunities to evaluate the quality of the
   course and instruction. About midway into the course students will be asked to provide an
   anonymous evaluation about the course and any suggestions for improving content, delivery,
   and discussion. The second evaluation will occur at the end of the course, using the format
   provided by the University. At any time during the course, students should feel free to
   comment on the quality of the course and instruction and suggest changes that will increase
   their learning. These comments can either be made in class, by making an appointment to meet
   with the instructor, or via any other means selected by the student.
6. Course Modifications: Any modifications, amendments, or changes to the syllabus and or
   assignments are at the discretion of the instructor. Changes will be announced in class and
   posted on Canvas. It is the responsibility of students to inquire about any changes that might
   have been made in their absence.
                                                                                                         5


   VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
1.    The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at
      Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
      responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
      integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
2.    Professional Conduct and Civility in the Classroom: The professor expects students to
      act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be
      prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions.
      A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students
      are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities,
      religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We
      expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual
      respect. Social work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be
      challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive
      classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to
      challenging issues. In this environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions,
      and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the
      professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
      professionalism.
3.    Unanticipated Distress: Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions
      to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged
      to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
      students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
      communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students
      may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at
      512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
4.    Policy on Social Media and Professional Communication: Public social networks are
      not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain
      that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
      choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read,
      and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc.,
      can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and
      prospective careers.
      Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other
      forms of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their
      communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work
      students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be considered
      inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this, social work
      students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid
      posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
      image.
      Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and
      are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks.
      Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media,
      including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise
      client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any
      material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as
                                                                                                   6


    certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
    Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
    Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social
    work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program
    while in the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
5.  Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic
    dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
    course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
    all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
    strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the
    Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
    Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
6.  Use of Course Materials: The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to
    exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any
    unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result
    in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course
    materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the
    University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in
    further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading class
    materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or
    future students.
7.  Documented Disability Statement: Any student who requires special accommodations
    must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
    Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259
    voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should
    present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
    accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor
    of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
    information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
8.  Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
    absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the
    student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
    religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the
    missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
9.  Title IX Reporting: In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
    the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that
    is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, instructors, agency-based
    field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated
    reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking,
    interpersonal violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such
    incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the
    University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Liaison SHSSW, Professor Tanya
    Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to
    obtain information. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX,
    may also be found at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-
    sexualharassment.pdf.
10. Campus Carry Policy: The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
                                                                                                  7


    here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
    Links menu on the School’s website.
11. Classroom Confidentiality: Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal
    matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is
    protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As
    such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted.
    Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure
    for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social
    Work Education.
12. Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students: Email is recognized as an
    official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading
    their email for university and course-related information and announcements. Students are
    responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students
    should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—
    to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
    sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
    address at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-
    policy.
13. Safety: As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
    involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
    present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession.
    It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related
    to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any
    safety concerns.
14. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If students are worried about someone who is
    acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
    their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
    partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
    Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas
    Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
    visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
15. Emergency Evacuation Policy: Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
    required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
    announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
         • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building.
             Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
             building.
         • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
             week of class.
         • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
         • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
             Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
             office.
                                                                                                         8


  IX.     COURSE SCHEDULE
Date        Topic                         Assignments   Readings
                                          Due
Class 1     •  Introduction and course                  •  Syllabus
Thursday,      overview
June 6      •  Establishment of
               guidelines for class
               discussion
Class 2     •  A multidimensional         •  Possible   •  Hutchison, Chapter 1,
Monday,        approach to human             case study    Human Behavior: A
June 10        behavior and social work      topics        Multidimensional
               practice                                    Approach and Chapter 2,
            •  Writing from a social work                  Theoretical Perspectives
               perspective                                 on Human Behavior
Class 3     •  Theoretical perspectives                 •  Hutchison, Chapter 3, The
Tuesday,       on human behavior and the                   Biological Person
June 11        social environment                       •  Canvas: Ambrosino et al.,
                   o The                                   The Ecological/Systems
                       ecological/systems                  Framework
                       framework
                   o Integrating theory,
                       research, and
                       practice
            •  Finalization of case study
               topics and presentation
               dates
Class 4     •  Client engagement                        •  Hutchison, Chapter 4, The
Wednesday, •   Biopsychosocial                             Psychological Person
June 12        dimensions                               •  Canvas: Hepworth, et al.,
               o Biological and                            Chapter 3, Overview of
                   psychological                           the helping process, pp.
                   perspectives                            35-45
Class 5     •  Continuation of discussion •  Concept
Thursday,      on biopsychosocial            Paper 1
June 13        dimensions
Class 6     •  Life course and                          •  Hutchison, Chapter 10,
Monday,        psychosocial life span                      The Human Life Journey:
June 17        development perspectives                    A Life Course Perspective
                                                        •  Readings on life span
                                                           development framework
                                                           posted on Canvas
Class 7     •  Client assessment                        •  Hutchison, Chapter 5, The
Tuesday,    •  Continuation of discussion                  Spiritual Person
June 18        on life course perspective               •  Canvas: Hepworth, et al.,
                                                                                     9


           • Religion and spirituality                      Chapter 8, Assessment…
                                                            pp. 186-211
Class 8    • Cultural and physical                        • Hutchison Chapter 6,
Wednesday,   environmental factors that                     Culture and the Physical
June 19      shape development                              Environment
                 o Race and ethnicity,
                     gender/
                     gender identity,
                     class,
                     religion/spirituality,
                     ability,
                     sexual orientation
Class 9    • Continuation of discussion •     Concept
Thursday,    on cultural and physical         paper 2
June 20      environmental factors that
             shape development
Class 10   • Understanding family           • Literature •  Hutchison, Chapter 7,
Monday,      systems and dynamics             matrix and    Families
June 24    • Family constellations            summaries
           • Changing family roles and        of articles
             structure                        for case
           • Challenges to family life        analysis
           • Student case presentation
Class 11   • Group processes and                          • Hutchison, Chapter 8,
Tuesday,     dynamics                                       Small Groups, Formal
 June 25   • Organizational culture and                     Organizations, and
             dynamics                                       Communities
           • Community culture and
             impact on human
             development
Class 12   • Social inequality and                        • Hutchison, Chapter 9,
Wednesday,   impact on human                                Social Structure, Social
June 26      development/behavior                           Institutions and Social
           • Globalization on and                           Movements: Global and
             impact on human                                National
             development/ behavior
           • Social movements
             Student case presentation
Class 13   • Important prenatal and         • Case        • Hutchison, Chapter 11,
Thursday,    childhood links to               analysis      The Journey Begins:
June 27      adolescent and adult             draft of      Conception, Pregnancy,
             development                      installment   Childbirth, and Infancy
                 o Reproductive rights        1
                 o Attachment
                 o Temperament
           • Family and community
             risks and opportunities
                                                                                     10


Class 14   • Client intervention        • Case          •  Hutchison, Chapter 14,
Monday,    • Development in               analysis         Adolescence
July 1       adolescence                  draft of      •  Canvas: Hepworth et al.,
                 o Identity               installment      Chapter 13, Planning and
                 o Relationships          1 returned       implementing change-
                 o Moral development      with             oriented strategies, pp.
                 o Risks and decision-    feedback         379-385
                     making
           • Student case presentation
Class 15   • Client evaluation                        •   Hutchison, Chapter 15,
Tuesday,   • Continuation of discussion                   Young/ Middle Adulthood
July 2       on development in                        •   Canvas: Hepworth, et al.,
             adolescence                                  Chapter 19, The final
           • Development in young                         phase: Evaluation… pp.
             adulthood                                    591-606
           • Student case presentation
Class 16   • Continuation of discussion               •   Hutchison, Chapter 15,
Wednesday,   on development in young                      Young and Middle
July 3       adulthood                                    Adulthood
Thursday,  • Fourth of July             • Case        •
July 4     • No Class                     analysis
                                          draft of
                                          installment
                                          2 due
                                          Friday,
                                          July 5
Class 17   • Development in middle      • Case        •
Monday,      adulthood                    analysis
July 8           o Taking on new          draft of
                     roles                installment
                 o Mental health and      2 returned
                     health
           • Myth of midlife crisis
Class 18   • Development in late                      •   Hutchison, Chapter 16,
Tuesday      adulthood                                    Late adulthood
July 9           o Income
                 o Spirituality and
                     religion
                 o Health/mental
                     health
                 o Loss and grief
                 o Elder abuse
           • Student case presentation
                                                                                    11


     Class 19         •   Film – Application of            Take home          •
     Wednesday,           human behavior theories          final posted
     July 10              and concepts (Final exam         on canvas
                          based on this film)
     Class 20         •   Integrating HBSE and             Take home          •
     Thursday,            practice                         final exam
     July 11          •   Future directions                and final case
                      •   Celebration and closure          analysis due
                                                           Saturday,
                                                           July 13
X.      BIBLIOGRAPHY
 Adrian, J. A. L., Deliramich, A. N., & Frueh, B. C. (2009). Complicated grief and posttraumatic stress
   disorder in humans' response to the death of pets/animals. Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 73(3), 176-
   187.
 Almack, K., Seymour, J., & Bellamy, G. (2010). Exploring the impact of sexual orientation on experiences
   and concerns about end-of-life care and on bereavement for lesbian, gay and bisexual older people.
   Sociology, 44(5), 908–924.
 Ainspan, N.D., Penk, W., & Kearney, L.K. (2018). Psychosocial approaches to improving the military-to-
   civilian transition process. Psychological Services 15(2), 129-134.
 Alaggia, R., Regehr, C., & Jenney, A. (2012). Risky business: An ecological analysis of intimate partner
   violence disclosure. Research on Social Work Practice 22(3), 301-312.
 Ambrosino, R.A., Ambrosino, R. J., Heffernan, J. & Shuttlesworth, G. (2016). Social work and social
   welfare: An introduction (8th ed.). Boston, MA: Cengage Learning.
 Arthur, D. P. (2015). Social work practice with LGBT elders at end-of-life: Developing practice evaluation
   and clinical skills through a cultural perspective. Journal of Social Work in End-of-Life & Palliative Care,
   11(2), 178–201.
 Ayon, C. (2016). Talking to Latino children about race, inequality, and discrimination: Raising families in an
   anti- immigrant political environment. Journal for the Society of Social Work and Research, 7 (3), 449-
   477.
 Bent-Godley, T. (2011). The ultimate betrayal: A renewed look at intimate partner violence. Washington,
   D.C: NASW.
 Berk, L.E. (2014). Development through the lifespan (6th ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
 Blundo, R. (2010). Engaging men in clinical practice: A solution-focused and strengths-based model.
   Families in Society 91(3), 307-312.
 Bronfenbrenner Life Course Center at Cornell University,
   http://www.human.cornell.edu/che/BLCC/index.cfm
 Brown, Brene’ (2017). Braving the wilderness: The quest for true belonging and the courage to stand alone.
   NY: Random House.
 Carter, M.J. & Fuller, C. (2016). Symbols, meaning, and action: The past, present and future of symbolic
   interactionism. Current Sociology 64(6), 931-961.
 Cartwright, C. M., Hughes, M., & Lienert, T. (2012). End-of-life care for gay, lesbian, bisexual and
   transgender people. Culture, Health & Sexuality: An International Journal for Research, Intervention and
   Care, 14(5), 537–548.
 Casado, B.L., Hong, M., & Harrington, D. (2010). Measuring migratory grief and loss associated with the
   experience of immigration. Research on Social Work Practice, 20(6), p. 611-620.
 Chen, B. (2017). Parent-adolescent attachment and academic adjustment: The mediating role of self-worth.
   Journal of Child & Family Studies 26(8), 2070-2076.
                                                                                                              12


Cloitre, M., Stolbach, B. C., Herman, J. L., Kolk, B. van der, Pynoos, R., Wang, J., & Petkova, E. (2009). A
  developmental approach to complex PTSD: Childhood and adult cumulative trauma as predictors of
  symptom complexity. Journal of Traumatic Stress, 22(5), 399–408.
Coates, T. (2015). Between the world and me. NY: Spiegal & Grau.
Cook, L.B., Kim, G., Morgan, K., Chen, C., Nillni, A., et al. (2016). Measuring geographic “hot spots” of
  racial-ethnic disparities: An application to mental health care. Journal of Health Care for the Poor and
  Underserved 27 (2), 663-684.
Corcoran, K. & Roberts, A.R. (Eds.) (2015). Social workers’ desk reference (3rd ed.). NY: Oxford University
  Press.
Cordaro, M. (2012). Pet loss and disenfranchised grief: Implications for mental health counseling practice.
  Journal of Mental Health Counseling, 34(4), 283-294.
Crede, M., Tynan, M.C., & Harms, P.D. (2016) Much ado about grit: A meta-analytic synthesis of the grit
  literature. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology.
Davila, M., McFall, S.L., & Cheng, D. (2009). Acculturation and depressive symptoms among pregnant and
  postpartum Latinas. Maternal and Child Health Journal, 13, 318-325.
Deblinger, E., Mannarino, A. P., Cohen, J. A., Runyon, M. K., & Steer, R. A. (2011). Trauma-focused
  cognitive behavioral therapy for children: Impact of the trauma narrative and treatment length. Depression
  and Anxiety, 28, 67-75.
DeLuca, S., Blosnich, J., Hentshel, El, & Amen, S. (2016). Mental health care utilization: How race, ethnicity
  and veteran status are associated with seeking help. Community Mental Health Journal 2 (52), 174-179.
DeLuca, S., Clampet-Lundquist, S., & Edin, K. (2016). Coming of age in the other America. NY: Russell
  Sage Foundation.
Doley, R., Bell, R., Watt, B., & Simpson, H. (2015). Grandparents raising grandchildren: Investigating
  factors associated with distress among custodial grandparent. Journal of Family Studies,21(2), 101-119.
Dubow, E.F., Huesmann, L.R, & Boxer, P. (2009). A social-cognitive-ecological framework for
  understanding the impact of exposure to persistent ethnic-political violence on children’s psychosocial
  adjustment. Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 12(2), 113-126.
Edin, K. & Shaefer, L. (2016). Two dollars a day: Living on almost nothing in America. Boston: Houghton
  Mifflin Harcourt.
Finger, B. Hans, S.L., Bernstein, V.J., & Cox, S.M. (2009). Parent relationship quality and infant-mother
  attachment. Attachment & Human Development, 11(3), 285-306.
Franklin, E. (2009). The emerging needs of veterans: A call to action for the social work profession. Health &
  Social Work, 34(3), 163-167.
Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I., Hoy-Ellis, C. P., Goldsen, J., Emlet, C. A., & Hooyman, N. R. (2014). Creating a
  vision for the future: Key competencies and strategies for culturally competent practice with lesbian, gay,
  bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) older adults in the health and human services. Journal of Gerontological
  Social Work, 57(2–4), 80–107.
Furman, R., Ackerman, A. R., Loya, M., Jones, S., & Egi, N. (2012). The criminalization of immigration:
  Value conflicts for the social work profession. Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare, 39(1), 169–185.
Gardiner, H. & Kosmitzki, C. (2011). Lives across cultures: Cross-cultural human development (6th ed.).
  Boston: Allyn and Bacon, Pearson Education.
Genaidy, A., Huston, R., Dionysiou, D., & Karwowski, W. (2017). A system-of-systems framework for
  improved human, ecologic and economic well-being. Sustainability, 9(4), 616.
Goodcase, E. T. & Love, H. A. (2017). From despair to integrity: Using narrative therapy for older
  individuals in Erikson’s last stage of identity development. Clinical Social Work Journal, 45(4), p. 354-
  363.
Greenfield, E. A. (2012). Using ecological frameworks to advance a field of research, practice, and policy on
  aging-in-place initiatives. The Gerontologist, 52(1), 1-12.
Guo, W. & Tsui, M. (2010). From resilience to resistance: A reconstruction of the strengths perspective in
  social work practice. International Social Work 53(2), 233-245.
Harris, N.B. (2018). The deepest well: healing the long-term effects of childhood adversity. Boston:
  Houghton Mifflin Harcourt.
                                                                                                              13


Hash, K. M., & Rogers, A. (2013). Clinical practice with older LGBT clients: Overcoming lifelong
  stigma through strength and resilience. Clinical Social Work Journal, 41(3), 249-257.
Hepola, S. (2015). Blackout: Remembering the things I drank to forget. NY: Grand Central Publishing.
Hepworth, D., Rooney, R., Rooney, G. & Strom-Gottfried, K. (2013). Direct social work practice:
  Theory and skills. Belmont, CA: Brooks /Cole Cengage Learning.
Holmes, S. (2013). Fresh fruit, broken bodies: Migrant farmworkers in the United States. Berkeley, CA:
  University of California.
Hutchison, E.D. (2016). Essentials of human behavior in the social environment: Integrating person,
  environment, and the life course (2nd ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.
Ikonomopoulos, J., Smith, R. L., & Schmidt, C. (2015). Integrating narrative therapy within rehabilitative
  programming for incarcerated adolescents. Journaling of Counseling & Development, 93, 460-470.
Jani, J., & Okundaye, J. (2014). The culturagram: An educational tool to enhance practice competence with
  diverse populations. Journal of Baccalaureate Social Work, 19, 53-63.
Jerkins, M. (2018). This will be my undoing: Living at the intersection of black, female, and feminist in
  (white) America. NY: Harper.
Kim, J. (2017). “You can't run into a burning building without getting burned yourself”: An ecological
  systems perspective of parents choosing out-of-home care for an intercountry adopted child. Families in
  Society: Journal of Contemporary Social Services, 98(3), 169-177.
Juarez, G., Branin, J. J., & Rosales, M. (2014). Perceptions of QOL among caregivers of Mexican ancestry of
  adults with advanced cancer. Quality of Life Research, 24(7), 1729-1740.
Kim, Y.J., Moon, S.S., & Kim, M.J. (2011). Physical and psycho-social predictors of adolescents’ suicide
  behaviors. Child and Adolescent Social Work Journal 28(6), 421-438.
Koehn, S., Neysmith, S., Kobayash, K., & Khamisa, H. (2013). Revealing the shape of knowledge using an
  intersectionality lens: Results of a scoping review on the health and health care of ethnocultural minority
  adults. Aging and Society, 33(3), 437-464.
Kum, S. (2017). Gay, gray, black, and blue: An examination of some of the challenges faced by older
  LGBTQ people of color. Journal of Gay & Lesbian Mental Health, 21(3), 228–239.
Lamb, F.F., Brady, E.M., & Lohman, C. (2009). Lifelong resiliency learning: A strength-based synergy for
  gerontological social work. Journal of Gerontological Social Work 52(7), 713-728.
Larsen, J. L., Clauss-Ehlers, C. S., & Cosden, M. A. (2015). An exploration of army wives’ responses to
  spousal deployment: Stressors and protective factors. Couple and Family Psychology: Research and
  Practice, 4(4), 212-228.
McGoldrick, M., Carter, B., Garcia-Preto, N. (2011). The expanded family life cycle: Individual, family, and
  social perspectives (4rd ed.). Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
McKeown, A. (2014). Attachment, personality and female perpetrators of intimate partner violence. Journal
  of Forensic Psychiatry & Psychology, 25(5), 556-573.
Mereish, E. H., & Poteat, V. P. (2015). A relational model of sexual minority mental and physical health: The
  negative effects of shame on relationships, loneliness, and health. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 62(3),
  425-437.
Mock, J. Redefining realness: My path to womanhood, identity, love & so much more. NY: Atria.
Moore, J., & Jenkins, P. (2012). ‘Coming out’ in therapy? Perceived risks and benefits of self-disclosure of
  sexual orientation by gay and lesbian therapists to straight clients. Counselling & Psychotherapy Research,
  12(4), 308-315.
Nazario, S. (2007, 2014). Enrique’s Journey. NY: Random House.
Neblett, E.W., Hammond, W.P., Seaton, E. & Townsend, T. (2010). Underlying mechanisms in the
  relationship between Africentric worldview and depressive symptoms. Journal of Counseling Psychology
  57 (1), 105-113.
Newman, B. & Newman, P. (2015). Development through life: A psychosocial approach (12th ed.). Stamford,
  CT: Cengage Learning.
Nicholson, N.R. (2012) A review of social isolation: An important but underassessed condition in older
  adults. Primary Prevention 33: 137.
Nicola, W. (2017). Living “illegally”: On the phenomenology of an undocumented immigrant. Clinical Social
  Work Journal, 45(4), p. 293-300.
                                                                                                              14


Ornelas, J., Martins, P., Zilhao, M.T., & Duarte, T. (2014). Housing First: An ecological approach to
  promoting community integration. European Journal of Homelessness 8(1), 2028.
Orth, U., Trzesniewski, K., & Robins, R. (2010). Self-esteem development from young adulthood to old age:
  A cohort-sequential longitudinal study. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 98(4), 645-658.
Ortiz, R. & Sibinga, E. (2017). The role of mindfulness in reducing the adverse effects of childhood stress
  and trauma. Children 4(3), 16.
Page, A. D., & Peacock, J. R. (2013). Negotiating identities in a heteronormative context. Journal of
  Homosexuality, 60(4), 639-654.
Palacios, J. (2009). The ecology of adoption. In G.M. Wrobel & E. Neil (Eds.), International advances in
  adoption research for practice. Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons.
Perry, B. D. (2009). Examining child maltreatment through a neurodevelopmental lens: Clinical applications
  of the neurosequential model of therapeutics. Journal of Loss and Trauma, 14(4), 240-255.
Pistella, J., Salvati, M., Ioverno, S., Laghi, F., & Baiocco, R. (2016). Coming-Out to family members and
  internalized sexual stigma in bisexual, lesbian and gay people. Journal of Child & Family Studies, 25(12),
  3694-3701.
Riggs, S. (2010). Childhood emotional abuse and the attachment system across the life cycle: What theory
  and research tell us. Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma 19(1), 5-51.
Riggs, S. & Riggs, D. (2011). Risk and resilience in military families experiencing deployment: The role of
  the family attachment network. Journal of Family Psychology, 25(5), 675-687.
Robinson, D., Papaj, A., Blumer, M.C. (2011). The clinical deployment of therapeutic frameworks and
  genogram questions to serve the servicewomen. Journal of Feminist Family Therapy,23, 263-284.
Rosling, H. 2018). Factfulness: Ten reasons we’re wrong about the world – and why things are better than
  you think. NY: Flatiron Books.
Roth, A. (2018). Insane: America’s criminal treatment of mental illness. NY: Basic Books.
Ruggiano, N. & Edvardsson, D. (2013). Person-centeredness in home- and community-based long-term care:
  Current challenges and new directions. Social Work in Health Care 52(9), 846-861.
Sable, P. (2013). The pet connection: An attachment perspective. Clinical Social Work Journal, 41(1), 93-99.
Saleeby, D. (2013). The strengths perspective in social work practice (6th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson
  Education.
Sandberg, S. & Grant, A. (2017). Option B: Facing adversity, building resilience, and finding joy. NY:
  Alfred Knopf.
Scherrer, K. (2013). Culturally competent practice with bisexual individuals. Clinical Social Work Journal,
  41(3), 238-248.
 Schwartz, R. (2013). Moving from acceptance toward transformation with internal family systems therapy
  (IFS). Journal of Clinical Psychology 69(8), 805-816.
 Schwerdtfeger, K.L. & Shreffler, K.M. (2009). Trauma of pregnancy loss and infertility among mothers and
  involuntarily childless women in the United States. Journal of Loss & Trauma, 14(3), 211-227.
 Seccombe, K. (2014). So you think I drive a Cadillac? Welfare recipients’ perspectives on the system and
  its reform (4th ed) Boston: Pearson.
Sedlovskaya, A., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Eibach, R. P., LaFmance, M., Romem-Canyas, R., & Camp, N. P.
  (2013). Internalizing the closet: Concealment heightens the cognitive distinction between public and private
  selves. Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 104(4), 695-715.
Shonkoff, J.P. & Garner, A.S. (2012). The lifelong effects of early childhood adversity and toxic stress.
  Pediatrics 129(1) e232-246.
Singh, A. A., & Moss, L. (2016). Using relational-cultural theory in LGBTQQ counseling: Addressing
  heterosexism and enhancing relational competencies. Journal of Counseling & Development, 94(4), 398-
  404.
Sloman, L. & Taylor, P. (2015). Impact of child maltreatment on attachment and social rank systems:
  Introducing an integrated theory. Trauma, Violence & Abuse 17(2), 172-185.
Sorkin, D., Murphy, M., Nguyen, H., Biegler, K. (2016). Barriers to mental health care for an ethnically and
  racially diverse sample of older adults. Journal of American Geriatric Society, 64(10), p. 2138-2143.
Steelman, S. M. (2016). Externalizing identities: An integration of narrative therapy and queer theory.
  Journal of Family Psychotherapy, 27(1), 79-84.
                                                                                                            15


Stinehart, M. A., Scott, D. A., & Barfield, H. G. (2012). Reactive attachment disorder in adopted and foster
  care children: Implications for mental health professionals. Family Journal, 20(4), 355-360.
Vaughn, M., DeLisi, M. & Matto, H. (2014). Human behavior: A cell to society approach. Hoboken, NJ:
  Wiley.
Wadsworth, S. M., Cardin, J., Christ, S., Willerton, E., O'Grady, A. F., Topp, D., & ... Mustillo, S. (2016).
  Accumulation of risk and promotive factors among young children in US military families. American
  Journal of Community Psychology, 57(1/2), 190-202.
Walker, M. D., Hernandez, A. M., & Davey, M. (2012). Childhood sexual abuse and adult sexual identity
  formation: Intersection of gender, race, and sexual orientation. The American Journal of Family Therapy,
  40(5), 385–398.
Warner, D. F., & Brown, T. H. (2011). Understanding how race/ethnicity and gender define age-trajectories
  of disability: An intersectionality approach. Social Science & Medicine, 72(8), 1236-1248.
Wiles, J.L., Wild, K., Kerse, N., & Allen, R.E. (2012). Resilience from the point of view of older people:
  ‘There’s still life beyond a funny knee.’ Social Science & Medicine 74, 416-424.
Witten, T. M. (2017). Health and well-being of transgender elders. Annual Review of Gerontology and
  Geriatrics, 37, 27–41.
Yuma-Guerrero, P.J., Lawson, K.A., Velasquez, M.M., von Sternberg, K., Maxson, T., & Garcia, N. (2012).
  Screening, brief intervention, and referral for alcohol use in adolescents: A systematic review. Pediatrics
  130(1). 115-122.
Zayas, L.H., Aguilar-Gaxiola, S., Yoon, H., and Natera-Rey, G. (2015). The distress of citizen-children with
  detained and deported parents. Journal of Child and Family Studies, 24 (11), 3213-3223.
Zeanah, C. H., Chesher, T., & Boris, N. W. (2016). Practice parameter for the assessment and treatment of
  children and adolescents with reactive attachment disorder and disinhibited social engagement
  disorder. Journal of the American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 55(11), 990-1003.
                                                                                                              16


                                               APPENDIX
                    ASSIGNMENT EXPECTATIONS AND GUIDELINES
I.       CONCEPT PAPER – APPLICATION OF ECOLOGICAL/SYSTEMS
         FRAMEWORK
Due Thursday, June 13 at 11:59 p.m. posted on Canvas in a word document. Counts 10%
toward your final grade (half of this paper grade will be on content; half will be on writing).
This paper will demonstrate that you understand the ecological/systems framework and can apply
it to a specific case example. You may apply the framework to a specific time period in your own
life or to a character in a novel, movie, or television program. You will first provide a brief social
history of the person you are assessing. You will then provide a brief but understandable
description of the ecological/systems framework you will use with appropriate references. The
last part of the paper will apply the framework to help understand/explain the person’s living
situation and the relationships between the person and their environment. Your paper should
include the following:
A. A brief introduction to your paper. This should be a short paragraph that introduces the
     reader to the purpose of your paper. It should conclude with a topic sentence and state briefly
     the person and situation and what theoretical perspective will be discussed. Be sure your
     introduction is interesting and gains the reader’s attention, at the same time conveying the
     focus of your paper. By the time readers finish your introduction, they should know who you
     are writing about, the context (i.e., if in a novel, title and author and a brief description of the
     person/key factors you will cover in your paper), and the fact that you will be using the
     ecological/systems framework to understand the impact the environment has had on this
     person’s life.
B. Describe the person and the significant factors that have an impact on this person’s life.
     This section should include descriptive, objective information about the person and the
     person’s environment, e.g., physical factors, psychological factors, socio/cultural factors,
     developmental factors, significant past and present life experiences that impact the person’s
     interaction with their environment, and key persons, groups, and organizations within the
     person’s environment that are critical to the person’s ability to function. Be sure to include the
     person’s age, race/ethnicity, and status. This section should include enough information so the
     reader will have some context for your assessment of the individual later in your paper. You
     will need to select critical pieces of information about the person in this section; refrain from
     storytelling. You can give an example to support a point you are making, but life stories and
     detailed descriptions of multiple events are not needed.
C. Briefly describe the ecological/systems framework, paying particular attention to the
     concepts on which your paper will focus. Give a brief overview of the framework and why it
     is useful in understanding individual behavior within the environment. If you are focusing on
     the Bronfenbrenner model and the four layers of the environment and chronosystem, give a
     brief description of each of these systems. If you are discussing boundaries and open and
     closed systems, explain these briefly, but if you will not refer to entropy and synergy, you
     don’t need to include these in this section.
D. Demonstrate your understanding of the ecological/systems framework by showing how it
     can be applied to the individual you are writing about. This section is an integration of parts B
     and C. Weave the framework language throughout your discussion in this section, giving
     examples from the person’s life/environment that help readers understand how the framework
                                                                                                          17


     can be applied (i.e., “these mesosystem relationships….”. After reading this section, readers
     should be able to understand the individual you have described and the environmental factors
     which have had positive and negative effects on the person’s life during the time period on
     which you are focusing. Be sure you include discussion here relating to the obstacles and
     resources that limit/support healthy functioning/development of the individual.
E. Provide a brief summary/conclusion to your paper. This should be organized in reverse
     order of the introduction, beginning with a topic sentence and going to a more general closing
     statement.
This paper should be 3-4 pages long excluding a cover page and a reference page. The only
sources needed are the Hutchison text and the chapter posted on Canvas on the ecological/systems
framework.
• Style formatting of citations throughout the paper and reference list must follow the
     Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association -- citations must be used
     appropriately and often. Remember, if you are quoting material exactly, you must put content
     inside quotations (or indent if a long quote) and add page numbers of where that quote can be
     found. You don’t need a lot of direct quotes; summaries of content are fine.
• Your paper is expected to be professional. Grammar, spelling errors, and incoherence in
     writing that detract from the important points you are trying to make will result in a deduction
     in points for this assignment.
II.      CONCEPT PAPER – APPLICATION OF LIFE COURSE/PSYCHOSOCIAL
         PERSPECTIVE
Due Thursday, June 20 at 11:59 p.m. posted on Canvas in a word document. Counts 10%
toward your final grade (half of your grade will be on content; the other half will be on
writing).
This paper will demonstrate that you understand the life course/psychosocial perspective and can
apply it to a specific case example. You may apply the framework to a specific developmental
period in your own life or the life of a character in a novel, movie, or television program. You will
first provide a brief social history of the person you are assessing. You will then provide a brief
but understandable description of the life course perspective. The last part of the paper will apply
the life course perspective to the person’s situation to help understand/explain the person’s living
situation, the relationships between the person and their environment, and their impact on the
person’s development. Your paper should include the following:
A. Provide a brief introduction to your paper. This should be a short paragraph that introduces
     the reader to the purpose of your paper. It should conclude with a topic sentence and state
     briefly the person and situation and what theoretical perspective will be discussed. Be sure
     your introduction is interesting and gains the reader’s attention, at the same time conveying the
     focus of your paper. By the time readers finish your introduction, they should know who you
     are writing about, the context (i.e., if in a novel, title and author and a brief description of the
     person/key factors you will cover in your paper), and the fact that you will be using the life
     course perspective to understand this person’s development.
B. Describe the person and the significant factors that have an impact on this person’s life.
     This section should include descriptive, objective information about the person and the
     person’s environment, e.g., physical factors, psychological factors, socio/cultural factors,
     developmental factors, significant past and present life experiences that impact the person’s
                                                                                                          18


   interaction with their environment, and key persons, groups, and organizations within the
   person’s environment that are critical to the person’s ability to function. Be sure to include the
   person’s age, race/ethnicity, and status. This section should include enough information so the
   reader can see later in your paper how it can be applied to the life course perspective. You will
   need to select critical pieces of information; refrain from storytelling. You can give an example
   to support a point you are making, but life stories and detailed descriptions of multiple events
   are not needed. In this section, clearly state the developmental period you will be discussing.
   Describe the person you are analyzing during this period of their life. This introduction should
   not be a retelling of the person’s whole life history. Rather, the reader should clearly
   understand what period of the person’s life you will be discussing and why this was an
   important time period for her/him. Provide relevant information that will help the reader
   understand what was happening during this time:
        • Describe the person during the selected developmental period. How old was the
            person? Where was the person living and with whom? What were the person’s
            primary roles in life during this time (student, child, mother, father, worker)?
        • Describe the person’s relevant personal and family characteristics that impacted
            her/him during this time period, such as family structure (e.g., single parent family),
            basic community and household information, birth order, family members’ ages,
            culture, race, gender, sexual orientation, disability status, and social class.
C. Briefly describe the life course perspective, paying particular attention to the concepts on
   which your paper will focus. Give a brief overview of this perspective and why it is useful in
   understanding individual behavior. You don’t need to go into great detail about each stage of
   life. Instead, provide a holistic perspective and then focus on concepts/information that is
   critical to the person’s stage of life on which you are focusing (i.e., societal/cultural
   expectations, developmental tasks, psychosocial crisis for a specific stage).
D. Demonstrate your understanding of the life course/psychosocial perspective by showing
   how it can be applied to the individual you are writing about. This section is an integration of
   parts B and C. Weave the life course language throughout your discussion in this section,
   giving examples from the person’s life that help readers understand how this perspective can
   be applied. After reading this section, readers should be able to understand the individual you
   have described and how the person is functioning according to this perspective and why. Be
   sure you include discussion here relating to the obstacles and resources that limit/support
   healthy functioning/development of the individual.
   In this section you will apply your understanding of the life course/psychosocial perspective to
   the person’s development during the selected time period. Although you may mention
   significant events and issues that occurred earlier in the person’s life, this section should not be
   a complete history of their life. Describe and illustrate the person’s physical, cognitive,
   emotional and socio-cultural development during your selected time period. Describe
   examples of developmental tasks, stressors, risks, strengths, and challenges the person
   experienced.
        • How was this developmental stage challenging for the person? Give examples.
        • How did the person’s gender, class, race, age, ethnicity, and other diversity factors
            influence their resolution of developmental challenges?
        • In your analysis, discuss how the person’s experiences fit the assumptions of the life
            course perspective.
E. Provide a brief summary/conclusion to your paper. This should be organized in reverse
   order of the introduction, beginning with a topic sentence and going to a more general closing
                                                                                                     19


     statement. In your conclusion, tie the above sections together to summarize the factors that
     influenced the person’s development. How was the person impacted during this developmental
     stage and why? How did this developmental stage impact the person’s subsequent
     development?
This paper should be 3-4 pages long excluding a cover page and a reference page. The only
sources needed are the Hutchison text and the material posted on Canvas from Newman and
Newman on the psychosocial life span development perspective.
• Style formatting of citations throughout the paper and reference list must follow the
     Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association -- citations must be used
     appropriately and often. Remember, if you are quoting material exactly, you must put content
     inside quotations (or indent if a long quote) and add page numbers of where that quote can be
     found. You don’t need a lot of direct quotes; summaries of content are fine.
• Your paper is expected to be professional. Grammar, spelling errors, and incoherence in
     writing that detract from the important points you are trying to make will result in a deduction
     in points for this assignment.
III.     CASE ANALYSIS AND LITERATURE MATRIX
Students are required to complete a written case analysis focusing on how to engage, assess, intervene, and
evaluate practice with an individual, a family, a group, an organization, or a community. This is a common
assignment for students in all sections of HBSE to assess how well they master competencies 6.1, 7.2, 8.2,
and 9.2 of the Council on Social Work Education’s Education Policy and Accreditation Process (EPAS).
Results are used to evaluate the School’s curriculum as part of its process to maintain CSWE accreditation.
This assignment assesses the following competencies:
 CSWE Competency                                                       Mastery Assessed by Completion
                                                                       of
 6.1 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Parts 1 and 2, submitted in
 environment, person-in-environment, and other multidisciplinary       Installment I
 theoretical frameworks to engage with clients and constituencies.
 7.2 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Part 3, submitted in Installment I
 environment, person-in-environment, and other interdisciplinary
 theoretical frameworks in the analysis of assessment data from
 clients and constituencies.
 8.2 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Part 4, submitted in Installment II
 environment, person-in- environment, and other interdisciplinary
 theoretical frameworks in interventions with clients and
 constituencies.
 9.2 Apply knowledge of human behavior and the social                  Part 5, submitted in Installment II
 environment, person in environment, and other interdisciplinary
 theoretical frameworks in evaluating practice with individuals,
 families, and groups
The objectives of this assignment are:
     • To apply critical thinking to the engagement, problem identification, assessment, planning,
         intervention, and evaluation for a case situation.
     • To practice using evidence-based resources to guide case interventions.
     • To apply a theoretical framework(s) to a case and presenting problem.
     • To gain experience writing a formal case analysis using APA format.
                                                                                                           20


This analysis will be submitted in three parts: a literature matrix and summary of 3 articles
you plan to use in the assessment portion of your case study due Monday, June 24; a draft of
installment 1 of your case analysis (introduction, engagement of the client, problem
identification, and assessment of the case) due Thursday, June 27; and a draft of installment
2 (intervention and evaluation of the intervention strategies) due Friday, July 5. You will
revise these two installments and combine them into a final document which will be due
Saturday, July 13. All assignments should be submitted as word documents on Canvas.
Your case analysis should be written using one of the following cases in the Hutchison text: 2.1
(Intergenerational stresses in the McKinley family), 10.3 (The Suarez family after September 11,
2001), 11.3 (Sarah’s teen dad), 14.2 (Carl’s struggle for identity), 16.2 (Margaret Davis stays at
home). Students will select cases during the first week of the course. Your analysis should be
approximately 8 full double-spaced, 12-point font, pages in length (excluding cover and reference
pages) and must adhere to APA 6th edition guidelines. This analysis should be supported with a
minimum of 5 peer-reviewed, refereed journal articles published within the past ten years (unless
you are citing the original author of a theory or an important historic citation). Do not use any
websites as one of your references unless the reference is a peer reviewed, refereed journal article
unless you are using the website to provide current demographic information.
A. LITERATURE MATRIX AND SUMMARY OF 3 ARTICLES
After reviewing the case you have selected from the Hutchison text, determine the major factors
that are significant (for example, type of problem identified, age, race/ethnicity, gender identity,
sexual orientation, ability/disability, citizenship status, access to economic and other resources).
Then, using the UT library or Google scholar search systems, identify at least 3 peer reviewed
journal articles published within the last ten years that will help with your assessment of this case
(understanding what you think is going on and why). Once you have identified the articles,
complete the following matrix providing key information gained from each article. These articles
can then serve as the major source of supportive information in installment I of your case analysis.
You can use either a table with columns or bullets to provide the information below for each
selected article:
• Citation in APA format, including author(s), year of publication, title of the article, journal in
    which the article appears, and page numbers
• Brief summary of key points in the article that relate to your topic
• Specific notes summarizing information (include page numbers so you can easily find this
    information when writing your case analysis) you can include to support your assessment of
    the individual/family that is the focus of your case analysis
• Your matrix is due no later than Monday, June 24 at 11:59 p.m. and will count 5%
    toward your final grade.
B. CASE ANALYSIS – INSTALLMENT I
Installment I must be posted on Canvas no later than Thursday, June 27 at 11:59 p.m. and
will count 15% toward your final grade. It will cover parts 1, 2, and 3 of the case analysis
requirements with a minimum of four sources (including 3 peer-reviewed articles and the
Hutchison text), cited appropriately in the body of your document and on your reference page.
• Part 1a - Introduction and Relevant Background Information:
        o Briefly summarize the case, giving identifying information about the targeted
            client/client system, which can be an individual, family, group, organization, or
            community and why you chose that system as the client (use third person).
                                                                                                     21


       o Include information about the client/client system (for example, if an individual, age,
           race/ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation/gender identity, religion if relevant, current
           living situation, presenting problem.)
       o Include detailed, relevant facts related only to the targeted client system you chose.
           This information should be grounded in the available case information and not based
           on unwritten assumptions, stereotypes, or biased opinions. The information should
           help explain the behavior of the client system in its total environment.
       o Suggested length ½-1 page
•   Part 1b - Problem Statement:
       o Give a specific and concisely written formulation of the problem to guide your analysis
           and problem-solving.
       o Suggested length: One short paragraph
•   Part 2 - Engagement of the Client in the Case:
       o Briefly describe how the client (or client system) is being engaged or not being
           engaged in addressing the problem the client (or client system) is facing. It is
           important to engage the client and develop a relationship so the client will be willing to
           seek and receive help.
       o Be sure to describe the engagement strategies such as empathy, reflection, and
           interpersonal skills a social worker could use with the targeted client system in the
           case. Remember that the targeted system can be an individual, family, group,
           organization, or community.
       o Use third person throughout your paper. Here, for example, you could say “The social
           worker could engage the client by….”, not “I will……”.
       o (Suggested length ½ page)
•   Part 3 - Assessment of the Case:
       o In reviewing the case, collect and organize the information data from the case study
           and describe a single problem that the targeted client system is facing in the case. (1
           paragraph).
       o Identify and discuss the biopsychosocial and cultural factors that contributed to this
           problem. Summarize the various environmental contextual factors that relate to the
           case (e.g., individual, family, peers, school/employment, neighborhood, community;
           biological, cultural, economic, political/legal, ethical). Do not reiterate the facts of the
           case, but describe the contextual issues surrounding the case objectively.
       o Choose one theoretical framework covered in this course that guided your assessment
           of the problem of the targeted client system. Explain the theory/framework(s) and then
           show how it is relevant to the problems and core issues of this case.
       o Incorporate content from at least 3 different appropriate peer-reviewed journal articles
           published within the last ten years to provide supportive documentation of your
           assessment of the problem described.
       o Suggested length 3 ½ pages; assessment and contextual discussion should be about 2-2
           1/2 pages; theory discussion should be about 1 page
•   Reference Page
       o Cite all sources used in this installment following APA format.
       o
C. CASE ANALYSIS INSTALLMENT II
Installment II must be posted on Canvas no later than Friday, July 5 at 11:59 p.m. and will
count 15% toward your final grade. It will cover parts 4 and 5 of the case analysis
                                                                                                      22


requirements with a minimum of four sources (including 3 peer-reviewed articles that focus
on intervention strategies relevant to your case study and your text).
• Part 4 - Intervention Strategies:
        o Based on your assessment of the case, develop intervention goals and select appropriate
            intervention strategies that you and the client/client system would collaborate on to
            address the problem(s) you have identified.
        o Describe how the intervention strategies will be implemented. Be sure the strategies
            relate to the identified problem and are consistent with your assessment of the case.
            Strategies should be distinct and feasible/realistic. Note briefly the advantages/
            disadvantages of each strategy selected.
        o Be sure to use a theoretical framework to guide the intervention selection and
            implementation. One theoretical framework can be used for all intervention strategies.
            (It can be either the same framework used in your assessment section or a different
            framework.)
        o Incorporate at least 3 different references from refereed journal articles supporting the
            intervention chosen to address the problem(s).
        o Suggested length 2-3 pages
• Part 5 - Evaluation of Practice:
        o Select and describe an appropriate method to evaluate the interventions selected. In
            other words, explain how you would know if the intervention(s) you chose was/were
            effective in addressing the problem.
        o Be sure to use your selected theoretical framework to guide the evaluation of the
            intervention selected and implemented.
        o Suggested length ½ page
D. FINAL CASE ANALYSIS
Students will have the opportunity to revise installments I and II based on feedback received from
the instructor and additional information gained from course content and readings. A final
submission of the case analysis must be posted on Canvas no later than Saturday, July 13 at
11:59 p.m. The final submission will count 15% toward your final grade.
• The final submission is to be submitted as a single professionally prepared document that
    includes the following:
        o Title/cover page with running head
        o Abstract
        o Introduction and statement of the presenting problem
        o Engagement of client
        o Assessment of the case, including theoretical framework
        o Intervention strategies
        o Evaluation plan
        o Reference page, combining all sources used in both installments
Grading of the case analysis will be based on the following:
    Installment I
    • Introduction (20 points)
    • Engagement of the client (20 points)
    • Assessment of the case (40 points)
            o Described single problem targeted client system is facing in the case (1 paragraph)
                 (5 points)
                                                                                                   23


            o Identified and discussed biopsychosocial and cultural factors that have contributed
                to the problem; used at least 3 appropriate peer reviewed journal articles published
                no earlier than 2000 to provide supportive documentation of assessment of the
                problem described and associated factors that have contributed to the problem (25
                points)
            o Discussed one appropriate theoretical framework that guided assessment of targeted
                client system with appropriate citation (10 points)
    • Writing quality and style, including appropriate use of references (20 points)
    Installment II
    • Intervention strategies (60 points)
            o Provided clear intervention goal(s) and strategies to address the problem (20 points)
            o Described how they would be implemented (20 points)
            o Used theoretical framework to guide discussion (10 points)
            o Incorporated at least 3 references from referee journal articles to support decision-
                making
            o Strategies were appropriate and derived from assessment of case (10 points)
    • Evaluation (20 points)
    • Writing quality and style, including appropriate use and formatting of references (20
        points)
    Final Case Assessment
    • Attention to feedback received on installments I and II (10 points)
    • Introduction (5 points)
    • Engagement of client (5 points)
    • Assessment of case (20 points)
    • Intervention strategies (20 points)
    • Evaluation (5 points)
    • Use of theory (5 points)
    • Integration of at journal articles (10 points)
    • Writing quality and style (20 points)
IV.     GROUP CASE ANALYSIS PRESENTATION
The due date for this assignment depends on which case you are presenting (see syllabus). It
will count 10% toward your final grade. Students will be divided into groups, with each group
required to lead the case discussion for one of the following cases in a required chapter from the
Hutchison text. The objectives of this assignment are:
    • To gain experience leading and participating in case conferences/staffings.
    • To further skills in assessment and intervention planning used evidence-based resources as
        guidance.
    • To gain experience applying theoretical perspectives to client situations.
    • To gain experience leading creative, engaging oral presentations.
Students will sign up for one case analysis presentation Monday, June 10 after reviewing the
syllabus and cases in the Hutchison text. Based on your top 3 choices, you will be assigned to a
group of 4-6 students. Presentations will take place according to the schedule of course topics:
                                                                                                   24


 Case from Hutchison text                                                 Anticipated Presentation Date
 7 The Sharpe family’s post deployment adjustment                         June 24
 9 Leticia Renteria’s struggle to make it in the United States            June 26
 14.1 David’s coming out process                                          July 1
 15.1 Sheila Henderson, coming home at 25                                 July 2
 16.1 Ms. Ruby Johnson is providing care for three generations            July 9
Presentation Guidelines
The purpose of presenting your case analysis is to gain experience presenting a case and engaging
and describing your opinions to your peers. Presentations should incorporate the following:
• The presentation will mirror a case meeting that many social workers engage in at their
   practice settings, though you can be creative in the type of case presentation you give. Be sure
   you include the entire class at some point in the discussion.
• The goal will be to have the class participate and discuss multiple perspectives of the case
   related to engagement, assessment, intervention, and evaluation.
• A relevant portion of the assigned readings for the same day of class that the group’s
   presentation takes place should be incorporated into your presentation. Groups will need to
   include other readings, i.e., journal articles, that help guide them in assessing the case and
   determining appropriate intervention strategies. Groups should indicate how the readings
   informed their analysis of the case. The readings may also be incorporated in the interactive
   discussion of the case with the class.
• Grades are determined by the entire group’s presentation. Presentations, including discussion,
   will last approximately 30 minutes (allow about 10 minutes for discussion).
• Presenters will lead the discussion and class members will actively ask questions after the
   presentation and provide feedback to the group presenting the case.
• Creativity is strongly encouraged, so make your presentation interesting and interactive. You
   may use PowerPoint slides to ensure that your material is organized and to help guide
   discussion, role plays, or whatever other approaches the group thinks fit best with the case
   being presented.
• Printed or posted handouts are also recommended. Any documents to be posted or printed as
   handouts and a reference list of sources used should be emailed to the instructor at least one
   day prior to the presentation.
• The group presentation needs to cover: introduction, identification the client/client system and
   definition of at least one problem you deem important if you were to be assigned this case as a
   social worker, how you would engage the client/client system, an assessment of the case to
   better understand the client/client system and identified problem(s), suggested goals and
   intervention strategies to address the problem(s), and how you would evaluate your
   intervention plan to determine whether it is effective.
• Your presentation should incorporate a theoretical framework and at least 3 peer-reviewed
   articles.
• Each student must orally present a part of the group presentation to receive a grade.
• Be sure to integrate the literature review of the peer-reviewed journal articles in the assessment
   and intervention parts of the group presentation.
• Theoretical frameworks need to be explained regarding why they were chosen and how they
   are relevant to the case.
Presentation Grading Criteria
Presentations will be graded based on the following:
                                                                                                  25


•   Introduction (5 points)
        o Background and summary of case
• Problem statement (5 points)
        o Clear statement of core problems
• Engagement (5 points)
• Assessment (20 points)
        o Discussion and context of the case
        o Use of evidence-based support
• Application of theory (15 points)
        o Theory appropriate
        o Addressed problem
        o Use of evidence-based support
• Interventions (15 points)
        o Addressed assessed problems
        o Use of evidence-based support
        o Explanation of alternative strategies and rationale for interventions selected
• Evaluation (5 points)
• Organization of presentation (10 points)
        o Use of time by members; balance of presented content and interactive discussion
• Creativity and engagement of colleagues (10 points)
        o Creativity demonstrated in presenting information
        o Engagement of and involvement of peers in discussion
• Integration of Readings and Supportive Materials (10 points)
        o Submitted supportive documents relating to the case including references
        o Applied theoretical and other relevant content from week’s readings
Total: 100 points (will contribute 10% toward final grade)
Peer Evaluations of Group Members
The group presentation grade will be based on the quality of the presentation as a whole,
including: 1) content (inclusion of the components described above, accuracy of information)
and 2) presentation (creativity, organization, and clarity). Thus, all group members typically
receive the same grade. Occasionally, however, one member does not contribute at the same
level as others. To account for these rare situations in a fair manner, students will complete an
evaluation form (available on Canvas and due the day after the group’s presentation) for each
group member detailing their specific contribution to the presentation. The instructor will take
information from these forms into consideration when grading the assignment. If there are
significant differences in ratings, up to 50% of the grade for this assignment will be adjusted
accordingly, with individual students receiving either higher or lower grades than the assigned
group grade. Students are expected to attend class for all case presentations, not just the day
they are presenting, to have read the case to be discussed prior to coming to class, and to
actively engage in a collaborative discussion about the case.
V. TAKE-HOME FINAL EXAM
Students will complete a take-home final exam at the end of the semester, which will require
application of concepts and theoretical frameworks covered in the course to a film, viewed in
class during the last week. The exam will be short-answer essay and will be due at 11:59
p.m. on Saturday, July 13, posted as a word document on Canvas. This exam will count
10% toward your final grade.
                                                                                                26
