                                 Global Markets and Local Cultures
                                       ANS 361 - Unique 32210
                                       ANT 324L -Unique 31665
                            University of Texas at Austin – Spring 2019
                                         GAR 2.112 (Garrison)
                                            TuTh 2:00 - 3:30
                                      Professor Heather Hindman
                          Office: WCH (Hogg) 4.104C – Phone: 471-1667
                      E-mail: h.hindman@mail.utexas.edu (preferred contact)
                 Office Hours: Tu,Th 12:30-2PM -- Other times by appointment
                             TA: Zach Adamz - zmadamz@utexas.edu
Course Description
         Globalization… the word is everywhere, but seems to actually mean less and less each
year. Casual observation suggests that there is something new happening -- new flows of people,
goods, money and ideas that didn’t exist before. In this course, students will seek to understand
what is and isn’t new about these flows and how various transnational exchanges relate to one
another. For example, how does the hypermobility of vast sums of transnational capital through
Wall Street relate to the popularity of anime and Bollywood in the United States? Throughout the
course, students will seek to master an understanding of the language and institutions of global
capital and governance (for example the IMF, structural adjustment and the “bubble economy”)
but also learn to connect these to their effects on local populations. Rejecting the idea of
globalization as an inevitable imposition on local cultures, readings examine the unexpected local
responses to transnational flows. In the class, the novelty of transnational connections will be
challenged through an examination of past moments of global trade; ones which often saw little
participation by “the West.” Readings on contemporary instantiations of globalization will
examine the rise of off-shore factory labor in Asia, the “chain of love” that has become apart of
the globalization of care work, and local responses to the arrival of transnational corporations
such as McDonalds and Mattel.
Texts and Readings
         There is one books that has been ordered for this class and is available at the Co-op
bookstore or can be ordered on-line:
Inda, Jonathan and Renato Rosaldo eds.
         2008 The Anthropology of Globalization: A Reader (Second Edition). Blackwell
         Publishing: Malden, MA. (AG)
(Unfortunately - the first and second editions are very different and only the second will do.)
         There is also a packet that contains the majority of the class readings. This is available at
Paradigm Books. They will ship the packet to you. Visit squareup.com/store/paradigmbooks
-- NOTE 1 - Feel free to buy the book on-line or anywhere else you can find it. It is a reader and we will be
reading about 6 articles out of the book. IMPORTANTLY, please bring either the reading (book or
printout) or notes to class EVERY DAY. This is necessary for class discussion as a blank desk often leads
to a blank mind.


Assignments
There are four basic ways your performance in this class will be evaluated. NOTE: On the
syllabus all assignments are listed in Bold.
(#1) Class attendance is mandatory - there are no “free absences” other than documented and
approved appointments and health issues as discussed in the University policy. You cannot learn
if you are not present. That said, if a situation does require you to miss a class, contacting the
professor or TA in advance will help me to understand the emergency. It is the student’s
responsibility to obtain class notes from the missed class or to arrange to see visual material that
was part of the class meeting. Initially, attendance will be formally taken, but over time we will
strive to learn all the students in the class. Thus, although there may be fewer random attendance
sheets, we will be observing who is present. Attendance is also about showing up on-time,
prepared and ready to learn. Late arrivals or students who frequently show up unprepared will be
considered “absent.”
(#2) There are six (6) response assignments that are designed to get you organizing your thoughts,
to get in good writing habits and to generate some conversation in a larger class environment.
These responses are due on Canvas 11:59 AM (NOON) the day BEFORE the class where we will
discuss them. The submissions to Canvas are necessary to formulate the discussion for class the
next day. We may call on individual students to share their responses. We might offer some
comments on the papers, especially at the beginning of the semester, to be sure you are on track
with the readings. A good response will connect the reading to news events or other assignment,
ask probing questions of the text or offer comments on the nature of the argument. Your
responses might be questions or statements - never more than a long paragraph. Responses should
get beyond “I liked/didn’t like” it and should offer open ended questions, rather than fact-based
queries. You will be given a handout on responses that will go into more detail. Importantly,
these are texts to be used, thus cannot be turned in late. If you turn in a coherent, on-time,
decently thought out response, you will receive full credit for this assignment.
(#3) There are two short writing assignments for the class associated with particular topics we
cover that will require you to do independent research/investigation. Assignment sheets will be
provided.
(#4) There will be two tests: a midterm just before Spring Break and a final exam during the
exam period. They will include both some short answer questions about the particular authors
that we have read and longer mini-essays that ask you to compare and contrast various
approaches or to provide examples. There will be a review session for the exams as well as
sample questions provided. The final will be cumulative.
Bonus - I do not offer extra credit - but I will have an open forum on Canvas where Zach and I
will post news items related to globalization and culture. I invite students to post interesting
current events or news analysis there as well. Contributing to this site will be looked upon
favorably.
The numbers…
         Attendance                          20%
         Discussion Questions                15%
         Commodity Tracking                   5%
         Mediascapes                         10%
         Midterm                             20%
         Final Exam                          30%


An insight into the mind of your professor – I dislike the grading aspect of teaching and am far
more enthusiastic about talking about how you are doing in the course than in arguing over letters
and numbers. Having a conversation before an assignment is due about the learning process and
how each individual can improve has proven more useful for students seeking to do well in the
course than looking at “A”, “B” or “C” at the top of your paper. I use plus/minus grading.
My Policies
          ABSENCES
          I expect students to come to class regularly, on time and prepared. If you do not do this,
not only will your grade be negatively affected, but it disrupts the learning process of your fellow
students as well as showing a lack of respect for the course. This is admittedly one of my pet
peeves. Attending class means showing up on time, prepared and ready to learn. If you are not
prepared – which I don’t anticipate will ever happen – come to class anyway. In general, many
problems can be solved if you keep in contact with your professor and TA.
          ACADEMIC HONESTY
          I expect students to conduct their research and writing honestly and to correctly reference
any sources consulted. Plagiarism is theft and a particular heinous crime to those whose life is
writing and research. Any dishonest academic practice will be referred to the administration for
investigation. I encourage collaboration among students, which is different from copying or
paper trading. In general, CITE EVERYTHING - including Wikipedia. If in doubt about the
ethics of a situation, contact me – do not guess.
          COMMUNICATION
          Both your TA and professor enjoy meeting with students in office hours and exchanging
email with students. BUT, we do not check email every 10 minutes. We are very eager to
answer student questions by email, discuss points of the reading or relevant outside materials, but
please think before you write. Show respect in your communication with us and with one
another.
          MISCELLANEOUS
- Turn off your cell phone when you get to class.
- I DO NOT ALLOW LAPTOPS IN CLASS. Sorry, it has just become too much of a problem.
If you have a documented need to use a laptop, please provide it. Recent studies suggest that
even today’s students remember things better if written down the old-fashion way, with paper and
pen.
- You may eat and drink in class, if it is subtle and not distracting to you or other students.
University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible
to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail
regularly and frequently to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be
time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter
that documents your disability from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the


beginning of the semester so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business
days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more
information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone)
or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center
(CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire
alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
           Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
              nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
           If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
           In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
SYLLABUS POLICY SUMMARY – If in doubt, ask! We are much happier
discussing concerns you have early on than dealing with problems that have been
allowed to grow over time.
Assignments
Readings are subject to change!
January 22nd Introduction to the Class
          24       Commodity Chains and Clothing I
                   Selections from Where am I Wearing - Timmerman (Canvas)
          29       Commodity Chains and Clothing II
                   “Tracking Globalization: Commodities and Value in Motion” -Foster (C)
          31       Commodity Chains and Clothing III
                   “Follow the Thing: Papaya” - Cook et al (C)
                   OPT “Follow the Thing: West Indian Hot Pepper Sauce” - Cook et al (C)
                   Commodity Tracking Assignment
February 5         Commodity Chains and Clothing IV
                   “Global Exposure” - Hansen
          7        Commodity Chains and Clothing V
                   “Designing Women” - Freeman
                   Response (February 6 at Noon)


February 12 Connecting Globalization and Culture I
            “Tracking Global Flows” - Inda and Rosaldo 1-17 (AG)
       14   Connecting Globalization and Culture II
            “Tracking Global Flows” - Inda and Rosaldo 18-35 (AG)
       19   Histories of Globalization -- Is it New? I
            Europe and the People without History - Wolf 1-7
            “The World System in the Thirteenth Century” - Abu-Lughod 75-92
       21   Histories of Globalization -- Is it New? II
            “Globalization: Long Term Process or New Era in Human Affairs?” -
            McNeil
            Introduction to A Brief History of Globalization 1-25
            Response (due Feb 20th at Noon)
       26   Flows and Frictions I
            “Disjuncture and Difference” - Appadurai (AG)
       28   Flows and Frictions II
            “Itineraries of Indian Cinema” - Larkin (AG)
            Mediascape Assignment Due
March 5     Global Cities I
            “Whose City is it?” - Sassen
            “The Global City: Introducing a Concept” - Sassen
       7    Global Cities II
            WEB reading on Global Cities in Asia (on line)
            Foreign Policy Global Cities Index 2010
March 12    Global Cities III
            “Situating Global Capitalisms” - Ho (AG)
       14   Midterm
SPRING BREAK
March 26th  Acceleration of Acceleration
             “Time-Space Compression and the Postmodern Condition” -Harvey
       28   Homogenization or Heterogenization I
            Introduction The McDonaldization of Society - Ritzer


April 2   Homogenization or Heterogenization II
          “Domesticating the French Fry” - Caldwell (AG)
          Selections from Golden Arches East
          “How Sushi Went Global” - Bestor
      4   Homogenization or Heterogenization III
          Video on global consumption
          Response (due April 3 at Noon)
April 9   Gender and Globalization I
          “Global Cities and Survival Circuits” - Sassen
          “Gender and the Global Economy” - Moghadam
      11  Gender and Globalization II
          “Freeing South Africa” - Dunham
      16  Gender and Globalization III
          Selections from Global Women
          Response (due April 15th at Noon)
      18  Networks/Internet I
          “The Global Economy” - Castells
          Redaction of “The Network Society” - Castells
      23  Networks/Internet II
          “The Global Situation” - Tsing (AG)
      30  Networks/Internet III
          “Virtual Commonality: Looking for India on the Internet” - Mitra
          Response (Due April 29 at Noon)
May   2   Anti-Globalization Movements
          “The New Digital Media and Activist Networking” - Juris (AG)
      7   Pundits, Populists and Defenders
          Friedman, Sen, Huntington, Barber, Greider, Fukuyama, Stiglitz etc.
          Response (Due May 6 at Noon)
May   9    Exam Review, Wrap-up, Etc.
FINAL EXAM - at official exam time
