note: any part of this syllabus or the course structure itself, including how grades are tabulated
or awarded may change at any time
COURSE DESCRIPTION
Animation, Visual Effects, Digital Painting and CGI are used to produce digital content in a
variety of formats including film, traditional and 3D animation, motion graphics and GUI, real
time rendering and video games. Through hands-on ​CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS​, you will learn
the ​TOOLS ​and ​TECHNIQUES​ of Digital Media Production. You will apply these techniques to
complete a variety of tasks in a ​PIPELINE​ of digital production from preproduction through
performance and capture to designing, compositing, rendering simulating and building. You are
given a wide array of projects to choose from, and YOU define your identity as a digital media
producer. Are you a specialist or a generalist? Are you a CGI simulations expert or a traditional
character animator? Are you a concept artist or an augmented reality designer? Perhaps you
are something we have never seen before.
Choose your own adventure...
INSTRUCTORS
I am​ ​Ben Bays (Links to an external site.)​. I am from Austin. I graduated from The
University of Texas. I have worked as an animator, visual effects artist, video game
artist and many other things.
    ●   Contact Ben Bays
    ● Office Hours
I am assisted by Graduate Level MFA and MA students from RTF - Radio Television
and Film.


You should reach out to them through the Canvas Inbox.
Sara Pinar Onder (Links to an external site.)​ has been the TA for this course for several
semesters. Sara has has technical understanding and exceptional insight in digital
media production.
     ●   Contact Sara Pinar Onder
 (Links to an external site.)
ONLINE CLASS FORMAT
This course is Asynchronous, Self-Paced and Non-Linear.
If you look at the​ ​ASSIGNMENTS​ section of this course (​It is very helpful to sort the
Assignments in a particular way.​), you will see a collection of​ ​CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS
CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS
     ●   Each CREATIVE ASSIGNMENT is worth 6 points. Details in Rubrics.
     ●   You may complete the CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS ​in any order you wish​, though I do
         ask that you complete the ​DMP Entrance Exam​ before you begin (and yes, this Exam
         does count as one of your CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS).
     ●   You may submit (and resubmit) a CREATIVE ASSIGNMENT ​as many times as you
         wish​ until ​you​ are satisfied with your grade. Made a mistake? Fix it and resubmit--no
         penalty.
     ●   You may complete the CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS ​at your own pace. ​There is only
         one ​required​ deadline in this course: ​AUGUST 14th, 11:59 pm​. After this date/time, I
         will ​not​ accept submissions (or revisions).
UNITS


As you can see there are ​UNITS​ with CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS in them.
    1. SOFTWARE UNIT
    2. PIPELINE UNIT
    3. SPECIALIZATION UNIT
Complete 5 CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS from ​each​ of those 3 UNITS.
15 CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS x 6 POINTS EACH = 90 POINTS
You cannot submit more than 15 CREATIVE ASSIGNMENTS for credit.
X-FACTOR
The​ X-FACTOR UNIT​ is a set of assignments or challenges which give you points for speed,
exceptional work, attending special events or completing other miscellaneous challenges.
Judicious use of the X-FACTOR UNIT can cause you finish the course with a perfect score
early!
COMMUNICATION
Much of our communication will happen through CANVAS.
    ●  If you have a question or comment about a ​particular​​CREATIVE ASSIGNMENT​, please
       communicate in the ​comment​ section of ​that​ assignment.
            ○ examples:
                   ■ "Is it okay to use Adobe Illustrator for this particular assignment?"
                   ■ "The layer mask isn't visible in my After Effects project"
                   ■ "Ben you spelled 'egregious' wrong and the Rubric shows an old version
                      of this assignment"
            ○ rationale : I can download your previous submissions, edit the assignment itself,
               know which course you are even enrolled in.
            ○ Responses to SUBMISSION COMMENTS can take up to one week.
    ●  Questions about more ​general issues​should be made via email to me (or the TAs)
       through the ​Canvas Inbox System​.
            ○ example:


                     ■   "When are your office hours?"
                     ■   " Could you look at my Resume and Portfolio and tell me what you think?"
                         (yes we can)
                     ■ "Ben I see a mistake in how you are tabulating points AND you left an
                         announcement from Fall 2017 up on the home page."
            ○   Responses via the CANVAS INBOX can take up to one week
I am available for ​synchronized video meetings​ on the​ ​CANVAS CALENDAR​.
It is something like office hours, something like an impromptu class on any subject you like,
something like an atelier, something like me available.
HARDWARE and SOFTWARE
Some of the assignments require a ​camera​, even a smartphone or webcam.
Some assignments can be completed with apps on a ​smartphone​ or a ​tablet​.
Some of the assignments will require a ​computer​. Either your own, or one on a cloud.
There are no minimum or maximum specifications for this computer, and you may use MAC or
PC or even LINUX operating systems.
That said ​some​software (like the Adobe Creative Suite or the UNREAL engine) has minimum
specifications or may only work on certain systems.
In the details of each CREATIVE ASSIGNMENT, there is a section called SOFTWARE. This
section details the primary software used and alternate software (if any exists).


The PRIMARY SOFTWARE used for this course is
    ●   ADOBE CREATIVE SUITE (Links to an external site.)​ : Photoshop, Animate and After
        Effects
            ○ MAC and PC
            ○ Adobe offers student pricing.
            ○ They also offer a 7 day free trial.
    ●   AUTODESK MAYA (Links to an external site.)
            ○ (Links to an external site.)​MAC and PC
            ○ Maya is free
                     ■ Create an account using your official UT email (name@mail.utexas.edu
                     ■ download Maya
*Summer 2020: Adobe has extended an offer for free use of the Adobe Creative Suite to you on
your personal computer until July 6th, 2020. The email address you provided to the University,
the one attached to your name in UT direct, is your account login. Instructions to install Adobe
Creative Suite here:
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/comm/Adobe+-+Faculty+-+Student+User+Covid+-+19+license
(Links to an external site.)
After July 6, you must purchase the software, or have advanced to a point in the course where it
is no longer required. This course has been designed to mitigate this disruption, but thinking
long-term, you may want to consider the investment for the entire academic year if your area of
study is in digital media production.
GRADES
GRADES are posted on the​ ​Canvas Gradebook​ throughout the semester.
You begin the course with ZERO POINTS for all​ ​ASSIGNMENTS


ASSIGNMENTS are evaluated when you submit them.
RUBRICS define the grading parameters of each assignment and assign POINTS.
POINTS = Percentage POINTS
LETTER GRADES are submitted to the registrar at the end of the semester according to the
following table.
 Grade             Range:
 A                 100 or more points                 to 95.0%
 A-                < 95.0 %                           to 90.0%
 B+                < 90.0 %                           to 85.0%
 B                 < 85.0 %                           to 80.0%
 B-                < 80.0 %                           to 75.0%
 C+                < 75.0 %                           to 70.0%
 C                 < 70.0 %                           to 65.0%
 C-                < 65.0 %                           to 60.0%
 D+                < 60.0 %                           to 55.0%
 D                 < 55.0 %                           to 50.0%
 D-                < 50.0 %                           to 45.0%
 F                 < 45.0 %                           to 0.0%
On Campus Media Labs
* summer 2020: media labs on campus are currently closed


UT Austin has several media labs you can use.
The following labs have the required software for this course.
Media Labs for all majors:
Moody College Media Labs
    ●   CMA 4.142 DML Lab
    ●   CMA 4.138 DML Lab
    ●   CMB 4.144
    ●   CMB 4.120
Fair Use
You may use your own photos, videos, audio etc for any of the assignments. I welcome
it.


You may ​ALSO​ use any images, videos, audio from other sources including the
internet. You are not limited to public domain or creative commons licensed footage.
You may use anything provided you transform it.
Ask yourself this question:
 I​ s the use you want to make of another's work transformative -- that is, does it
add value to and repurpose the work for a new audience -- and is the amount of
material you want to use appropriate to achieve your transformative purpose?
If you simply turn in someone else's video, it is ​not​ transformative (and is also
plagiarism). But if you download a video and rotoscope or animate over it, it ​IS
transformative. Every assignment in this course requires that you add something.
Fair Use can seem complex, but in the context of this course, it is pretty clear: you CAN use
other people work in your own provided you transform it.
More on Fair Use Here. (Links to an external site.)
RTF Safety Policy
Special safety precautions for your crew, actors and others in the area are required if you are
undertaking any hazardous activities while filming, including but not limited to ANY driving or
horseback/livestock shots, shooting in or around water or heights, or if you are using stunts,
flames, pyrotechnics, squibs or simulated weapons. Please note that unlicensed handguns and
other real weapons are never permitted in RTF studios or on location shoots. In addition, you
must follow all federal, state and local laws and the rules of any venue or location at which you
are filming regarding hazardous activities, including University of Texas at Austin rules if filming
is done on campus.
Student filmmakers must submit a detailed safety plan to their course instructor and the RTF
Technical Facilities Manager if a script or project involves driving or horseback/livestock shots,
shooting in or around water or heights, stunts, flames, pyrotechnics, squibs, weapons or any
other hazardous activities (this requirement applies to all shoots, including documentary
projects, but please see the special guidelines for documentary driving shots below). It is the
responsibility of the student to hire experts in the field and budget at least $600/day for expert
consultation and on-set supervision if, in the judgment of the class instructor and the Technical


Facilities Manager, such expert consultation or supervision is necessary. In addition, any
utilization of pyrotechnics on the University of Texas at Austin campus requires prior review and
approval through the Fire Prevention Services office by the University Fire Marshal or their
designee.
Students should understand that driving while filming will be permitted only in strictly limited
circumstances, such as on a private road or drive. In most circumstances, students who wish to
undertake driving shots will be required to arrange for a police escort and a city permit.
Monitors inside the vehicle will NOT be allowed while filming in a vehicle. Filming from the back
of trucks is not considered safe and is not permitted under any circumstances.
Documentary filming of an interview while the interview subject is driving is only permitted if the
cameraperson is secured in a seat belt and is not directing the driver of the car in any way,
besides engaging in a conversation in which the driver/interviewee has been informed not to
look at the camera or the interviewer at all during the interview. In addition, any filming from a
vehicle, for drive-by B-roll, must be done by a cameraperson secured in a seat belt, where the
driver is not being directed in any way by the director, so that they are driving as they normally
would. As noted above, any documentary student planning on filming in any vehicle must
submit a safety plan to their course instructor and the RTF Technical Facilities Manager.
Students who fail to comply with this policy will receive a failing grade in this class and will be
barred from future access to RTF production and post-production equipment and facilities
If Police, Fire, or EMS are called to your shoot, or any injuries on your shoot require
medical attention, this must be reported to your instructor and the Assistant Director of
Production Services, (Keefe Boerner Keefe.Boerner@austin.utexas.edu), within 24 hours
of the incident. There is a form in checkout and on the RTF website that must be filled out
and returned within three business days.
Policy on Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the


Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at:​ ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct
(Links to an external site.)​.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
| 512-471- 3515 |​cmhc.utexas.edu
-     CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |​ ​cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- |CMA 4.134 | 512-471- 7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
-     Brief assessments and referral services


- Mental health &amp; wellness articles -​ ​cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab -​ ​cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, &amp; groups -​ ​cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
