                ALD 321: Play in Early Development Spring 2020
               Tuesdays      9:30 am -11:00 am in BEL 328
               Thursdays     09445 (9:30 am -11:00 am, SZB 312) Nnenna Odim
                             09450 (9:30 am -11:00 am, SZB 344) María José Ruíz González
                             09455 (9:30 am -11:00 am, SZB 411) Da Hei Ku
                             09060 (9:30 am -11:00 am, SZB 424) David Barry
                     Welcome to ALD 321: Play in Early Development
This course is designed to examine play from a variety of political, anthropological,
sociological, educational and social justice perspectives. In an era where play is increasingly
disappearing in schools and neighborhoods, it is essential that anyone who cares about or
for children have a deep understanding of the connections between play, learning, healthy
living and capability expansion. In this course, we critically evaluate research on play and try
to better understand the role of play in our lives and in the lives of children. We investigate
how society and culture shape the ways we think about play and how much access to play
we have in our daily lives. We talk about play experiences for children on the Autism
spectrum as well as for children who have experienced trauma. We address whether video
games count as play and how to support principles of play in an increasingly digital world.
There are two goals for this course. The first goal is to help each student value play for
children and for themselves and to have a range of theory and evidence to advocate for play.
The second goal is for students to expand their capabilities to support children’s play in ways
that increase their agency rather than try simply to control them.
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed
to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your
major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the
independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
                                                                                               1


Natacha Jones, Instructor
SZB 528D Email: njones@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Thursdays 2:30-3:30 pm and by appointment
     Teaching                   Email                            Office Hours
    Assistants
   Nnenna Odim      nnenna.odim@utexas.edu         (SZB 528D) Thursdays 11:00-12:00pm
      (09445)
  María José Ruiz   mariajoseruiz@utexas.edu (SZB 528B) Thursdays 11:30-12:30pm
     Gonzalez
      (09050)
     Da Hei Ku      dahei@utexas.edu               (SBZ 528D) Thursdays 11:00-12:00pm
      (09455)
    David Barry     davepbarry@utexas.edu          (SZB 528D) Mondays 11:45-12:45pm
      (09460)
Required Text
Course Reading Packet - ALD 321 can be purchased on first day of class or at Asel Art Supply
510 W. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd. If you have questions text Jerome: 512-497-6662.
Technology Etiquette
There are so many ways you *could* distract yourself in class – please don’t. Stay with us. It
is important for us all to be mentally present during our time together. Technology is a
great tool when used appropriately; however, it can be distracting, not only to you but also
to those around you. It is also disrespectful to our class learning community. You are
expected to use your laptop/tablet/phone in appropriate ways and at appropriate times.
These policies are meant to help us all be engaged and less distracted. If you choose to use
electronic devices inappropriately (e.g. watching material other than the ones assigned in
class, being on social media, or working on assignments for other classes) instead of
engaging in class, you will lose participation points. Please do not wear any type of
headphones or earbuds during class unless they are a documented accommodation.
Posting on social media any pictures or quotes from students or teachers is prohibited.
Class should be a safe place for sharing ideas without worrying about people posting it.
                                                                                             2


Course Assignments
I. Participation (60 points)
Participation includes coming prepared to class, reading the assignments, appropriately
participating in class discussions and periodic attendance assignments. Regular attendance
at all class meetings is a requirement of this course: you cannot learn if you are not here. For
each class session you miss, points will be deducted from attendance grade for the course. In
addition to attendance, your class engagement will be evaluated as well based on your
participation during Tuesday’s lectures and small sections. Each of you will be granted two
Emergency Release (ER) days. Your ER excuses you from two class sessions with no penalty.
To use your ER, you must notify your TA by email BEFORE class. If you fail to contact your
TA before class, you ER will not count, and you will lose points. Save your two ER’s for
medical issues, family demands, car trouble, etc. All other absences are unexcused and will
affect your grade. *Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of
religious holidays that fall on our scheduled class day. You must give your TA an advance
notice of these absences, so they can make the necessary accommodations. All other
absences are unexcused and will affect your grade.
For both Tuesday lectures and the small sections, sign-in sheets will be made available for
the first 10 minutes of class for you to mark attendance. If you are late and unable to sign,
then please check in with your TA after the class for attendance.
II. Weekly Reflection (65 points total)
Before each Tuesday class, you will post about your weekly readings by 9:30 am on Canvas
under the Discussion tab (except for Week 1 and 15). To post, students will reply to the
discussion board created each week. Once your response is posted you will be able to see
your other classmates’ responses as well and respond to them. You are free to discuss and
respond to one another, but that is not a requirement. However, glancing over each other’s
work may enhance the conversation within class. Please see below for a few reflection
guidelines:
Your weekly post will have three parts: a reading reflection, a robust question, and a short
self-reflection on how you view young children.
Your weekly posts should be approximately 250-300 words.
    1. Your reading reflection should synthesize the weekly readings, not summarize
         (200-250 words).
         Please refrain from including long quotes/ too many quotes.
                                                                                               3


        Your reading reflection may include a few, some, or all of the following:
     •  What was most compelling and striking to you in the readings? What makes you think
        more deeply in the reading in helpful and provocative ways?
     •  What are the major arguments/thesis of each reading (what supporting evidence,
        facts, experiences, or data do the authors provide to support their arguments)? And,
        what are your reactions to the arguments? Are you convinced, why or why not?
     •  What are specific strengths and weaknesses of the ideas in the readings? How did the
        authors support or not support their argument? Were there any perspectives missing
        in the reading?
     •  How do the authors' perspectives compare and contrast across readings?
     •  How does the reading content relate to your own life experience? Critically reflect on
        this question.
2. Create 1 robust question from the readings that may be used for discussion. It can be a
larger question you still have after the readings that relates to the theme of the week/course
OR a specific question that relates directly to what you read for that week. Include page
numbers and direct quotes where appropriate. These questions will guide discussions
during small group meetings on Thursdays.
3. Finally, EVERY week you will answer the following question: How has your thinking
about this week’s readings and/or course content changed, deepened, clarified or challenged
the way you think about young children? (50-100 words)
III. Opening Activity (10 points)
For each small section meeting on Thursday, students will prepare one 10-minute opening
activity that relates to the topic we will be discussing. The activity can be and is not limited
to a game, video clip, discussion questions, etc. Be creative! Students will sign-up for a
session on the first day of class.
On your opening activity week, you need to send your TA a paragraph about what you are
going to do for opening activity and how it is connected to that week’s readings by Tuesday.
III. Play Series
1. Generation Play (Data due 02/06/20 and Reflection due 02/13/20) (25 points)
For this project, you will be asked to complete an interview with one adult about his/ her
play memories (using guiding questions that we come up with in class) and one interview
with a child (ages 3-12) about his/her experiences and ideas about play. Students will bring
data to class and the following week turn in 2 pages (typed, double spaced) reflection that
draws upon readings and interview data.
                                                                                               4


2. Observation of Play (Paper due 03/05/20) (25 points)
For this project, you will observe a child/children (between 2 and 12-years-old) playing for
1 hour in spaces such as a park, preschool (we have a couple of preschools we can put you in
contact with), school, or a museum. You can choose to observe a child/children in your family
or friend circle if you have permission from their caregiver. For the first 30 minutes, without
being invasive, you will watch them play (engage in minimal interaction and intervention)
and take careful notes of what they do, say, or show interest. Possible areas of focus include
the ways children engage in play, welcome or don’t welcome others into their play, how
physical materials and nature play a role in the play, how adults interact with children during
play, ways that certain things encourage and discourage play and how regulations impact
play. For the second part of the observation, you will use the questions and wonderings from
the previous assignment to see if observing the child/children can help answer or elucidate
them.
After, the one-hour observation, you will analyze your observation using at least one theorist
and/or reading from class in 2-3 pages (typed, double spaced) paper. Be sure to detail what
you observed (children actions, dialogues, setting, etc.). You may assign pseudonyms if you
do not know the children’s names. You are also encouraged to use your experiences from the
interviews and connect it to your observations in the paper.
*Be sure to be respectful of children. You do NOT have permission to film or take
photographs.
3. Environment Design for Play (Due 03/26/20) (25 points) Due: Environment redesign
map
Students will take a picture of a space children go to but is not conducive to their play
(classroom, family room, hospital, library, outdoor space, supermarket, museum, hallway)
and change the design to allow for play – this includes attention to time and space as well as
what people do, what is around for them and how it is regulated. Students can map, draw
arrows, stick pictures, create models and will narratively explain the readings/ concepts/
theorists/ researchers that inspire each change. Students will make 3-5 changes to the space
of their choosing and use 2 or more theorists/readings to explain the changes.
4. Equity and Development (Due 04/16/20) (25 points)
OPTION 1: Write a paper or create some type of a visual demonstration (e.g., poster, ppt
presentation, or video of yourself) to explain how play and development is impacted by
equity issues. The equity issues include, but are not limited to, race, class, ability, gender,
sexuality, language or immigration status. Select one of these equity issues and provide three
related examples to articulate how play is affected by that particular equity issue. You can
draw examples from legitimate news sources, articles, reports, or books (NOT from the
reading packet). You may use the readings to support the examples you have found from the
other sources. One example can be your own experience You can also write about your own
experience(s) as a child, aunt/uncle, or parent and reflect on how (in)equity issues played a
                                                                                              5


part in your or the child’s/children’s play and development. Please cite your sources
according to APA style.
OPTION 2: Autobiography. Write a paper to explain how your past or/and present
experiences are impacted by equity issues using 3 experiences. Reflect on your personal
history and experiences in relation to schooling, gender, sexuality, race, class, language,
culture, religion, dis/ability, immigration status, intersectionality.
IV. Play Advocacy Project (Final) (Presentation due 05/07/20, Paper due 05/11/20) (70
points)
Due: Play advocacy artifact Cover sheet (found on Canvas)
      Reflection paper (2-3 pages, double-spaced)
      Proof of Project’s execution (i.e. screenshot, forwarded email, etc.)
This project is meant to demonstrate knowledge of the importance of play and a committed
effort to advocating on behalf of young children. Using discussions and readings from the
class as a guide, students will create an advocacy piece that is meant to publicly explain the
importance of play. This is meant to be a flexible but high-quality creative project. For
example, students could write a general op-ed for the Texas Tribune on the importance of
play. Students could choose to advocate for play in certain specific environments such a
schools, doctors’ offices or other locations. Students could choose a particular group of
people/organization to focus on with their project. Other possible project options include
policy brief, podcast, graphics poster, graphic novel, social media campaign. Students will be
graded according to the play advocacy project guidelines/ cover sheet found on canvas.
       Attendance                                  45 points
       &                                           (15 weeks x 3 pts each week)
       Weekly Engaged Participation                15 points
       Reflections                                 60 points (13 weeks)
       Opening Activity                            10 points
       Play Series                                 100 points
                                                   (4 projects x 25 pts each)
       Play Advocacy Project                       70 points
       Total                                       300 Points
Class Policies and Grading Criteria
    •   All papers, assignments, and projects must be completed and submitted through
        canvas by the start of the class session on which they are due. The grade on any late
        work will be decreased by 5 points for each day beyond the due date unless
        arrangements have been made with your TA in advance.
                                                                                             6


    •   Any students with travelling schedules need to submit their schedules to their
        respective TAs in the first week of class.
    •   If you leave from class early, then it would be counted as an absence and attendance
        points would be deducted.
    •   Meeting the basic requirements of an assignment neither constitutes nor guarantees
        an A. Please refer to the University of Texas at Austin's grading system that defines
        the following letter grades: A (excellent); B (above average); C (average); D (pass); F
        (failure). In this class A= 93-100; A- =90-92; B+=87-89; B=83-86; B- =80-82; C+=77-
        79; C=73-76; C- =70-72: D=60-69; F= 59 or below
    •   Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
        disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
        dismissal from the University. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services web
        site at <http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/> for more information about
        scholastic dishonesty.
    •   Students with specific learning needs should meet with me within the first week of
        classes so that all necessary accommodations can be made. Students with disabilities
        may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
        and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSB)
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment
consistent with university policy and federal and state law. Please let me know if you
experience any barriers to learning so I can work with you to ensure you have equal
opportunity to participate fully in this course. If you are a student with a disability, or think
you may have a disability, and need accommodations please contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD).
Please refer to SSD’s website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
If you are already registered with SSD, please deliver your Accommodation Letter to me as
early as possible in the semester so we can discuss your approved accommodations and
needs in this course.
                                                                                                7


                          Course Content and Organization
Week 1: Introduction to the Course – What is Play?
1-21-20 - Large Class
   • Defining Play
   • Reasons why children play
   • Overview of the course
1-23-20 - Small Sections
   • Introduction to the Course Community
   • Housekeeping - Remind: Texas email and Canvas, Weekly activity signups
   • Play Genealogy Maps
   • Discuss reading (on Canvas)
     READING                               Ambiguity of Play (Sutton Smith)
                                                     ** On Canvas
Week 2: How do we listen carefully to young children?
1-28-20 - Large Class
   • Principles for taking children seriously
   • Importance of listening and observation when working with children
   • Technology and listening to children
1-30-20 - Small Sections
   • Discuss Readings
   • Examples of Adult/Child Discussions
    READINGS         “We’re Many Members, but One Body”: Fostering a Healthy Self-
                     Identity and Agency in African American Boys (Wright, Counsell &
                     Tate)
                     On Listening to What the Children Say (Paley)
Week 3: What does play have to do with development? Part One
2-04-20 - Large Class
   • Domains of development
   • Impact of Piaget and Montessori
   • Theory of Minds
2-06-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Generation Play Project Data – Sharing
  DUE THIS WEEK                       Data from Interviews (Bring to class)
 READINGS            Theories of Childhood – Piaget (Harhart)
                     Playful Learning and Montessori Education (Lillard)
                     Scientist in the crib (Gopnik, Meltzoff & Kuhl)
                                                                                      8


Week 4: What does play have to do with development? Part Two
2-11-20 - Large Class
   • Expanding domains
   • Impact of Vygotsky and Erikson
2-13-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Theorist Activity – Ages & Stages/Context & Environment
  DUE THIS WEEK                           Interviews Reflection paper
 READINGS            Vygotskian and Post-Vygotskian Views on Children’s Play
                     (Bodrova & Leong)
                     Play as the Precursor to Literacy Development (Genishi & Dyson)
Week 5: What does play have to do with development? Part Three
2-18-20 - Large Class
   • Culture(s) and Development
   • Impact of cultures, nationalities, and experience on play
2-20-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Interpretation Activity
 READINGS           Using Postcolonial Theory to Critically Reframe the Child Development
                    Narrative (Gupta)
                    Children’s Play as a Cultural Activity (Gaskins)
Skim                Preschool in Three Cultures Revisited (Tobin)
Week 6: How does agency and control impact play?
2-25-20 - Large Class
   • How agency works
   • International development and children’s development
   • Unequal access to play
2-27-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Open-up activity with roadblocks
   • Tech Challenge
 READINGS       Children’s Need to Know: Curiosity in Schools (Engel)
                Making a Stink About the “Ideal” Classroom (Souto-Manning)
                                                                                        9


Week 7: How does policy and equity impact children’s play and development?
3-03-20– Large Class
    • Disappearance of play
    • Advocacy for play and early childhood
3-05-20 – Small Sections
    • Opening Activity
    • Discuss Readings
    • DAP changes over time – where did play go?
    • Equity issues and Play
  DUE THIS WEEK                                 Observation of play paper
 Choose one of the      Inserting Child-Initiated Play into an American Urban School District
 two readings. Be       after a Decade of Scripted Curricula Complexities and Progress
 ready to someone       (Nicholson, Bauer & Woolley) in course packet
 who has read it in                                           OR
 class                  Is Kindergarten the New First Grade? ** On Canvas
 ALL READ               NAEYC Policy Statements ** On Canvas
Week 8: How can technology limit or extend play?
03-10-20 - Large Class
    • Play vs. Entertainment
    • Tech for young children
03-12-20 - Small Sections
    • Opening Activity
    • Discuss Readings
    • Play Tech Challenge
 READINGS        “I’m Just Playing Ipad” (Moore & Adair)
                 Young people, online gaming culture, and education (Beavis)
 SKIM            http://www.naeyc.org/files/naeyc/file/positions/PS_technology_WEB2.pdf (Links to
                 an external site.)
 SKIM           https://masalachaimusings.com/2017/07/28/phones-r-us-parental-
                controls-in-a-digital-world/
3-17-20 – NO CLASS (Spring Break)
3-19-20 – NO CLASS (Spring Break)
                          ******** Spring Break – March 16-21 *********
                                                                                                  10


Week 9: What is different about playing outdoors?
3-24-20 - Large Class
   • Explorer of the World
   • Loose Parts Theory
   • Privilege
3-26-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Outside Time vs. Playing Outside
 DUE THIS WEEK Environment Design for Play
 READINGS          The Genius of Childhood: How nature nurtures creativity (Louv)
                   Learning with children, ants, and worms in the Anthropocene:
                   Towards a common world pedagogy of multispecies vulnerability
                   (Taylor & Pacini-Ketchabaw)
 SKIM              Quality Outdoor Spaces for Young Children (Spencer & Wright)
Week 10: Does gender affect how we play?
3-31-20 – Large Class
   • Internalized Gender Roles
   • Sexism at Play
   • Queer Theory and Play
4-02-20 – Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
 READINGS          How to play like a girl (LaFrance)
                   Using Queer theory to rethink gender equity in early childhood
                   education (Blaise & Taylor)
                                                                                  11


Week 11: What kinds of racial conversations happen during play?
4-07-20 - Large Class
   • Kids act out real life
   • Examples of racial conversations that happen during play
   • Normalizing diversity
4-09-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Inclusive communities
 READINGS         The impact of race and culture on play in early
                   childhood (Adair & Doucet)
                  How children learn about racism and enact anti-racism (Derman-
                  Sparks)
                  Teaching about Racial Equity Issues in Teacher Education Programs
                  (Boutte)
Week 12: How does play make sense for children with disabilities?
4-14-20 - Large Class
   • Play and Autism
   • Play for children with different abilities
4-16-20 – Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
   • Parent Letters
 DUE THIS          Equity and play
 WEEK
 READING           Emancipating play: Dis/abled children, development and
                   deconstruction (Goodley & Runswick-Cole)
                   Preferred Play Activities of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder in
                   Naturalistic Settings (Doody & Mertz)
 SKIM              Therapeutic Advantages of play (Goncu & Gaskins)
                                                                                       12


Week 13: Identity, Parents, and Community
4-21-20 - Large Class
   • Parent panel
   • Identity development in young children
   • Intersectionalities and identity(ies)
4-23-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
                    Preschoolers’ funds of knowledge displayed through sociodramatic
                    play episodes in a bilingual classroom (Riojas Cortes)
 READINGS
                    Learning to be a child (Brooker)
Week 14: How can play and positive schooling help children going through trauma?
4-28-20 - Large Class
   • Play and Trauma
4-30-20 - Small Sections
   • Opening Activity
   • Discuss Readings
                  Learning to laugh (Wright)
 READINGS         Ordinary Magic: Lessons from Research on Resilience in Human
                  Development (Masten)
Week 15: Considering children in our work
5-05-20 - Large Class
   • Discipline and Young Children
   • Future directions
5-07-20 – Small Sections
   • Advocacy Project Presentations
 DUE THIS WEEK                 Advocacy Project Cover Sheet to share with class
                                                                                     13
