The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
                                                                                                                          H-E-B Design + Construction, Lake|Flato Architects, Selser Schaefer Architects. Photo: A. Pyrek
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL II
(the thermal environment + water systems,
vertical transportation, fire protection and egress)
Unique Number: 00990 • ARC 384L & 00390 • ARI 384L
MW     0930 to 1100p SUT 2.114
M      0700 to 0800p SUT 2.114
INSTRUCTORS:
Adam Pyrek
Office: WMB 4.116A
Office hours: M 8:45 to 09:30a and by appointment
Telephone:
Email: aapyrek@utexas.edu (Include ECII in the subject)
Teaching Assistant:
Ken Sneed
Office hours: by appointment
Email: kensneed@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION
As a complementary course to EC I (illumination, electricity and acoustics), Environmental Control II will focus on
the thermal environment, water systems and management, vertical transportation, fire protection and egress. The
course will first establish a framework and a context for the technical components of buildings. These will include
Environment, Resources & Energy; Site, Resources & Climate; Thermal Comfort; and the Design Process.
Consequently, the various core topics of this course will be explored both individually and in relation to one
another in order to develop students’ approaches to systems integration in architecture. The assignments will
encourage the students to explore the possible opportunities to find interrelationships between different systems
and disciplines.
The course will survey traditional and free-running buildings as a background to contemporary approaches of
mechanical and hybrid environmental control. Beyond learning about the industry standard systems and
methods, students will become familiar with alternative ways of fulfilling project and code requirements. Case
studies will be used in order to broaden the students’ realm of possibilities in terms of system selection and the use
of novel approaches to climate control for buildings. Other related topics such as the application of renewable
energy technologies will also be covered.
One and one-half lecture hours twice per week and a one-hour lab once per week for one semester.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
The objective of this course is for graduate students to acquire the understanding of the technical material that
will allow them to become effective designers and project team-leaders. After this survey, they should be able to
use critical thinking (with some imagination) in order to push the selection and application of environmental
control systems beyond what is typically offered by the industry. This should ultimately lead to more design
autonomy, a more seamless integration of systems, improved occupant comfort, and better performing, more
environmentally sensitive projects.
Some of the specific objectives of this course are for students to be able to:
   •   Perform fundamental calculations relating to envelope heat flow, natural ventilation, rainwater
       collection…
              Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 1 of ! 8


     •   Have an in-depth understanding of the occupant's thermal comfort.
     •   Be familiar with the technical terminology needed for effective interdisciplinary communication.
     •   Recognize the importance of occupant behavior in the design of passive and mechanical systems.
     •   Have a critical understanding of the role of analytical tools used for thermal and energy simulations.
     •   Be familiar with the principles of water conservation and rainwater collection.
     •   Use case studies to expose students to real-world conditions and illustrate application of
         environmental principles in contemporary practices.
NATIONAL ARCHITECTURAL ACCREDITING BOARD (NAAB) CRITERIA
National Architectural Accrediting Board “requires an accredited program to produce graduates who: are
competent in a range of intellectual, spatial, technical, and interpersonal skills; understand the historical, socio-
cultural, and environmental context of architecture; are able to solve architectural design problems, including the
integration of technical systems and health and safety requirements; and comprehend architects' roles and
responsibilities in society.”
The Student Performance Criteria as categorized under the NAAB Educational Realms that are addressed during
the EC courses are listed here:
Primary: A.5. Investigative Skills, B.3. Sustainability, B.6. Comprehensive Design, B.8. Environmental Systems, B.10.
Building Envelope Systems, B.11. Building Service Systems, B.12. Building Materials and Assemblies, C.2. Human
Behavior, C.4. Project Management.
Secondary: A.1. Communication Skills, A.2. Design Thinking Skills, A.3. Visual Communication Skills, A.4. Technical
Documentation, A.6. Fundamental Design Skills, A.10. Cultural Diversity, B.1. Pre-Design, B.2. Accessibility, B.4. Site
Design, B.5. Life Safety, B.7. Financial Considerations, C.1. Collaboration, C.3. Client Role in Architecture, C.6.
Leadership, C.8. Ethics and Professional Judgment, C.9. Community and Social Responsibility.
For more information reference: www.naab.org
COUNCIL FOR INTERIOR DESIGN ACCREDITATION (CIDA)
Standard 4. Global Context - Interior designers have a global view and consider social, cultural, economic, and
ecological contexts in all aspects of their work.
Student Learning Expectations
a) Students are aware that building technology, materials, and construction vary according to
geographic location.
Student work demonstrates understanding of:
c) how environmental responsibility informs the practice of interior design.
Standard 5. Collaboration - Interior designers collaborate and also participate in interdisciplinary teams.
Student Learning Expectations
Students have awareness of:
a) the nature and value of integrated design practices.
e) Student work demonstrates the ability to effectively collaborate with multiple disciplines in
developing design solutions.
Standard 6. Business Practices and Professionalism - Interior designers understand the principles and processes that
define the profession and the value of interior design to society.Students understand:
g) instruments of service such as contract documents, transmittals, schedules, budgets, and
specifications.
Standard 9. Communication - Interior designers are effective communicators.
Program Expectations
The interior design program provides opportunities for:
g) students to develop active listening skills in the context of professional collaboration.
Standard 14. Environmental Systems and Comfort - Interior designers use the principles of acoustics, thermal
comfort, and indoor air quality in relation to environmental impact and human wellbeing.
Student Learning Expectations
a) Students understand that design decisions relating to acoustics, thermal comfort, and indoor air
quality impact human wellbeing and the environment.
Students understand:
                Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 2 of ! 8


d) the principles of thermal design.
e) how active and passive thermal systems and components impact interior design solutions.
f) the principles of indoor air quality.
g) how the selection and application of products and systems impact indoor air quality.
Standard 15. Construction - Interior designers understand interior construction and its interrelationship with base
building construction and systems.
Student work demonstrates understanding that design solutions affect and are impacted by:
g) vertical and horizontal systems of transport and circulation such as stairs, elevators, or escalators.
For more information reference: https://accredit-id.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/01/Professional-
Standards-2018_Final.pdf
FORMAT AND PROCEDURES
The course will consist of five complementary components: Lectures, Lab Sessions, Assigned Reading, Field Trips
and Assignments/Quizzes/Tests. All components will cover and mutually reinforce the same subjects, but will focus
on different aspects (theoretical, quantitative, hands-on, etc.). Effort will also be made to relate and integrate this
course to the students’ current studio work. The structured time for this semester will consist of 1-1/2 lecture hours
twice per week and a 1 hour lab once per week. Required field trips with the class and the instructor will take
place during the semester (In some cases a nominal fee might be required). Guest speakers will be invited in order
to share their expert view and experience on specific topics.
The Canvas course management software will be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, etc. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help
Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/wiki/general-canvas-support-procedure
If you choose to use Adobe software in this course: When accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you
will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not required to purchase Creative Cloud services to sign in
on our lab computers, but you are required to create a free Adobe ID. That can be done here: https://
accounts.adobe.com/”
PREREQUISITE
Graduate standing and consent of the graduate adviser.
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
Schedule may be adjusted during the semester due to coordination with guest lecturers and/or trips.                      If the
schedule is changed, students will be notified and the updated schedule will be posted on Canvas.
                                     < SEE NEXT PAGE FOR THE TENTATIVE SCHEDULE>
               Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 3 of ! 8


WK     DATE      TOPIC
1    28-Aug      Course Introduction & Design Process
2      2-Sep     Labor Day - No Class
       4-Sep     Environment, Resources and Energy
3      9-Sep     Site, Resources and Climate
     11-Sep      Thermal Comfort
4    16-Sep      Building Enclosure: Introduction & IAQ
     18-Sep      Building Enclosure: Solar Geometry & Shading
5    23-Sep      Building Enclosure: Heat Flow: Opaque Elements
     25-Sep      Building Enclosure: Heat Flow: Fenestration
6    30-Sep      Building Enclosure: Moisture Control and Air Flow
       2-Oct     Passive EC Methods: Introduction
7      7-Oct     Passive EC Methods: Passive Solar Heating
       9-Oct     Passive EC Methods: Passive Cooling
8    14-Oct      Mechanical EC Methods: Introduction
     16-Oct      Mechanical EC Methods: Heating
9    21-Oct      Mechanical EC Methods: Cooling
     23-Oct      Mechanical EC Methods: Ventilation
10   28-Oct      Mechanical EC Methods: HVAC
     30-Oct      Hybrid EC Methods
11    4-Nov      Field Trip or Guest Lecturer
      6-Nov      Fire Protection
12   11-Nov      Water Systems and Management
     13-Nov      Water Systems and Management
13   18-Nov      Conveying Systems
     20-Nov      Life-Cycle Lecture
14   25-Nov      Field Trip or Guest Lecturer
     27-Nov      Thanksgiving Holiday
15    2-Dec      Exam Review During Class
      4-Dec      Final Studio Reviews - No Class
16    9-Dec      Field Trip or Guest Lecturer
   Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 4 of ! 8


EVALUATION CRITERIA
GRADED WORK
Students will be evaluated on the following work:
ASSIGNMENTS 50.0% (#1&2-10%; #3&4-15%)
LAB WORK            15%
QUIZZES             15%
IN-CLASS EXAM 10.0%
WRITTEN EXAM 10.0%
Bonus point may be earned by students for exemplary work or class participation at the instructor’s discretion.
ASSIGNMENTS, QUIZZES, AND EXAM
There will be (4) assignments during the semester: Assignment #1 - Site and Climate Analysis; Assignment #2 -
Shading Study - Including a Physical Model; Assignment #3 - Passive Methods - Design and Calculations;
Assignment #4 - Mechanical Methods and Energy Modeling
All assignments will be listed on Canvas with the final due dates. All completed assignments will be submitted
digitally via Canvas (by midnight on the due date). Do not email assignments as attachments! Due dates are
tentative and may be adjusted in order to allow for coordination with students' studio work. Teams will be assigned
by the instructor.
Quiz dates may be adjusted and given at any time and will cover the assigned reading, lecture material, labs and
class discussions. There will be a comprehensive exam at the end of the semester (covering assigned reading,
lecture material, labs and class discussions). The exam will divide into an in-class section and a take-home written
section.
GRADING CRITERIA
A Grade Work:
     • Has a concept that is innovative and original
     • Is comprehensive and very well developed
     • Shows in-depth understanding of the subject matter including the assigned text
     • Includes exemplary supporting figures, graphs and/or models
     • Is well written and well supported by cited references
B Grade Work:
     • Has a concept that is strong
     • Is comprehensive and developed
     • Shows understanding of the subject matter including the assigned text
     • Includes appropriate supporting figures, graphs and/or models
     • Is well written and well supported by cited references
C Grade Work:
     • Has a concept
     • Is developed
     • Shows understanding of the subject matter
     • Has adequate figures, graphs and/or models
     • Is well written with and is supported by cited references
D Grade Work:
     • Fulfills some of the assignment requirements
     • Is not developed
     • Shows some understanding of the subject matter
     • Has inadequate figures, graphs and/or models
     • Is not written well and has too few relevant cited references
F Grade Work:
     • Does not fulfill the assignment requirements
     • Is not developed
     • Does not show understanding of the subject matter
     • Has no relevant figures, graphs and/or models
     • Is not written well. Has no relevant references or references are not cited
                Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 5 of ! 8


Each of 5 categories is worth 20%. Use Modern Language Association (MLA) format for citations. Assignments
without citations will not receive a passing grade.
FINAL GRADE CRITERIA
   UT LETTER GRADE      EC MINIMUM SCORE
           A                  93.33
           A-                   90
           B+                 86.67
           B                  83.33
           B-                   80
          C+                  76.67
           C                  73.33
           C-                   70
          D+                  66.67
           D                  63.33
           D-                   60
            F                    0
LAB WORK
Lab sessions will be held during the scheduled time on Monday nights. Some of the lab assignments will be
graded and will account for 15% of the semester’s grade. Many of the labs will complement a graded
assignment. Students should be able to complete the work during the scheduled time.
DEADLINES
Each student may hand in ONE assignment (7) calendar days late ONCE during the semester. Consequently,
assignments will be reduced by 5% for each school day that they are late. Credit for work turned in late due to
non-scholastic reasons should be discussed with the instructor before the due date. Agreed-upon proof of the
reason needs to be provided by the student.
ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION
Students are required to attend and participate in all lectures. Attendance may be taken at any time. Students
need to notify the instructor in advance by email if they cannot attend a lecture. Absent students must complete
the assigned reading and familiarize themselves with the content of the missed lecture. Three (3) unexcused
absences (not due to illness, or to authorized University activities) will result in a deduction of a letter-grade from
the student’s final grade. Students need to attend labs, many of which will contribute to a graded assignment, or
will count toward a lab grade.
Students are expected to fully participate during class and labs, and need to bring a calculator, pencil/pen and
paper in order to perform quick calculations when required. (Calculator: Any type will do, and does not need to
be scientific. Phone with a calculator will do. Laptops don’t count).
Students are not to use electronic devices such as laptops, tablets or phones during the lecturers
without prior approval from the instructor. Students will need a phone or other portable electronic
device with the Canvas Student App installed in order to take quizzes and final exam in class.
ASKING FOR ASSISTANCE
Each student is expected to ask for assistance when needed. This can take place right after class, or students
may schedule additional time to meet with the instructor or the TA at a later date, preferably during office hours.
               Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 6 of ! 8


TEXTS
REQUIRED TEXTS:
Grondzik, Walter T.; Kwok, Alison G.; Stein Benjamin; Reynolds, John S. Mechanical and Electrical
Equipment for Buildings, 12th Edition. Wiley, 2014.
Heschong, Lisa. Thermal Delight in Architecture. MIT Press, 1979.
Required reading for a lecture will be assigned at the end of the previous lecture. Additional reading may be
assigned at that time. Check Canvas each week for required readings.
RECOMMENDED TEXTS:
These texts are held on reserve at the Architecture and Planning Library, or available as an Electronic Resource
through the UT Library:
Addington, D. Michelle. Smart Materials and New Technologies: For the Architecture and Design Professions. Amsterdam ; Boston
: Architectural Press, 2005.
Allen, Edward; Iano, Joseph. The Architect's Studio Companion: Rules of Thumb for Preliminary Design, 4th Edition. Wiley, 2006.
Arvind Krishan, et al. Climate Responsive Architecture. New Delhi ; New York : Tata McGraw-Hill Pub. Co., 2001.
Bachman, Leonard R. Integrated Buildings: The Systems Basis of Architecture, New York : J. Wiley & Sons, 2003.
Bradshaw, Vaughn. Building Control Systems, 2nd Edition. New York : Wiley, 1993.
Bluyssen, Philomena M. The Indoor Environment Handbook : How to Make Buildings Healthy and Comfortable. London, Sterling,
VA : Earthscan, 2009.
Bobenhausen, William. Simplified Design of HVAC Systems. Wiley, 1994.
Daniels, Klaus. The Technology of Ecological Building. Birkhauser, 1995.
Daniels, Klaus. Low-Tech, Light-Tech, High-Tech. Birkhauser, 1998.
Fanger, P.O. Thermal Comfort. McGraw Hill, 1970.
Givoni, Baruch. Passive and Low Energy Cooling of Buildings. Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1994.
Lechner, Norbert. Heating, Cooling, and Lighting: Sustainable Design Methods for Architects, 3rd Edition. Wiley, 2009.
Mendler, Sandra. The HOK Guidebook to Sustainable Design. Hoboken, N.J. : J. Wiley, 2006.
McDonough, William. Cradle to Cradle : Remaking the Way We Make Things. New York : North Point Press, 2002.
Rush, Richard D. The Building Systems Integration Handbook. New York : Wiley, 1986.
Watson, Donald, Climatic Design: Energy-Efficient Building Principles and Practices, New York ; St. Louis : McGraw-Hill, 1983.
Yeang, Ken. Ecodesign : A Manual for Ecological Design. London : Wiley, 2006.
ON-LINE RESOURCES:
ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY (EERE):
www.eere.energy.gov
WINDOWS AND DAYLIGHTING GROUP, LAWRENCE BERKELEY NATIONAL LABORATORY:
windows.lbl.gov
ENERGY STAR (A joint program of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and the U.S. Department of Energy):
www.energystar.gov
THE HESCHONG MAHONE GROUP, INC.
www.h-m-g.com/downloads/Daylighting/order_daylighting.htm
PVWATTS (Performance Calculator for Grid-Connected PV Systems)
http://pvwatts.nrel.gov/
BUILDINGGREEN, INC.
http://www.buildinggreen.com
                 Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 7 of ! 8


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fair-ness, and respect toward peers and community.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, visit the following sites: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ & University Honor Code http://
www.txstate.edu/honorcodecouncil/
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone).
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
      ▪    Please notify the instructor as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
           (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
           conversion, etc.).
      ▪    Please notify the instructor as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations of any
           kind are required. For field trips, advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on
           the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
      ▪      Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
             reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
             contact-us/
CLASS WEB SITES AND STUDENT PRIVACY
Web-based, password-protected class sites will be associated with all academic courses taught at the University.
Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available within these
sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging
files. In addition, electronic class rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names
included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main
Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information, see the General Information Catalog or go
to:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
By UT Austin policy, the student must notify the instructor of pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or
a project in order to observe a religious holy day, she/he will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire
alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation
from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/:
           ▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
                exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
           ▪ If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
           ▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow instructions of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
           ▪ Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
           ▪ Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
                found at: http://emergency.utexas.edu/
                  Syllabus • ARC/ARI 384L: Environmental Control II • Fall 2019 • Instructors: Adam Pyrek • page ! 8 of ! 8
