                        Anthropology 301 WB Spring 2020 (unique no. 31400)
                Introduction to Biological Anthropology (Web Based and Self-Paced)
                          COURSE WEBSITE: UT’s Canvas Course Website
PLEASE READ THIS SYLLABUS CAREFULLY AND ENTIRELY. YOUR
SUCCESSFUL COMPLETION OF THIS COURSE DEPENDS UPON YOUR
KNOWLEDGE OF THE INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THE SYLLABUS.
CONTACT INFORMATION                           Contact us through the course site on Canvas. Include your last name and
your UT EID in the "Subject" line of the email message.
PROFESSOR: Dr. John Kappelman. Office Hours: M W 10-11 am in SAC 5.160, or by appointment. Since this
course does not have a formal lecture time, it is anticipated that some students will have scheduling conflicts with the
official office hours. Students are encouraged to contact me to set up an alternative meeting time by appointment.
Office telephone: 512-471-0055; email jkappelman@austin.utexas.edu – put last name and UTEID in subject line.
TEACHING ASSISTANTS: TA office hours are held in SAC 5.112 during review hours (see below). Testing and
review hours are Monday-Thursday during mornings, afternoons, and evenings, but Fridays are for testing only.
INTRODUCTION                  This course is designed as an introduction to the field of biological (also called physical)
anthropology. During the semester you will investigate numerous and diverse subjects including modern evolutionary
theory, sexual reproduction, human genetics, biological variation in populations of modern humans, mammalian
phylogeny, primate diversity, behavior, biology, and ecology; the fossil record of primate and human evolution, and
archaeology. The diversity of these topics will illustrate how the topics of biological anthropology are integrated and
offer you an understanding of the place of humans in the world.
All exams and labs are completed in the Computer Testing Lab in SAC 5.112.
     - You are permitted two attempts on each exam, with the higher score counting for the grade
     - You can submit lab assignments one time only
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS                            To successfully complete this course, the student must be able to learn
the material without the benefit of lectures and formal laboratories. An introductory pdf provides an orientation to
the course (available on Canvas). Students are responsible for setting their own proper study pace for the course, but
must comply with due dates for the exams and lab assignments. This class is not less time consuming than other
classes, but it provides the student with broad latitude in arranging their study and testing schedule. The course may be
completed before the end of the semester by working in a more concentrated manner and testing before the due dates.
Any student who does not complete an exam(s) and lab assignment(s) by the due date will receive a grade of zero.
All of the work submitted in this course must be that of each individual student. Students ARE NOT permitted to
assist each other by discussing, requesting, or sharing questions and answers from the examinations, or collaborate in
the completion of laboratory assignments by discussing questions or requesting or sharing answers. Any violation of
this policy will be treated as cheating, and the offender will be referred to UT’s Office of Student Judicial Services for
investigation with the recommendation of an F in the course and the potential for additional disciplinary action.
Students are required to sign and submit a Course Policy on Academic Integrity Policy statement (see below) at the
beginning of the semester which states that they have read and understand and agree to follow these rules.
                                                               1


ANT 301 WB COURSE POLICY ON ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who cheat not only cheat themselves but also cheat other students and harm the reputation of the
University. Students in this course are expected to adhere to the highest standard of academic and personal
integrity. Each student is expected to compete honestly and fairly with his or her peers. All students are
harmed by unethical behavior by any student. Under this course’s honor system, students must not tolerate
unethical behavior by their fellow students. A student who knows of unethical behavior of another student is
required to take the steps necessary to expose this behavior. Please see UT’s policy on Student Discipline
and Conduct.
The work that you complete in this course must be entirely your own. If you do not think you can follow
this simple rule, please do not take this course.
You ARE NOT permitted to:
  - copy or reproduce by any means the exam questions and answers
  - discuss, request, or share any information about the exams in any possible venue (e.g., informal
       hallway chat, websites, forums, online chat groups, Facebook, GroupMe, TM, etc.) with anyone who is
       not the professor or a teaching assistants
  - have more than two attempts on each exam
  - collaborate on, or discuss, request, or share any information about the laboratory assignments in any
       possible venue (e.g., informal hallway chat, websites, forums, online chat groups, Facebook,
       GroupMe, TM, etc.) with anyone who is not the professor or a teaching assistants
  - submit lab assignments for another student
  - submit any lab more than once
A word of caution: Because the exams are “open” (i.e., can be taken at any time), and can be taken twice
(the higher score counts for the grade), and the labs are open book take-home assignments, it is too easy for
chat and study groups to quickly shift into platforms for sharing answers, and this behavior is against the
academic integrity policy of the course (see above). Do not fall into this trap because it only takes a single
honest person to expose cheating, and a student who knows of unethical behavior of another student is
required to take the steps necessary to expose this behavior. The best path to the successful completion of
this course is to do your own work. All questions about the lab assignments and exams should be directed
to the professor and teaching assistants, NOT to your fellow students.
                     This course has a ZERO TOLERANCE policy for cheating.
Any student found cheating (see above) will have their case directed to the UT Dean of Students and
Office of Student Judicial Services with the recommendation of an F in the course and the potential for
additional disciplinary action.
I have read and understand the above rules and agree to follow these course and University policies.
___________________________________ ________________________________ ____________
         Name and UTEID (printed)                           Signature                             Date
Print your name and UTEID, sign, and date this page. Submit this signed and dated page to the TA
when you take the syllabus compliance test. If you do not submit this signed and dated form, you will
not be permitted to take the syllabus compliance test or continue with the course.
                                                        2


REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS                          The following materials are required for the course and are supplied as a
shrink-wrapped bundle in order to reduce the overall costs of the materials:
•Essentials of Physical Anthropology, Jurmain, Kilgore, & Trevathan, 2017, 10th edition (ISBN-13: 978-1305633810).
Be sure to purchase the correct book! Older editions do not have the exact same content in each particular chapter, and
are not updated with the newest findings and discoveries.
•Virtual Laboratories for Physical Anthropology, Kappelman, 2007, Version 4. Labs are on-line from UT’s TXShop
website, and the instructions are available on the Canvas course website. VLabs can be used with these browers:
Firefox, Safari, or Internet Explorer (but not Google Chrome). For purchase, go to the TXShop website:
Virtual Laboratories for Physical Anthropology
COURSE WEBSITE                     Go to UT’s Canvas Course Website. The website will aid you in completing the course.
It is strongly suggested that you visit the site frequently and at least weekly to view any announcements posted to the
bulletin board. In addition to the complete syllabus, the website contains links to interesting sites related to biological
anthropology. Most importantly, the class website provides the Virtual Lab assignments.
EXAM AND LAB REQUIREMENTS                                 The requirements for this class include:
1) You must present your UT ID card before you can test. No other ID is accepted (e.g., electronic ID), and you
      will not be permitted to test without your valid UT ID card. This is the ID for all exams and labs.
2) All students are required to take a compliance exam that evaluates their understanding of course policies as
      presented in the syllabus. You must earn a score of 100% before you are permitted to continue with the course.
3) Ten computer-generated exams based on readings from the textbook, Essentials of Physical Anthropology. You
      are permitted two attempts on each of the ten exams, with the higher of the two scores counting as the grade. All
      exams are completed in the SAC Computer Testing Lab (SAC 5.112). Sign-up sheets for reserving testing times
      are available on a bulletin board outside the testing lab (SAC 5.112). You must present your UT ID card before you
      can test. There are DEADLINE DUE DATES for these exams. Please see below for exam deadlines.
4) Twelve lab assignments are based on the Virtual Laboratories for Physical Anthropology. Again, these
      assignments have DEADLINE DUE DATES. Deadline dates are staged on Tu and Wed according to the
      student’s last name in order to reduce lab congestion. You download each of 12 lab assignments from the
      Canvas course website, go online to the labs, work through each lab, answer the questions, and then bring your
      completed lab assignment to the SAC Computer Testing Lab (SAC 5.112) and enter your answers during REVIEW
      HOURS only. You must present your UT ID card before you can enter your answers. Please see below for lab
      deadline dates, and detailed lab submission instructions.
5) Check Status. We encourage you to check your grade, that is, “Check Status” (see deadline schedule below) at
      least four times during the semester. This task lets you know your progress and grade(s) in the course.
                   The SAC 5.112 computer testing lab opens on 23 January 2020
                                                                3


DEADLINE DATES: EXAMS, LABS, and CHECK STATUS
                        EXAM, LAB, & CHECK STATUS                           DEADLINE DATE
                           Syllabus Compliance Exam                                31 Jan
                      Exam 1                                                       31 Jan
                      Exam 2                                                        7 Feb
                      Exam 3                                                       14 Feb
                                                                           18 Feb last name A-L
                                   Labs 1, 2, and 3
                                                                           19 Feb last name M-Z
                                                   Check Status                    21 Feb
                      Exam 4                                                       28 Feb
                      Exam 5                                                      6 March
                                                                         10 March last name M-Z
                                   Labs 4, 5, and 6
                                                                         11 March last name A-L
                                                   Check Status                  13 March
                                    Spring Break                        16-21 March (Lab Closed)
                      Exam 6                                                     27 March
                      Exam 7                                                      3 April
                      Exam 8                                                      10 April
                                                                          14 April last name A-L
                                   Labs 7, 8, and 9
                                                                          15 April last name M-Z
                                                   Check Status                   24 April
                      Exam 9                                                       1 May
                                                                           5 May last name M-Z
                                 Labs 10, 11, and 12
                                                                           6 May last name A-L
                      Exam 10                                                      8 May
                                                   Check Status                    8 May
Be sure to note the “DEADLINE DATE” column in the above table. It is NOT possible to take an exam or submit a
lab assignment after the deadline other than in exceptional cases documented by an approved extension request (see
below). The extension request form and documentation must be received no later than 1 week after the missed exam or
lab assignment; if the request is received after 1 week, it will not be accepted. For example, if a Friday exam deadline is
missed, the extension request form and documentation must be received no later than the following Thursday.
EXAMS
Exams are based on information from the Jurmain et al. textbook. Be sure to read all of the material carefully,
including figures and the “boxes” which highlight certain important historical and scientific events. In order to answer
some of the multiple-choice questions, you may be required to work Punnett squares (Mendelian genetics), complete
phylogenies and timelines, and identify bones and features in figures and plots.
                               EXAMS MUST BE TAKEN IN NUMERICAL ORDER!
                     Exam 1 = chapters 1 and 2                   Exam 6 = chapter 9
                     Exam 2 = chapters 3 and 4                   Exam 7 = chapter 10
                     Exam 3 = chapter 5                          Exam 8 = chapter 11
                     Exam 4 = chapters 6 and 7                   Exam 9 = chapters 12 and 13
                     Exam 5 = chapter 8                          Exam 10 = chapter 14
                Chapter numbers are from the Jurmain et al. textbook (2017) 10th edition as noted above.
                                                              4


A WORD OF CAUTION: exam deadlines are Fridays. Whenever possible, it is best to complete testing early in the week
before the Friday deadline because of potential overcrowding on Fridays. To take an exam on FRIDAY, you must
reserve a time slot in advance of when the testing lab opens by signing the sign-up sheet. Only ONE exam attempt is
permitted on Friday; if you wait until the deadline day of Friday to test for your first attempt, you will not be allowed a
second attempt to complete the exam.
You must have your UT student ID card to test, and no exams will be given to students without a UT ID card.
You must sign in, and your ID card will be checked and left with the TA during the exam. Studying is not allowed in
the testing room. Books, notebooks, and electronic devices are not permitted in the testing area (cell phones have to
remain in pockets, backpacks or purses), and students are not permitted to copy down any questions or answers from the
exams. The TA will provide scratch paper if needed to work any problems, but the scratch paper must be returned to the
TA when the student finishes the exam. Exams are taken on computers in SAC 5.112 during posted testing hours only.
You should sign-up for a testing slot on the sheets posted on the bulletin board outside SAC 5.112 if you wish to reserve
a computer for a specific testing time. A second test is permitted on the same day but must be separated from the
first attempt by an exam review period. Students who reserve a testing slot receive priority for that testing time over
walk-in students. This is an especially important distinction on deadline days because no walk-ins are allowed on
Friday. Only students who sign up in advance before the testing lab opens on Friday will be seated on Fridays. In
order to expedite your time, it is also strongly recommended that you sign up for testing times on other days of the
week. You can also sign up for testing times in future weeks.
Since exams take approximately 10-15 minutes to complete, the last login time for an exam is fifteen minutes
before the end of each testing period. There are NO EXCEPTIONS to this rule; do not come by 5 minutes
before the end of the testing period and expect to test – you will not be seated for an exam. It is in your best
interest to plan out a weekly schedule and stick to it. We cannot reschedule testing times if the testing periods
conflict with your classes. If you have scheduling conflicts with the testing times (see below) you need to: 1) drop the
course that conflicts with this course; 2) rearrange your work/course schedule; or 3) drop this course.
BEGIN TESTING EARLY in the week and keep a cushion of time between the deadlines if you want to take
advantage of testing flexibility. You will receive a grade of zero for any exam that you have not taken.
EXAM SCORING: Each exam consists of 15 questions worth 1 point each for a maximum score of 15. You may
retake each exam once, and the higher of the two scores will be counted toward your grade. No two exams are
identical because the questions in each exam are randomly selected from a large pool of possible questions. There is,
therefore, no advantage to taking an exam without studying with the intention of previewing the questions before trying
a second “serious” attempt. Exams are scored and the results are reported to you and recorded by the computer
immediately upon completion of each exam. You are strongly encouraged to record your exam scores in the
"Record Keeping" section at the end of this syllabus for your own information.
EXAM SECOND ATTEMPT: If you choose to take an exam twice, both attempts must be completed by the exam
deadline, and the highest score of the two attempts will be counted as the grade. Both attempts of the exam must be
completed before you can move on to the next exam because all exams must be completed in numerical order. If you
wait until the deadline day to complete the second attempt, be sure to sign up for a testing slot. You can check the
reservation sheets posted outside SAC 5.112 for computer availability. SIGN UP EARLY!
EXAM REVIEW PROGRAM: You can use the exam review program to review the results of your exam. It is
strongly recommended that you review your first exam before you take the second attempt, and you can only do this
during Review Hours. You are permitted to review one time only and the review is limited to 15 minutes.
                                                             5


HOW TO COMPLETE AN EXAM.
1. Bring your UT ID card to the SAC Computer Lab (SAC 5.112) during TESTING HOURS only. You must arrive
     at least 15 minutes prior to the end of a testing block in order to be seated (see below).
2. Sign into the testing lab with your name and the number of the exam that you wish to take. Only one exam can be
     cued at one time. Give your UT ID to the TA and they will log you into the system.
3. After the TA has logged you in, you will be directed to go to a computer station. Enter your UTEID at the prompt
     and you can begin your exam. You can navigate though the exam, and should answer all of the questions. You can
     also review your answers before you submit the exam. You have 15 minutes to complete the exam.
4. When you are done, log off, and alert the TA with a wave of your hand that you are done. Once the TA recognizes
     you (usually a wave of their hand), you can leave the testing station.
5. Be sure to collect your ID card from the TA before you leave the testing lab.
6. If you want to review your answers, you need to come back during REVIEW HOURS (see above).
VIRTUAL LABS                Instructions for accessing Virtual Laboratories are given on the Canvas course homepage. It
can be used with these browsers: Firefox, Safari, or Internet Explorer (but not Google Chrome) with Flash installed.
Each lab requires about 30-60 minutes to complete and can be worked through as many times as you wish. You are
encouraged to take notes while working on the Virtual Labs. Exact instructions for logging onto the Virtual Labs
website are given on the Canvas course website. All lab assignments are subject to deadline dates and must be
completed in numerical order. There are 12 Lab Assignments worth 5 points each, for a total of 60 points.
The due dates for the Lab Assignments are listed above. They are staged across Tu and Wed in alphabetical
order, and alternate by last name. Students are, however, strongly encouraged to submit their completed lab
assignments well before the due date. If a student waits until the due date, it is possible that s/he will experience
difficulties accessing the testing lab. Assignments not completed by their due date will receive a grade of zero.
HOW TO COMPLETE VIRTUAL LAB ASSIGNMENTS. Lab assignments (pdf files) are downloaded from the
Canvas course website, and consist of a series of 10 questions that can be answered as you work through the different
sections of each of the 12 Virtual Labs. These exercises should be treated as open book assignments, but you must
complete the work on your own without assistance from other students. The labs are completed in the following
manner:
1. Go to the Canvas course website and download the lab assignments. The assignments for each lab are in the “pdf”
     file format. It is probably easiest to print out a copy of the assignment and use this hardcopy to record your answers
     to the questions as you work through the lab.
2. As you work through each Virtual Lab, be sure to read all the various sections, navigate through all of the screens,
     view the video clips and animations, and complete the Virtual Lab exercises and brief quizzes. While working
     through each Virtual Lab, you will encounter information regarding the questions on the lab assignment that you
     have downloaded from the course website (item #1 above), and you can answer them at this time. You will find all
     of the answers to the questions in the Virtual Lab. Once you have completed the lab and answered all of the
     questions on the downloaded hardcopy assignment, you should double-check all of your answers for correctness.
3. Be sure to save the hard copy of your completed assignment for each particular Virtual Lab.
HOW TO SUBMIT VIRTUAL LAB ASSIGNMENTS: You are permitted ONE submission only for each lab. If
you submit answers for a lab more than once, you will receive an F in the course.
1. Bring your UT ID card and the hardcopy of your completed lab assignment to the SAC Computer Lab (SAC 5.112)
     during REVIEW HOURS only. You must arrive at least 15 minutes prior to the end of a review block in order to
     be seated (see below).
2. Sign into the testing lab with your name and the number of the lab that you wish to complete. Only one lab can be
     cued at one time. Give your UT ID to the TA and they will log you into the system.
3. After the TA has logged you in, you will be directed to go to a computer station. Take the hardcopy of your Virtual
     Lab completed assignment to the computer station, start the lab, and enter your answers. You can navigate
     anywhere at any time though the lab, and should enter your answers to all of the questions. You can also review
     your answers before you “submit” the lab. You have 15 minutes to complete the lab. but in most cases you will
     finish answer entry in less than 5 minutes. Be sure to read the answers carefully because the computer program will
     randomize the possible answer responses.
4. When you have completed the answer entry, log off, and alert the TA with a wave of your hand that you are done.
     Once they recognize you (usually a nod of the head or wave of their hand), you can leave the testing station.
                                                                 6


5. Make sure that your name and UTEID are on your hardcopy lab assignment and turn it into the TA. Be sure to
   collect your ID card from the TA before you leave the testing lab.
7. If you wish to submit your answers for another lab (the due dates for the labs are in groups of three labs: e.g., Labs
   1, 2, and 3), the TA must re-enter you into the testing cue; if the testing lab is busy, you might have to go back into
   the sign-in line. Be sure to budget adequate time for the task.
TESTING AND REVIEW HOURS                          Exams and reviews have are completed in SAC 5.112 and have a 15
minute time limit in. You are permitted to review each exam one time only. You must log into the SAC lab at least 15
minutes before the end of review session.
The last page of this syllabus also lists the Deadline Dates for the Exams, Labs, and Check
Status that you can print out and post on the wall above your desk.
                                                            7


EXAM REVIEW AND TA CONSULTATION: Depending upon the number of questions missed in your first
attempt to pass an exam, the Exam Review program can take from 5 to 10 minutes to complete. The review is given in
SAC 5.112 during review hours only. You are permitted to review each exam one time only with a 15 minute time
limit. Any questions you have about material in the textbook or Virtual Lab can be answered by one of the TAs during
the review hours or by the professor during office hours.
CHANGES IN TEST SCHEDULE: Any changes in scheduling will be posted on the bulletin board outside SAC
5.112 and sent by email via the Canvas course website. You are strongly encouraged to check the bulletin boards and
your inbox at least weekly. In addition, there is a sign-up sheet for testing times on the bulletin board outside the testing
room. You are encouraged to sign up for testing and lab submission times well in advance of the day that you wish to
test. If you wait until the deadline, you may find that available slots are limited. There is no online sign-up sheet.
GRADING Your course grade is determined by summing your exam and lab scores. When an exam is taken twice,
the higher of the two scores is counted toward the course grade. Grades are assigned as whole letter only (no +/-).
Grades are determined by your cumulative point total: 150 possible points for the exams, and 60 possible points for the
Virtual Lab assignments, for a total of 210 possible points. A pass/fail grade must have 125 points or more to earn a
“pass.” When calculating the letter grade, we follow this commonly used rounding rule: if the point fraction is less
than 0.5, it rounds down; if it is greater than 0.5, it rounds up; if the value is exactly 0.5, it rounds up if the preceding
digit is odd, and down if the digit is even. For example: 166.3 = 166; 166.6 = 167; 167.5 =168; 166.5 = 166.
See http://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/level5/Leo/Stats8.html
                                     GRADE                 POINTS             Percent Score
                                         A                 188-210                 > 90%
                                         B                 167-187                80-89%
                                         C                 146-166                70-79%
                                         D                 125-145                60-69%
                                         F                124 or less              < 59%
EXTRA CREDIT                 There is no extra credit. Please take full advantage of the fact that you are permitted to count
the higher of two attempts on each exam toward the final grade, and that the labs are “open book” assignments.
OTHER ISSUES Disabilities, Extensions, and Drops and Incompletes
Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259.
Extensions
Requests for an extension for missed work because of a sanctioned University activity, documented illness, family-
related emergency, or death in the family will be dealt with on a case-by-case basis, but whatever the circumstance,
documentation is required. If you are unable to document your excuse, you will not be permitted to make up the missed
work. Because the labs and exams can be completed at any time, simply missing a Friday deadline does not ensure that
you will be permitted to make up missed work even if the excuse is documented. Whatever the case – sanctioned
University activity, documented illness, family-related emergency, or death in the family – full documentation is
required. If you find yourself so sick that you must miss an exam or lab submission, you should see a doctor, and if you
do, the doctor will give you a written excuse.
Permission to make up missed exams or labs requires a completed Extension Permission Request Form (available from
the TA in SAC 5.112). The extension request, consisting of a completed Extension Permission Request Form (available
in SAC 5.112) along with supporting documentation must be submitted NO LATER THAN ONE WEEK
FOLLOWING THE MISSED EXAM OR LAB ASSIGNMENT WITH:
      1) If an illness, a medical excuse documented by a letter from your doctor;
      2) If a family emergency, written documentation;
      3) If a family death, an obituary or death certificate; or
                                                                 8


     4) If a University-sanctioned activity, a letter from the director of the organization delivered to us BEFORE the
          event since these events are scheduled months in advance; and
     5) If a work-related conflict, a note from your supervisor.
If a scheduling conflict arises from work or some other issues that will cause you to miss a deadline, please inform us as
early as possible so we can assess the validity of the conflict and make any necessary arrangements. If you do not tell
us ahead of time about a scheduled event, you will not receive permission to make up the missed work.
The extension request must receive approval before any missed work can be made up. If you cannot provide
independent documentation that we can verify, the extension request will not be approved. We check on all excuses.
During the days when a completed extension request is under evaluation, you should continue to meet the exam and lab
assignment schedule.
Drops and Incompletes
If you find that you are unable to complete the course, you may obtain a drop with a “Q” if you file the appropriate
paperwork (available from your dean’s office). This request must be filed by the University deadline.
An incomplete after the deadline date can generally only be granted for a serious medical condition as documented by a
letter from your doctor. In only exceptional cases are other excuses considered legitimate grounds for an incomplete,
and these excuses generally require approval from your dean’s office.
We strongly advise you to finish the course as early as possible and thereby avoid any last-minute problems.
                 It is your responsibility to finish the course on time!
SOME IMPORTANT DATES AND DEADLINES TO REMEMBER
Spring 2019
22 January               SAC 5.112 testing lab opens
24 January               Last day of official add/drop period
31 January               Syllabus compliance test deadline
                         Exam 1 deadline
5 February               Twelfth class day
See syllabus (above) for all other exam, lab, and check status deadlines.
16-21 March              Spring Break (no testing)
6 April                  Last day a student may, with their dean’s approval, withdraw or drop a class, or change
                         to pass/fail basis.
5-6 May                  Lab assignments 10-12 deadline (no exceptions)
8 May                    Exam 10 deadline (last day of testing: no exceptions)
For additional University dates and deadlines, see https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/18-19
                                                              9


Ant 301 WB Scores                                                        Name
_____________________________
When you check status, record your scores in the tables below so that you keep a record of your point totals:
EXAMS
       EXAM #         DATE             SCORE               DATE             SCORE          BEST SCORE
                                   1ST ATTEMPT                          2nd ATTEMPT
           1
           2
           3
           4
           5
           6
           7
           8
           9
          10
                                                                                          ________________
                                                                                         Total Exam Points
VIRTUAL LAB ASSIGNMENTS
        LAB #         DATE              SCORE               LAB #          DATE              SCORE
          1                                                    7
          2                                                    8
          3                                                    9
          4                                                   10
          5                                                   11
          6                                                   12
                                                                                       __________________
                                                                                            Total Lab Points
                                                       10


PRINT OUT THE LAST TWO PAGES AND POST WHERE YOU CAN REFER TO THEM
                  Anthropology 301 WB Spring 2020 (unique no. 31400)
Exam content from Jurmain et al. (2017) Essentials (10th edition textbook)
               Exam 1 = chapters 1 and 2                Exam 6 = chapter 9
               Exam 2 = chapters 3 and 4                Exam 7 = chapter 10
               Exam 3 = chapter 5                       Exam 8 = chapter 11
               Exam 4 = chapters 6 and 7                Exam 9 = chapters 12 and 13
               Exam 5 = chapter 8                       Exam 10 = chapter 14
Exam, Lab, and Check Status Deadline Dates
                EXAM, LAB, & CHECK STATUS                       DEADLINE DATE
                   Syllabus Compliance Exam                            31 Jan
               Exam 1                                                  31 Jan
               Exam 2                                                   7 Feb
               Exam 3                                                  14 Feb
                                                               18 Feb last name A-L
                          Labs 1, 2, and 3
                                                               19 Feb last name M-Z
                                          Check Status                 21 Feb
               Exam 4                                                  28 Feb
               Exam 5                                                 6 March
                                                             10 March last name M-Z
                          Labs 4, 5, and 6
                                                              11 March last name A-L
                                          Check Status               13 March
                           Spring Break                     16-21 March (Lab Closed)
               Exam 6                                                27 March
               Exam 7                                                 3 April
               Exam 8                                                 10 April
                                                              14 April last name A-L
                          Labs 7, 8, and 9
                                                              15 April last name M-Z
                                          Check Status                24 April
               Exam 9                                                  1 May
                                                               5 May last name M-Z
                        Labs 10, 11, and 12
                                                               6 May last name A-L
               Exam 10                                                 8 May
                                          Check Status                 8 May
                                                     11


                   Anthropology 301 WB Spring 2020 (unique no. 31400)
Testing and Review Hours: SAC 5.112
                                         12
