Fall 2019
ARC 342R/388R ‐ AFRICAN AMERICAN EXEPERIENCES IN ARCHITECTURE
Instructor: Dr. Tara Dudley
Unique Nos. 00834/01094                                     Office: WMB 4.116A (inside WMB 4.122)
Monday 9:00a – 12:00p                                       Office hours: TTh 11:00–12:00p or by appt.
WMB 5.112                                                   E‐mail: taradudley@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is intended to serve as an exploration of African American experiences with the built
environment in the United States from the American colonial period to the present. The course is
1520arranged chronologically and thematically to consider conventional topics such as plantation
architecture and segregated space but offers an opportunity to explore other themes often neglected in
the canon of American architectural history such as sites of urban slavery, freedmen’s communities,
evolution of the African American architect, convict laborers’ contributions to American architecture,
early African American architects, interwar design, post WWII modernism and social reform, and
reclamation/formation of an African American architectural identity. Students will explore who or what
defines the African American architectural experience in the framework of what constitutes American
Architecture.
The course is a seminar that meets once a week for three hours. Students are expected to read a wide
array of primary and background texts and participate in writing assignments. This is an intermediate‐
level, lecture/discussion course intended to build on the foundation of previous architectural history
survey/topics sequence as well as courses in history and African American Studies. It offers frameworks
for interpreting the history of architecture in the United States and opportunities for developing
research and interpretation.
With these objectives in mind, students will participate in a major research project on the “dependency”
of the Neill‐Cochran Museum, an 1856 Greek Revival style mansion located just west of the UT campus
and adjacent to an area that developed as a freedmen’s community in the late nineteenth century. The
outbuilding is possibly the only remaining dependency intended for the use of enslaved people in
Austin. Currently, the dependency’s first floor houses a collection of 19th century tools, and the second
floor interprets a relatively spare and primitive living space. The goal of the project is to conduct archival
research and examine previous architectural and archaeological research to prepare historic contexts
that will be used in the future to reinterpret the space and to honor the labor and lives of the people
who built the original structures and who initially worked there.
PREREQUISITES
Undergraduate students in the School of Architecture program must have completed ARC 318L World
Architecture: Industrial Revolution to Present, ARC 342R.2 American Architecture, or ARC 350R/386M
Race and Gender: By Design. Upper‐division undergraduate and graduate students from other
departments are welcome to enroll with the consent of the instructor.


REQUIRED TEXTS
Gooden, Mario. Dark Space: Architecture, Representation, Black Identity. New York: Columbia Books on
         Architecture and the City, 2016.
 Mitchell, Melvin. The Crisis of the African‐American Architect: Conflicting Cultures of Architecture and
         (Black) Power. Revised 2dn edition. Lincoln: Writers Advantage, 2003.
*Additional required readings will be posted on the course Canvas website
COURSE WEBSITE
Students can access the course website through Canvas at utexas.instructure.com. You will need an EID
to login. Course materials, including syllabus, reading assignments, auxiliary readings, and work
assignments will be posted on this site. You may also be asked to submit assignments through Canvas.
SEMINAR FORMAT
As a seminar, I expect the course to include active student engagement in the seminar discussion. Each
seminar meeting will address a topic that covers African American experiences in and with the built
environment. A variety of readings will be posted online weekly for seminar participants to review in
advance of the Monday meeting. Dr. Dudley will begin each class with a lecture introducing the subject
and relevant architectural case studies, individuals, and historical events. Following this introduction will
be a student‐led exploration of the topic, considering the readings and case studies presented. Seminar
participants will—on a rotational and first‐come, first‐served basis—take turns hosting the student‐led
discussion. These discussions and student interests will aid in developing the seminar over the course of
the semester and serve to inform subsequent seminar meetings.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS/GRADING
In addition to active participation in the seminar, student’s grades will be based on:
        Seminar hosting                           15%
        Seminar participation                     30%
        Research project draft assignment(s)      20%
        Research project final assignment         30%
        Class attendance                          5%
The distribution of percent and corresponding grades is given below (plus and minus will be given):
A (94‐100%)             B+ (89‐86%)            C+ (79‐76%)             D+ (69‐66%)             F (≤59%)
A‐ (93‐90%)             B (85‐83%)             C (75‐73%)              D (65‐63%)
                        B‐ (82‐80%)            C‐ (72‐70%)             D‐ (62‐60%)
“A” represents exemplary work in which the student has successfully realized his or her stated
objectives in terms of content and style; “B” has broader compass in which the intentions of the
assignment are met adequately but with some weakness of content or style or reticence in approach;
“C” acknowledges effort but reflects serious problems in content or style; “D” and “F” reflect a
fundamental lack of effort. I use plus and minus grades for both graduate students and undergraduates.


ASSIGNMENTS AND DUE DATES
Weekly           Seminar hosting (as assigned)
October 21       Research project mid‐semester assignment
November 11 Research project assignment
December 9       Research project final assignment and presentation
WORKLOAD GUIDELINES
Students are expected to spend time on outside preparation for every class. If writing assignments are
due, students should expect to spend more time to complete their work. Required readings are outside
preparation for this course and should be completed before class for the day they are assigned.
Students are responsible for all the material in the required readings, whether or not the material has
been discussed in class.
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Class attendance is required. Your success in this class will depend, to a large degree, upon your
attendance and active engagement. In‐class material will be reinforced in the required and
recommended readings, and some in‐class material may not be covered in the readings. Students are
responsible for all seminar material whether or not it is included in the assigned readings. Class
attendance is required and will be monitored. Sometimes an illness, emergency, or other circumstances
may cause you to miss class. Missing extensive days results in a significant impact on your work, and to
your participation in the class. If you miss class, try to borrow a classmate's notes. The instructor will not
assume responsibility for providing class notes to you. Late assignments will not be accepted. Please
take advantage of my office hours to discuss the course or just to talk. If you cannot make my regular
office hours, I am willing to meet you by appointment.


ACADEMIC INFORMATION AND UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Religious Holidays                                   continually exposed to other’s ideas. We read
UT respects religious holidays. Students are         ideas and words in textbooks, hear them in
excused from attending classes or other required     lectures, discuss them in class, and incorporate
activities, including exams, for the observance of   them into our own writing. Keep in mind that you
a religious holiday, including travel for that       must give credit when credit is due.
purpose. If you will miss class (including exams) to
                                                     Plagiarism can occur in a myriad of forms and
celebrate a religious holiday, UT policy requires
                                                     media. Although most commonly associated with
that you notify me of your pending absence AT
                                                     writing, all types of scholarly work, including
LEAST 14 days prior to the date of the observance
                                                     architectural and interior design projects, music,
of a religious holy day (and your absence). You
                                                     scientific data and analysis, and electronic
will be given an opportunity to complete the
                                                     publications. Plagiarism includes, but is not
missed work within a reasonable time (generally
                                                     limited to, the appropriation, buying, receiving as
one week) after the absence.
                                                     a gift, or obtaining by any other means another's
Academic Accommodations for Students with            work and the submission of it as one's own
Disabilities                                         academic work offered for credit. University
UT Austin provides upon request appropriate          policy pertaining to scholastic dishonesty applies
academic accommodations for qualified students       to in‐class assignments, projects, examinations,
with disabilities. For more information, contact     research reports, papers, and assignments
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471‐6259  required for the course. Additional information on
(voice) or 232‐2937 (video phone).                   the definition of academic dishonesty including
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd             plagiarism can be found at:
                                                     http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09‐
UT Honor Code and Academic Dishonesty                10/app/gi09.appc03.html.
The core values of UT at Austin are learning,        To avoid plagiarism, give credit when you use:
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of          Another person’s idea, opinion, or theory;
the University is expected to uphold these values        Any facts, statistics, graphics, visual images (i.e.:
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and          drawings, videos, etc.) that are not common
                                                          knowledge;
respect toward peers and community. Cheating
                                                         Quotations of another person’s spoken or written
and plagiarism (using another’s words or ideas            words; or
without proper attribution) are serious academic
                                                         Paraphrase of another person’s spoken or written
offenses and may result in a failing grade or             words.
expulsion from the university! If you are unsure
about what constitutes plagiarism or have            Students who are in violation of the university’s
questions about how to employ source material in     plagiarism policy may be subject to the following:
your assignments, please consult with me. You            Disciplinary probation
are encouraged to discuss assignments with your          Receive a failing grade for a test, assignment, or the
peers but work you submit must be your own.               course
                                                         Creation of a disciplinary record
Plagiarism
                                                         Suspension or expulsion from UT
Plagiarism is the most common form of academic
                                                         Denial of degree
dishonesty. Plagiarism can be a difficult concept
to define; simply put, plagiarism is using other     If you are unsure about what constitutes
people’s ideas and words without clearly             plagiarism and academic dishonesty, or have
acknowledging the source of that information. It     difficulty addressing source material in your
is important to note that at the university we are   assignments, please consult with the instructor.


COURSE SCHEDULE (subject to change)
Week 1 – September 2
NO CLASS – Labor Day
Week 2 – September 9
Overview and Lingering Traditions
The Big House/Beyond the Big House
Week 3 – September 16
Sites of Urban Slavery
Site Visit to Neill‐Cochran Museum
Week 4 – September 23
Hidden in Plain Sight: marginalized spaces of enslavement
Archival Research at ????
Week 5 – September 30
Raised to the Trade: master builders and craftsmen
Week 6 – October 7
Freedmen’s Communities
Site Visit to Neill Cochran Museum [tentative]
Week 7 – October 14
The New Slavery: Convict Laborers’ Contributions to American Architecture
Week 8 – October 21
Mid‐semester research project assignment
Site Visit to Neill Cochran Museum
Week 9 – October 28
Gilded Age, 1865‐1900
Reconstruction and Re‐creation: Post‐Civil War developments and the rise of the middle class
Week 10 – November 4
Upward Bound


Week 11 – November 11
Segregated Space
Research Project milestone
Site Visit to Neill Cochran Museum
Week 12 – November 18
Interwar…
Week 13 – November 25
Modernity and Social Reform
Week 14 – December 2
Reclamation and Conclusions
Presentation Prep
Week 15 – December 9
Research Project Presentations
