                                           Course Syllabus
                                   JPN611D Intermediate Japanese
                                              Summer '20
Class (#78905) Time: MTuWThF 11:30am-2:30pm
                   Loc: Zoom
Instructor         Name: Midori Tanaka
                   E-mail: midori@austin.utexas.edu
                   Office Hours: TBA
Prerequisite
•You must have finished JPN610D or equivalent with a grade of at least C (or with a passing
grade or above if you have finished it in 2020 Spring)
•Students who studied Japanese previously with materials/textbooks other than "Yookoso" or at
the other institutions should consult the instructor immediately to receive further instructions.
•Those who wish to advance to the next class JPN317C in the future must take this course by
letter grade option (and must finish with at least a C grade).
I. Course Objectives
•To improve the following four skills in the Japanese language as well as to increase general
knowledge of the Japanese language and culture.
1) Listening: the ability to understand a larger range of every day conversation.
2) Speaking: the ability to handle an increasing number of everyday situations, focusing on the
     topics of travel, home, transportation, and health.
3) Reading: the ability to read more complex reading materials including semi-authentic
     materials.
4) Writing: the ability to write and type more complex descriptions of things pertaining to you
     while correctly using the Japanese writing system.
II. Course Materials
Required
1) YOOKOSO: Continuing with Contemporary Japanese, Vol. Two By Yasuhiko Toosaku (©
     2006, 3rd Edition)
2) Canvas-handouts, homework assignments, and quizzes and tests will be posted on Canvas
3) Audio material (on Canvas) for both textbook & workbook http://laits.utexas.edu/itsaud/ and
     http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072408162/student_view0/
4) Robust wifi connection (for Zoom meetings and online tests)
5) A headset with microphone (e.g. earbuds) and built-in (web) camera (your face has to be
     visible) during Zoom class.
6) Proctorio on Canvas (please install using Google Chrome) which requires a built-in (web)
     camera.
Optional
7) printer/scanner (for kanji writing HW)
8) Workbook/Laboratory Manual for YOOKOSO: Continuing with Contemporary Japanese (©
     2006, 3rd Edition) for further practice
9) Other activities on JOSHU http://lanic.utexas.edu/japanese
10) Visit the publisher’s site http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072408162/student_view0/
11) Follow us on Japanese Program http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese/ ,
   http://www.facebook.com/pages/Japanese-Program-UT-Austin/209417159118042 ,
                                                                                                  1


III. Course Structure
•JPN601D is a synchronous course. The class meets at Zoom. Make sure you have a robust wifi.
Please sit in a quiet place and use a headset with microphone. You must make your face visible
during the class.
•You are expected to attend all the classes. Use self-study materials on Canvas outside of the
class as well (especially when you miss speaking activity classes).
•Be prepare for the class and review after the class according to the schedule. Do not do your
homework or take online tests in class.
•Read your e-mails daily for important announcements and updates, etc.
1) Lecture class
•Come prepared. Read appropriate textbook pages and do the grammar exercises and activities
before class. New kanji characters in 2nd year Japanese will not be introduced in class. Please
study by yourself using Canvas kanji material.
•Brief grammar explanations and grammar exercises will be given, and you will practice
activities, which are related to the new grammatical structures.
•Reading and some writing practice will be given.
•Japanese culture related to the topic will be discussed.
•Administrative announcements will be given.
2) Speaking Activity class
•Come prepared. Dialogues and activities in the textbook will be focused and followed by
communicative practice based upon/related to the dialogues.
•The sessions will be entirely in Japanese. Questions, which require explanations (in English),
should be asked in lecture classes.
IV. Grading Policy
     Your final course grade is determined in the following way:       A   92+
                                                                       A-  89~91.99
     1) Attendance & Class Participation                      0%       B+  86~88.99
     2) Homework (Joshu 12%, Gram 12%, Kanji 12%)            36%       B   82~85.99
     3) Midterm tests 1 & 2 (2)                              36%       B-  79~81.99   C-  69~71.99
     4) Oral Performance tests 1 & 2 (2)                     28%       C+  76~78.99   D+  66~68.99
                                                            100%       C   72~75.99   D   62~65.99
                                                                                      D-  59~61.99
                                                                                      F   0~58.99
•Letter grades will be determined according to the above scale. There will be NO grading on a
curve.
V. Course Requirements
1) Attendance & Participation
•You are required to attend all classes and to prepare for the class according to the schedule;
however, you will not be penalized for your absences. Come Join the Zoom meeting class on
time and try not to disturb the class by joining late or leaving earlier. Each day’s class may be
divided into three sessions (the first session approx.11:30-12:20, the second session approx.
12:30-1:20, the third session approx.1:30-2:20).
•There will absolutely no make-up for missed course requirements such as homework
assignments, OP, Midterm tests, etc. listed below.
                                                                                                   2


•Read your e-mails daily; important announcements and updates might be sent.
•The student must notify the instructor at least 14 days prior to the classes scheduled of dates
she/he/they will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
•Your instructor will abide by the above-mentioned rules very strictly and reserves the right to
judge whether to allow work to be made up or not in unexpected circumstances such as family
emergencies.
•No food, No gum, No texting, No phone use, etc. during a zoom class. If you would like to do
something other than studying Japanese together in class, please leave Zoom.
•Please turn off all of your gadgets such as cellular phones etc. and place them somewhere
invisible/unreachable during the class.
•You are not allowed to use any recording devices (e.g. voice recorder, camera. etc.) during class.
•Do not wear outfits nor carry accessories, which include Japanese (& Chinese) characters when
you take midterms.
2) Online Homework – All due 11am on the due date (before the class). Late homework will
receive 0 point.
<Joshu online homework> due 11:00am
•Joshu online homework links are on Canvas. Submission method is described at the end of the
class schedule. Please use your assigned pseudonym.
•Study the material first. Try not to open the textbook while doing Joshu HW. Try a few times
and improve your scores each time before submitting.
•A score which is less than 0.5(50%) will receive 0 point. The second decimal place will be
rounded off. (e.g. 0.95 will be 1, 0.94 will be 0.9, and so forth)
•There are 45 assignments, and the five lowest scores will drop.
<Kanji practices-hand-written homework- > due 11:00am
•Visit Canvas and get kanji homework material. Practice writing words with kanji (and add
hurigana and English meanings if you like) in the Kanji HW list (or Kanji Quiz list), using the
specified practice sheets (hardcopies) and following the instructions. Please printout the
specified practice sheets. Please do not use regular notebook pages to practice kanji. Write big
letters neatly. Write your name on the sheet. Please get the best quality scan of your finished
homework, and submit your homework using the corresponding submission link.
•The homework will be graded mainly based on the quality of your handwriting. Sloppily
done homework may be accepted but will receive a reduced score or 0 point.
•The lowest (one) score will drop.
<Grammar Exercise homework> due 11:00am
•HW assignments are on Canvas. Type your answers, using double (or triple) space, Mincho
font, size 12 (or 14). Please indicate the corresponding question # with your answer. Submit
using the corresponding submission link on Canvas.
•You could also printout the HW (questionnaire) hardcopies and write the answers directly.
Please get the best quality scan of our finished homework and submit by using corresponding
submission link. Please do not handwrite your answers in your notebook papers etc. and submit.
•The homework will be graded mainly based on the quality of your answers. Sloppily done
homework may be accepted but will receive a reduced score or 0 point.
•The three lowest scores will be dropped.
※You must do all your homework assignments on your own. Unauthorized collaboration on
assignment and/or copying someone's assignment and turning it in as your own will be
considered as cheating and will result in a severe penalty. Allowing other students to use your
assignment is also considered as scholastic dishonesty.
                                                                                                 3


3) Online Midterm tests1 (Ch1 & 2) & Midterm 2 (Ch 3 & 4) -- NO make-up
• Each midterm test will include everything that has been covered in that chapter such as
vocabulary, kanji, listening, dialog, grammar, reading, etc.
• Please install Proctorio and use Chrome when taking tests. You can take them anytime after
published, but please finish before the deadline.
•Study '"Linguistic Notes," and "Culture Notes," etc. in the textbook. (We will not cover all of
them in the class; however, students are expected to read them.)
※You must take Midterm tests and finish them on your own without getting any help from
anyone or any resources.
4) Oral Performance Test 1 (Ch1 & 2) and Test 2 (Ch3 & 4) -- NO make-up / No early OP
•At the end of chapters 1 & 2 and 3 & 4, there will be an oral performance test based upon the
material that you have practiced in class. Study handouts will be on Canvas. The test will be
graded on the basis of communicative skills as well as accuracy, structure, vocabulary,
pronunciation, and fluency.
•You need to sign up for oral performance tests in advance. Sign up calendar will be posted on
Canvas a few days before in advance. Without signing in, you cannot take the OP tests. There
will be no makeup if you missed your scheduled time slot, so join the Zoom on time.
•More detailed instructions will be included in the study handouts.
VI. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
•The University of Texas guidelines on scholastic dishonesty apply to all requirements in this
class.
  e.g. Copying other students’ homework/test answers.
        Sharing your homework/test answers with other students (on SNS etc.).
        Working homework or taking a test together.
        Finding answers using the internet.
•Visit the Student Judicial Service web site for more information.
       http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
•Students who violate university rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failing the course and dismissal from the University.
University policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
VII. Studying Japanese
•In learning a foreign language, it is important to study every day. Find your own learning and
organizational style and continue previewing before the class and reviewing after the class on a
daily basis.
•Actively participate in class. Use Japanese whenever possible, and do not be afraid of making
mistakes.
•Do not be a minimalist. Do extracurricular activities as much as you can.
                                                                                                 4


VIII. Honor Code
•The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
•http://www.utexas.edu/welcome/mission.html
IX. For Students with Disabilities
•Any student with a documented medical condition which requires academic accommodations
should contact the Service for Students with Disabilities in the Office of the Dean of Students at
471-6259 or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations.
•http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
X. Covit-19
https://coronavirus.utexas.edu/campus-announcements
XI. Title IX and SB212
•The law addresses reporting requirements for incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault,
dating violence, or stalking at certain public and private institutions of higher education,
including UT.
•For more information, please visit https://titleix.utexas.edu/sb212
XII. Be Vocal
•Be Vocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm.
•For more information, visit https://www.wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal/
XIII. Emergency Preparedness
•If you have an emergency either on or off campus, please call 911 to report the situation.
•Please call UTPD 512-471-4441 for non-emergency situation such as crime prevention,
criminal investigation, etc.
•Please review documents outlining emergency terms (e.g., the difference between “shelter-in-
place” and “lockdown”). The documents are uploaded on Canvas.
•If you have concerns regarding the attitude or actions of students, staff, or other faculty, please
call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL: 512-232-5050)
•For further information, please visit the Emergency Preparedness site below and review
emergency protocols. http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                                                                                     5
