CH301 Summer 2019 Syllabus
Principles of Chemistry I • Summer 2019
Unique: 85290 · MTWThF, 8:30-10am PAI 2.48
Instructor: Dr. Sam Dunning
(samdunning@utexas.edu)
Teaching Assistant: Tyler Davis
(ty.davis@utexas.edu)
Chemistry Course Content
CH301 will cover the following subjects in chemistry. Each of the four overall topics
below have links to that section on our gchem site.
Unit 1 - Gases (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. The semester
begins with the study of gases beginning with the gas laws and finishing with the
kinetic molecular theory of gases.
Unit 2 - Atomic Theory and Bonding (Links to an external site.)Links to an
external site. Our second unit is all about the atom including its structure and
energetics. Atoms combine via chemical bonds. As more atoms bond together,
molecules are created. Bonding theory allows us to predict properties and describe
the behavior of these molecules.
Unit 3 - Intermolecular Forces (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site. The interactions between molecules govern key physical properties.
Categorizing intermolecular forces (IMFs) helps us define key behaviors of chemical
substances.
Unit 4 - Thermodynamics (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site. The final unit is a study of thermodynamics as it applies to specific substances,
chemical reactions, and processes. Thermodynamics is the study of the energy
requirements for all interactions both physical and chemical.
Resources Available to You for Free
gchem website: All of our course topics are covered via our online "gchem"
website. The gchem site has chapters presented in the same order that we will cover
them in class. Plus, in addition to the textual content, there are hundreds of videos
available throughout the chapters. Some videos are for "big picture" concepts while
others are for specific problem solving skills. When you do learning exercises (LEs)


in Canvas, you will being seeing the content of the gchem site. You can always
browse the gchem site independent of Canvas.
OpenStax eBook: Rice University has dozens of open source eBooks that were
created for teaching. Here is a link to their "Chemistry" eBook. Browse the table of
contents to find the right chapters.
Piazza: (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. What to do if you
have a question but can’t make it to office hours? You should post a question to our
online discussion board – it’s called Piazza. Students can post questions and other
students can answer questions. The course instructors and teaching assistants
check student answers and endorse or correct them throughout the week. We do
moderate this discussion board and ask that you keep your questions chemistry
related. If you have a personal question, you should email your lead faculty professor
at the email address provided at the top of the course syllabus. We do not answer
content questions via email - only via the Piazza site. You should receive an email
from Piazza with an invitation to join our class. If you don’t get the invitation via
email, you can add yourself to the Piazza discussion board using the sign up
link: https://piazza.com/utexas/summer2019/ch301/home (Links to an external
site.)Links to an external site.
Your UT Network Bandwidth: Each student at UT receives at least 500MB of
"free" bandwidth per week. This may, or may not meet your actual needs for this
course and your other online activities. Please consider your upgrade options offered
through the UT ITS website at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/network/1772 (Links to
an external site.)Links to an external site.. Also realize that resident students that
are using Resnet will have 10GB per week included with their room - that should be
more than enough, but if you need more you do that via Resnet. ALL students
should be aware of their own bandwidth needs and respond accordingly.
UTInstapoll: We are using UT Install software as our in-class response system.
Each student will need to set up an account and have a smart device (phone, laptop,
tablet, etc.). You will need to bring your wifi enabled device to each and every class
in order to obtain points for the Reef portion of your grade. We will not use the
iclicker remote which is a separate product - only the app will be used. Reef access
is purchased at the UT Co-op bundled with your course pack. You will register for
Reef through an assignment in your Canvas modules.
Resources You Provide (purchase)
Simple Scientific Calculator: (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site. We will only allow simple scientific calculators for our exams. No programmable
or graphing calculators will be accepted. The TI-30xais the best calculator for this job
and is only about $10 dollars. Plan on using it for homework as well as your exams.


Calculating Your Overall Score
We will use five aggregate scores that we will use to get your over all score in the
course. Your overall score is calculated according to the percentages in the following
table.
  Category                                                               Weight
 3-Exam avg: average of your best 3 of 4 exams (one drop)               60%
 Final exam: score on the final exam                                    25%
 Learning Exercises: LE average (seven drops)                           5%
 Homework: HW average (three drops)                                     5%
 Instapoll: score for in-class polling questions as a percentage of max 5%
 points possible. A score of 75% or above gives full credit.
  Total                                                                  100 %
Grade Breaks
Course grades will be determined according to the following scale or cut-offs:
A      ≥  93.00
A-     ≥  90.00
B+     ≥  87.00
B      ≥  83.00
B-     ≥  80.00
C+     ≥  77.00
C        ≥ 73.00
C-       ≥ 70.00
D+       ≥ 67.00
D        ≥ 63.00
D-       ≥ 60.00
F        < 60.00


    Your score is calculated to the nearest 1/100th - that's 2 places PAST the decimal.
    So the only digit that is rounded "up" is the 1/1000th's digit.
    Exam Schedule
• All midterm exams take place during class on the following dates:
• Exam 1: 6/17
• Exam 2: 6/25
• Exam 3: 7/3
• Exam 4: 7/11
•
• Final 7/12, 7-10pm. Room TBA.
    If you have an Exam Conflict...
    If you have a documented, UT-related conflict with the exam time for all or specific
    exam(s), it is possible that we can offer you an alternate time on the same day. To
    request an alternate exam time, please
    visit https://cm.utexas.edu/academics/undergraduate/testing-services (Links to an
    external site.)Links to an external site. and follow the given instructions. Check ALL
    the exam dates now and fill this out SOON for all exam conflicts you have during the
    semester!
    University related conflicts include:
  •    a UT laboratory course (like physics, chemistry, or biology lab)
  •    a UT Band member where rehearsal is at the same time as the exam
  •    any official UT course with a conflicting time (we'll need the unique number of the
       course)
  •    UT athletes who must travel to go to a game or tournament
  •    affiliated students to the above reason - like trainers, team managers, and traveling
       band members
  •    You are away from UT as part of a University-sponsored activity. For such
       instances, you will provide written documentation on UT Letterhead explaining the
       reason for your absence.
    In general, only UT-related conflicts are accepted reasons to reschedule an exam for
    another day. An exception is if the exam is in conflict with a religious holiday. If your
    exam is in conflict with a religious holiday you must provide notice of the conflict at
    least 14 days in advance.
    SSD Students
    If you are a student registered with the Office of Services for Students with
    Disabilities and receive special accommodations for your exams, the Chemistry


Student Services Office (BIO 404) is equipped with a limited number of seats in a
reduced distraction environment for the administration of exams. Please submit your
SSD letter to them.
Visit https://cm.utexas.edu/academics/undergraduate/testing-services (Links to an
external site.)Links to an external site. to sign up for accommodated exams for this
course. Sign up for accommodations for ALL semester exams NOW! You may
contact Chemistry Student Services (512-471-1567) with any questions related to
setting up SSD accommodations for a chemistry class.
Work in the Class
You should stay fully engaged in class. Opportunities to test your prior knowledge,
your progress on the learning curve, and your mastery of chemical principles will be
given in class using an in-class polling system. It is very important that you
remember to bring your "device" so that you can answer questions and get credit this
way. We use technology (your cell phone, laptop, or other wifi-enabled device) to
facilitate this in-class polling, but be sure not to let your device get in the way of your
engagement in the class! Practice the skill of being fully involved in the present -
keep your device closed or face-down on your desk when not using it to enter your
answer to the polling questions. The score from the polling questions will be 5% of
your overall score.
Work Outside the Class
Work outside the class includes reading and learning via the Learning Exercises (LE)
and Homework (HW) in Canvas. The LEs are designed to introduce the new
material, whereas the HWs are designed to help you test your knowledge of various
concepts for the course. Both quantitative (calculations) and qualitative (conceptual)
questions will be on the LEs and HWs. These assignments are a great way to test
yourself as we move through the material. Some questions are easy while others will
be much harder and push you to develop more sophisticated problem-solving skills.
Skill drilling worksheets are available in the course pack, but they are not graded.
The worksheets are designed to help build your problem solving skills such that you
can be successful in the course. Each type of assignment has been designed for a
particular purpose to help you master the learning outcomes for this course. To this
end, each assignment should be completed in the order in which it was assigned.
The Canvas LEs and HWs will be counted toward your overall grade at 5% each.
Exams
Four examinations will be given during the semester. Exam scores will be available
on Quest and Canvas (Quest is only used for the grading of the exams - there is no
cost associated with Quest for this course). You may use Quest to see which
questions you missed on each exam.


Be sure and bring your approved non-programmable, non-graphing calculator to the
exam. We cannot provide calculators. You CANNOT use your cell phone or any
other device as your calculator. Each student will receive a unique exam copy with a
specific version number on it. There is a different exam version for every student in
the class; no two students can have the same version numbers. We will keep ALL
exam materials after the exam is over. You MUST turn in your exam, scratch paper,
and bubblesheet when you complete your exam. Make sure you sign each part of
your exam.
You CANNOT make-up a missed exam for ANY REASON WHATSOEVER. If you
have a University approved conflict that requires rescheduling an exam, you must
reschedule within the first 2 weeks of the course - see the section on exam conflicts.
You get to drop one exam score from your overall average, so for whatever reason
you miss, that particular exam score (a zero) will be your dropped exam.
Final Exam
We will not allow you to take the final early, late, or with another section. Make
sure you know the time and place of your exam for your section of the course.
A final exam cannot be made-up in any way. Final exam times are scheduled by the
registrar's office and cannot be changed for any reason. Show up at the right place
and the right time or get a zero on the exam. The final exam WILL be
comprehensive. This means that all the material covered during the course will be on
the exam. The final exam will be counted as 25% of your overall grade. If you keep
up with the material for the semester, the final will not be any more difficult than the
four exams. It will be extremely difficult if you try to cram for it one day ahead. Keep
up and make the grade. The time for the final is published when the course schedule
is made, but it is subject to change, so double check the time for the final the week
before the final exam.
Cheating
If you get caught cheating in any way, whatsoever, you will have to discuss the
situation with us. We will arrive at a penalty and write up a formal report. The
minimum penalty for cheating is receiving a 0 on the assignment on which you
cheated, but harsher penalties may be assigned. In this class, in addition to all the
traditional types of cheating (looking at someone else’s answer, utilizing “cheat
sheets” of any form or fashion – paper or digitized, getting an advance copy of an
exam or quiz), we also consider allowing someone else to enter answers in class
with your phone or tablet cheating. For example, if you send your iPhone to class
with another classmate or an individual who is not you and you are caught, you and
your accomplice will be penalized. For more information, read about scholastic
dishonesty in the General Information Catalog.
Drop Date
The last day to drop the course is June 7, 2019. This will require you to go to your
college and get a drop form. After the deadline, students must go to the Dean's
office, WCH 2.112, to begin the appeal for substantiated non-academic reasons.


Students with Disabilities
Please notify me of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean
of Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be
determined. Specialized services are available on campus through Services for
Students with Disabilities. The official wording is this: The University of Texas at
Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY or Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259,www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.Links to an external site. If you only need
exam accommodations (extended time, reduced distraction environment), you can
work directly with our Student Services Office - see the information listed under
"exams".
Observance of Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. It is
the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that the student must notify each
instructor at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates he or she
will be absent to observe a religious holy day. For religious holidays that fall within
the first two weeks of the semester, the notice should be given on the first day of the
semester. The student may not be penalized for these excused absences but the
instructor may appropriately respond if the student fails to complete satisfactorily the
missed assignment or examination within a reasonable time after the excused
absence.
How can I be prepared for an emergency?
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of
each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door
may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring
assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
Does this course carry a FLAG?
QRThis course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning
courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding
the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and


professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
Core Curriculum Requirements & Objectives
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the natural science and technology
(Part I or Part II) component of the university core curriculum and addresses the
following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and
empirical and quantitative skills.
Communication Skills
Students will work in class, on homework and on exams to apply scientific model to
explain empirical data as well as to use models to predict physical and chemical
change. Students will be able to connect mathematical formulas and graphical
representations to communicate scientific concepts.
Critical Thinking
Students are presented with many opportunities to use critical thinking skills to solve
problems both in class via the classroom polling system and on graded homework
assignments. These skills are assessed on the exams.
Teamwork
Students work in small groups in class on guided group activities designed to help
the student come to a deeper understanding of the content and to "discover"
chemical principles via the process of inquiry. Outside of class students are
encouraged to continue working in groups on better understand homework
assignments.
Quantitative Skills
Students are required to calculate answers based on their understanding of scientific
laws and derived equations. These methods include skills in manipulating units,
understanding and applying the concept of ratios, proportionality, rearranging
algebraically to solve for a specified unknown, understanding and applying rates of
change, interpreting equations using physical models. These skills are assessed on
the exams.
