AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                        Fall 2018
                                             Fall 2018
                          AET 347: Projection Design - Unique # 21034
                           TD 354T: Projection Design - Unique #26150
                       Tuesday / Thursday, 9:30am – 11:00am PAC 3.204
OVERVIEW
Projections and imagery have been part of the theatrical language since the beginning
of the 20th century. However, the technological innovations of the last two decades
have created a vast array of new challenges and opportunities for visual storytellers
and designers. This course will examine the history, technology, and aesthetics of
projection and media, and will introduce the student to the processes and techniques
used by projection & media designers.
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
This course is a lecture/lab course designed to introduce students to the field of
projection design. The primary focus is on the process and techniques that produce
and realize projection designs in live performance environments.
The approach to this end is threefold:
First, you will research and discuss the work of visual artists, designers, and directors
who have influenced the field of projection design. This will be accomplished primarily
through reading, research, class discussion and
Second, you will learn about the technology and techniques used for creating and
installing projections. This includes projectors, lenses, playback system hardware and
software, control systems, projection surfaces, projector placement, lens calculation,
projection system design as well as basic editing and creation of media for this
application.
We will make use of the resources of the PLAIlab classroom (PAC.3.204) to explore the
principles and equipment types involved in this field of work.


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                         Fall 2018
You will also be acquainted with the current equipment resources used for projection
here at U.T.
Third, you will learn the process and workflow of the projection designer.
This component consists of lectures, discussions, lectures and conversations by guests
artists and the creation of your own designs under guidance. These designs will be
realized through the combinations of scaled-down representations of the chosen
architectural spaces (model boxes) and the use of miniature projectors.
You will analyze one play and another piece of work that is either a musical or themed
entertainment. You will develop imagery for use in those productions. Your work will be
presented and critiqued in class to enhance the understanding of art and design theory
and the development of technical, creative and analytical skills. Developing the
imagery will draw not only upon your skills as an artist, but your skills as a designer and
collaborator.
The instructor draws on his extensive experience in live entertainment to provide
context and real-world examples for the topics and techniques discussed in this course.
Professor Ortel’s pioneering work has informed the methodologies taught in this class
in the field of projection design over the last two decades.
LEARNING OUTCOMES:
By the end of the semester, students will be able to:
    • recognize and analyze a variety of projection principles;
    • critically examine projection techniques;
    • apply designs utilized for live performance;
    • effectively participate in a collaborative design process; and
    • create and implement a projection design
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
    • Participation (15%): Students should come to class each day prepared to
        contribute to the day’s conversation.
    • Project 1 (25%): Design Process - "Measure for Measure": Create a written
        design concept, scene breakdown, and two basic design renderings.
    • Critical Writing (5%): Write a single page, double-spaced paper in which you
        describe a live event attended that utilized projection. This paper should serve
        as a critical examination of both the "visuals" experienced and your
        interpretation or reaction.
    • Project 2 (20%): Drafting your projection design for Measure for measure:
        Draft a complete projection plot, projection section, system diagram, surface
        diagram, equipment list, and budget. This project illustrates the student’s
        understanding of VectorWorks and the technical requirements for a successfully
        implemented projection design.
    • Project 3 (30%): Integration - "Three Penny Opera" or Digital Experience/
        Themed Entertainment: Create original content for your design. The created
        content is to be played back through the use of projection playback software
        (Qlab) and projected inside a scale model onto surfaces you specify. You will


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                      Fall 2018
      need to make judicious use of miniature projectors to realize your design. This
      project illustrates the student’s understanding of the entire projection process
      from research to design and then to implementation.
  •   Attendance (5%): Attendance is taken during every class.


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                           Fall 2018
CLASS POLICIES
PREREQUISITES
This course also relies on research, daily preparation and homework. You will need to
use the extensive UT library system, the internet, and any departmental or citywide
resources available.
It will be necessary to have a working knowledge of Microsoft Word, Excel (or some
other spreadsheet program and word processor) as well as basic technical drawing
skills (AutoCAD or Vectorworks). Familiarize yourself with the pdf format and the
techniques that allow you to convert your documents into pdf files as many
assignments have to be submitted in that format.
You will need to have access to a computer, a scanner, a copier, and a printer. You will
need an external hard drive or USB stick to transfer your work and files between
computers for assignments
Faulty equipment is not an excuse. Practice good e-habits and save, back-up or store
your work so a quick transfer to another piece of equipment after system failure is
possible.
ATTENDANCE
Attendance is critical in the professional world and this class as our goal is to prepare
for a successful professional career after you graduate.
    •    ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY- Tardiness and absence for this course will cause
         your total grade to fall. Design/Technology is an art form of collaboration and
         participation with fellow artists. Your inability to attend and participate will be
         viewed as a failure to complete an important facet of this course. Attendance
         will be taken at each class. EACH UNEXCUSED ABSENCE WILL DROP YOUR
         SEMESTER GRADE A WHOLE LETTER. THREE UNEXCUSED ABSENCES WILL
         RESULT IN A FAILING GRADE.
    •    Excused absences include:
             1. Absences documented in advance in writing with my prior approval (no
                 third party advocates)
             2. Illness excused with a note from the doctor or infirmary
             3. Death, yours, mine or a close relative (funeral notice required)
THREE TARDYS = ONE UNEXCUSED ABSENCE (i.e. ONE LETTER GRADE DROP)
    •    All reading, research and homework assignments must be completed before the
         beginning of each class period. Follow the class schedule for these due
         dates. Failure to prepare or complete work as assigned will cause your otherwise
         stellar grade to plummet drastically.
    •    Neatness, scholarship, and presentation all count towards your final grade.


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                         Fall 2018
     •   You are responsible for making up missed work for excused absences. It
         is your responsibility to obtain assignments and lecture notes from one of your
         classmates.
This course relies heavily on research, daily preparation and homework. You will need to
use the extensive UT library system, the internet, and any departmental or city wide
resources available (such as museums, galleries, historical collections). It will be
necessary to have a working knowledge of Word, Excel (or some other spreadsheet
program) and Outlook (or some other calendar program). It will be necessary to have
access to a computer, a scanner, a copier, and a printer for duplicating research and
sketches. Faulty equipment is not an excuse. Practice good e-habits and save or store
your work so a quick transfer to another piece of equipment after system failure will
not be traumatic.
Course Communication
The syllabus and assignments will be posted on the course Canvas site. All
communication outside class hours is via canvas.
There are many students in this course, and it will help everyone if you post questions
in the discussions area whenever possible. If you send me a private message via
canvas, I will attempt to respond to messages within 24 hours on weekdays. I will skim
posts in the Discussions myself, and comment when I think there is something
interesting or something that needs to be discussed in class.
I will check my email two times a day: at noon and in the evening.
It is your responsibility to
1. Make yourself familiar with the canvas learning system. Start here.
2. Make sure you can receive announcements and get notified about messages,
assignment updates, announcements, etc. More info here.
Pay attention to the canvas notification preferences.
3. Ask questions. Do not make assumptions.
Assignments
• Assignments are explained in class and are available to view in Canvas. The big
assignments are given in week one and eight of the semester and are described in class
and on canvas. Smaller assignments may be made throughout the semester as the
need arises. Often it becomes necessary to demonstrate a point or clarify an element
of the process to assign a small homework exercise on a particular topic or skill. When
this occurs these assignments become a part of your overall grade for class
participation and collaboration.
• You are responsible for making up missed work for excused absences. It is your
responsibility to obtain assignments and lecture notes from one of your classmates.
• It is your responsibility to ask and inquire if you are not clear about what is required
or when.


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                         Fall 2018
Assignment Deadlines
It is vital that you do not get behind in this class as all work builds upon previous work.
As a general rule all projects, reading, research, and homework assignments must be
completed before the beginning of each class period. However, many class assignments
have a due date and time in the evening before class. That allows me to review your
work and provide feedback as well as prepare for a discussion based on the submitted
work during the next lesson. If you submit your assignment late, it will not be reviewed
in class.
All work is due as specified in the assignment listed on canvas. Work not completed
before the canvas deadline will be considered late.
Any work turned in late, regardless of the excuse, will result in a grade reduction of one
full letter for each calendar date it is late (an A would become a B and so on).
In summary:
Every assignment has a due date and time.
I do accept work after that. However, assignments automatically lose one full grade for
every day they are submitted late, and they will not be reviewed in class.
Any work turned in more than four calendar days late will receive an automatic F. If
you are having difficulty completing your work on time, please speak to me privately so
that I can work out an arrangement with you.
Evaluation and grading
Neatness, scholarship, and presentation will all count towards your final grade.
Communicating clearly by visual means is a part of the process.
YOU WILL BE GRADED ON:
     •   Reading, Discussion, Participation (15%)
     •   Critical Writing (5%)
     •   Project 1: Measure For Measure Design Project (25%)
     •   Project 2: Technical support documents for project 1 (20%)
     •   Project 3: Three Penny Opera or Digital Experience Design/ Themed
         Entertainment (30%)
     •   Attendance (5%)
This course does not have a final exam.
Grading Scheme
A - Represents outstanding participation in all course activities. All assigned work must
be completed on time and with a very high quality of demonstrated skill and technique.
There is an evidence of significant development across all dimensions of learning. The
result at this level demonstrates activity that goes significantly beyond the required
course work in one or more areas.


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                         Fall 2018
B - Represents excellent participation in all course activities; all assigned work must be
completed on time with consistently high quality in course work. There is an evidence
of marked development across all dimensions of learning.
C - Represents good participation in all course activities; all assigned work completed,
with generally good quality in course work. There is evidence of some development
across all dimensions of learning.
D - Represents uneven participation in all course activities; some gaps in assigned work
completed, with inconsistent quality in course work. The evidence of development
across all dimensions of learning is unclear.
F - Represents minimal participation in all course activities; serious gaps in assigned
work completed, or very low quality in course work. Development evidence is not
available.
Please Note: If you are concerned about your grade – check in with us regularly so that
we can determine where you’re at, and what might need to be done to correct any
problems. Do not wait until the end of the semester!
Canvas does show you your grades on any assignment that has been graded.
Privacy
What we say about each other’s work during this class should remain in the classroom.
It will not be published in a blog or on any other personal websites, tweeted or posted
on social networks.
About services for students with disabilities:
The University of Texas provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more info, contact the Dean of Students at 471-6259,
471-4641 TTY
TEXTS
Mobile devices
Mobile devices of any kind need to be silenced and put away. I do not want to hear any
notifications (including vibrations) or sounds coming from them.
Texting and other cell phone-related activity is never appropriate during class
Books required
William Shakespeare: Measure For Measure
Bertolt Brecht: The Threepenny Opera
Recommended:Theatre Svoboda (available at realeyz.tv.)
reference online:
www.projctn.com
www.projectorcentral.com
UTiM wiki: https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/UTIM/UT+Integrated+Media+Home


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                 Fall 2018
Resources and equipment
You may need to check out cameras and camera support from UTIM, the COFA library,
or The Foundry. You will be responsible for their return in good shape.
You will need access to computers with movie and picture editing software.
These can be found in the TADL (WIN 1.138) on the ground floor outside the Brocket
Theatre (15 iMACs with Adobe CC), The Foundry at the Fine Arts
Be sure to back everything up to a personal drives.


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                        Fall 2018
University Policies
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class,
an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may
not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice)
or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty:
Details of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions
related to a student’s condition or diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation
letter.)
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable
for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related
accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the
arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
accessibility, etc.).
• Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php (Links to an external
site.)Links to an external site.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                        Fall 2018
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal (Links to an external site.)
Evacuation Information
The following are the recommendations regarding
emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-
5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to eva
cuate buildings when an alarm or alert is activated.
Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside, unless told
otherwise by an official representative.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you
used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin
Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation
routes and emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
     “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core val
     ues of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own
work, unless it is assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or
assignment whether collaboration is encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources.
If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a
previous class), you must make that
clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary acti
on, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be foun
d at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.p
hp]


AET 347 / TD 354T: Projection Design / Ortel                                        Fall 2018
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance
and support for your learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger
Learning Centereach year to improve their academic performance? All students are
welcome totake advantage ofSanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
specialist appointments, peer academic coaching,and tutoring for more than 70
courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The UniversityWriting Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any
UT student, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop
strategies to improve their writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster
students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric,
consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals
and enhance their personal growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7
at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
