                THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
              STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:           SW n387R26                Instructor:        René Gaitan, LCSW-S
 Unique Number:           87610                     Email:             rene.gaitan@austin.utexas.edu
 Semester:                Summer 2020               Office:            3.124J
 Meeting Time/Place:      Tue/Thu                   Office Phone:      512-232-5871
                          8:30am – 11:00am          Office Hours:      Thu, 11:30am – 12:30pm
                          Online                                       Other time by appointment
                                 Spanish for Social Workers
I.    STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
      In preparation for field education and subsequent practice, this course builds on students’
      academic and/or native foundation in the Spanish language by providing specialized language
      education designed to increase cultural sensitivity with diverse Spanish speaking populations
      and their corresponding environments.
      The focus is on development of skills for ethical and effective communication with client
      systems in a manner which addresses the complexities of cultural and individual identity,
      religious and spiritual beliefs, as well as differences related to age, economic class,
      geographic and national origin, gender, sexual orientation, and levels of disability.
      An experiential component of this course involves the students in exploration of their own
      and other cultures in order to facilitate understanding, affirmation and respect for diversity.
      Prerequisites
      A minimum of two semesters of college level Spanish is preferred. Completion of an oral
      language assessment with the instructor is required before registering for the course.
II.   STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
      Upon completion of this course students will demonstrate:
              1. Familiarity with the complexity of cultural and personal identities existing among
              and within Spanish-speaking populations and their corresponding language variations.
              2. Skill in application of values and professional ethics as they relate to effective
              communication with a variety of client systems, including differences related to
              economic class, geographic and national origin, levels of ability, gender, sexual
              orientation, religious and spiritual differences, and age across the life span.
              3. Skill in use of a systemic, strengths approach in data collection, assessment,
              intervention, and evaluation, with clients who have limited proficiency in English.
                                                                                                      1


              4. Application of communication skills in interviews that incorporate cultural nuances
              and empowerment goals for the promotion of social justice and human well-being
              among Spanish-speaking populations.
              5. Familiarity and beginning skills in application of terminology specific to different
              fields of practice.
              6. Skill in self-assessment and goal directed professional growth for cultural sensitivity
              in practice with Spanish-speaking client systems.
III. TEACHING METHODS
      This class will be taught using a variety of methods with an emphasis on experiential
      learning: i.e. lecture and instruction, drills and practice, role play, guest speakers, cultural
      immersion activity, videos viewed in class, community-based activity, course assignments
      and readings. The assignments will provide the opportunity for "learning by doing." For
      success in this class you must be willing to participate, risk yourself, and attend class. You
      are encouraged to ask questions, give the instructor feedback, and meet with the instructor
      individually as needed.
      This course is first and foremost a safe educational learning environment. Students will be
      encouraged and challenged to stretch their professional language skills. The Professor will
      ensure that the class humbly supports each other to be vulnerable as we grow together in
      building skill sets that will be of great value and service to Spanish speaking populations we
      will serve through our profession.
IV.  REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
     Reading material for this class will be a combination of online resources and scholarly articles
     that support the topics covered each week. Podcasts, videos, and agency websites will be
     assigned to supplement these discussions. All assigned readings and other course materials are
     available in the class Canvas page, which is organized into modules for each class session.
     Additional readings and materials may be assigned as we progress through the semester. These
     readings will also be available on-line in the course modules. If additional readings are
     assigned, the class will be notified the week before so that students will have adequate time to
     read it before class.
V.   COURSE REQUIREMENTS
     Pre/Post Class Self-Assessment Survey (25 Pre + 25 Post = 50 Points Total) - Students
     will be provided a Qualtrics survey link where they will answer questions to reflect on their
     comfort level in speaking professionally in Spanish, understanding of diverse Spanish
     cultures, and awareness of local resources. This survey will be provided at the beginning
     of the semester and once again at the end of the semester to illustrate where progress and
     growth have occurred.
     Spanish Language Voicemail Recording (20 Points) – Students will upload a Spanish
     Voicemail recording identifying themselves as a Social Worker at a made-up agency.
     Details on the content expected in voicemail will be posted on CANVAS.
     Bilingual Staff Group Interview, Reflection and Presentation (100 Points) - Students
     assigned in groups will meet and interview a bilingual service provider in the community.
                                                                                                       2


        Interviews will take no more than 30 minutes of the provider’s time. Group members will
        be ask a series of questions to help understand the provider’s work with the Spanish
        speaking community, challenges, and recommended resources. Each group member is
        individually responsible for compiling the responses in a 2 page maximum reflection paper.
        The group will collectively will be tasked with presenting the results of the interview to
        the class. Reflections are individually grades and group presentations will share scores. A
        detailed assignment and grading rubric will be posted on CANVAS.
        Translation & Role Play Assignment (50 Points) - Students will be partnered up in dyads
        to translate an assessment from English to Spanish. Students will then upload the translated
        assessment to CANVAS along with a brief recording of themselves administering the
        translated assessment in Spanish. Translation assignment will be a shared score and role
        play will be individually graded. A detailed assignment and grading rubric will be posted
        on CANVAS.
        Participation (80 Points) - Lectures, readings, and assignments make up a portion of the
        learning experience. Experiential learning through class engagement and participation will
        make up a great portion of the learning experience. In order to achieve these learning
        objectives it is important that students attend class on-time, are engaged, and present free
        of distraction (email, texting, etc). Students are allowed one unexcused absence and will
        lose 5 points for each subsequent absence. Arriving to class after start time will result in a
        deduction of 2 points per incident. Extenuating circumstances involving documented
        medical emergencies may be considered on a case-to-case basis.
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and Above              A
        90.0 to 93.999              A-
        87.0 to 89.999              B+
        84.0 to 86.999              B
        80.0 to 83.999              B-
        77.0 to 79.999              C+
        74.0 to 76.999              C
        70.0 to 73.999              C-
        67.0 to 69.999              D+
        64.0 to 66.999              D
        60.0 to 63.999              D-
        Below 60.0                   F
VII.     CLASS POLICIES
Class Attendance & Participation - Classes will begin promptly at the start time indicated. A
zoom waiting area will be available for students to log into pending initiation of class. Students
are allowed one unexcused absence and late arrival. Subsequent absences will result in a deduction
of 5 points per incident. Incidents of tardiness will result in a deduction of 2 points per incident.
Extenuating circumstances involving documented medical emergencies may be considered on a
case-to-case basis. Students are responsible for checking CANVAS and reaching out to peers for
any information and class notes missed.
Assigned Readings – Readings listed in the syllabus are to be read before class for the days they
                                                                                                     3


are assigned to help facilitate conversation about the topic listed. Any additional readings or
direction around specific page numbers will be communicated no later than one week before
reading assignment is due.
Assignment Deadlines and Late Submissions - Assignments are due no later than 11:59 PM on
the assigned due date. Assignments submitted past the deadline will result in a deduction of 5
points per day. Assignments that are 3 days past due will require a meeting with the Professor
before being accepted.
Writing Style - Certain assignments will require students to follow APA 7th Edition guidelines
regarding professional writing (cover page, running head, in-paper references, bibliography).
Students are encouraged to access UT resources through the University Writing Center to review
papers: http://uwc.utexas.edu/.
Students can use Purdue University online resources to help guide APA formatting:
https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/apa_style/apa_style_introduction.html
CANVAS - All assignments, relevant instructions, grades and announcements will be posted
through shared class CANVAS page. Students will be expected to maintain their UT provided
emails in order to continue to receive timely communications regarding class or assignments.
Online Etiquette and Professionalism - All University Policies including but not limited to those
regarding conduct, civility, and professional communication still remain in effect with regards to
remote/online instruction courses. As a professional courtesy to fellow peers, students will be
expected to focus in class and refrain from texting, browsing other sites, or answering emails while
in class. All information shared in class is expected to be held in confidence.
Course Modification - To ensure achievement for course objectives, the professor reserves the
right to make modifications to any part of this syllabus related to schedule and assignment due
dates. Should any modifications be made, students will be notified in class and modifications will
be posted to Canvas. Students should check their email frequently. Note that some of the links to
documents and videos on the Internet may change. Documents, new links or alternate options will
be provided
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                                                                                   4


PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
 UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
 POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public
social networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users
cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work
students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen,
read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc.,
can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective
careers.
 Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
 Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
                                                                                                     5


 Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
 POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
 CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients,
and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
 USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
 RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
                                                                                                     6


any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
 CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
 SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
 BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
 EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    ·     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    ·     If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    ·     In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    ·     Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX.      COURSE SCHEDULE
   Date                 Topic               Assignment Due               Readings
                          Week 1 - Getting to Know Each Other
                                          Pre-Class Self-
   Thu        Class Introductions
                                          Assessment Survey
              Class Overview
   June                                                           None
              Syllabus
    4th                                   Spanish Voicemail
              Group Dynamics
                                          Upload
                                                                                                   7


                       Week 2 - Context and Culture
                                                     Is Social Work still
Tue  History of SW and                               racist? A Content
June Latinx Communities                              Analysis of Recent
 9th                                                 Literature
     Latinx communities in
     the Macro, Mezzo, and                           Latino Critical
     Micro levels of SW                              Perspective in Social
                                                     Work
                                                     Service Needs among
Thu                                                  Latino Immigrant
                                                     Families - Implications
June Latinx Populations
                                                     for Social Work
11th World-Wide and in the
                                                     Practice
     U.S.                           Dyad Group
                                    Assignment
                                                     The Hispanic
     Generational Divides &
                                                     Population – Census
     Bridges
                                                     Brief 2010
                                                     The Culturagram
             Week 3 - Religion, Spirituality, and Community
     Institutional Faith-Based
Tue  Beliefs
June
16th Non-Institutional Faith-
                                                       To Be Assigned
     Based Beliefs
     Professional & Personal
     Values
                                                     Planificación
Thu                                                  estratégica en la
                                                     organización y gestión
June Dynamics of Spanish           Bilingual Staff
18th                                                 de servicios sociales:
     Communities and             Group Interview –
                                                     Guías de práctica para
     Organizations               Group Assignment
                                                     la transformación
                                                     administrativa en el
                                                     trabajo social.
               Week 4 - Spanish Social Work Terminology
     Roles
Tue  General Clinical Terms                          WB-SPA Clinical
     Treatment Planning
June                                                 Language & Resource
     Therapeutic Strategies
23rd                                                 Guide
     Skills/Strategies
     Allied Services
     Emotions/Feelings
                                                                             8


Thu  Behavior                                       WB-SPA Clinical
                               Translation & Role
June Cognitive
                                Play Assignment:    Language & Resource
25th Development
                                    Translated      Guide
     Identity
                                    Assessment
     Parenting
                   Week 5 - Assessments in Spanish
                                                    Examining the Impact
Tue                                                 of Differential Cultural
     Administration                                 Adaptation with
June                            Translation & Role
     Protocols & Fidelity
30th                             Play Assignment:   Latina/o Immigrants
                                Role Play Upload    Exposed to Adapted
     Cultural Adaptation
                                                    Parent Training
                                                    Interventions
     BioPsychoSocial
Thu
July Crisis Assessments                              To Be Assigned
2nd
     Mental Health
                   Week 6 - Interventions in Spanish
Tue                                                 Cuento Group Work in
     Individuals
July                                                Emerging Rural Latino
     Groups
 7th                                                Communities
                                                    Experiences of Latino
Thu                                                 Couples in Relationship
                                                    Education - A Critical
July                                                Analysis
 9th
                                                    Enhancing Parenting
     Couples                   Bilingual Staff
                                                    Practices with Latino/a
     Families                  Group Assignment -
                                                    Immigrants: Integrating
                               Reflection
                                                    Evidence-Based
                                                    Knowledge and Culture
                                                    According to the Voices
                                                    of Latino/a Parents
                          Week 7 - Evaluations
Tue                               Bilingual Staff
     Community Resource
                               Group Assignment –    To Be Assigned
July Evaluation
                                Presentation Part I
14th
                                                                             9


   Thu                                     Bilingual Staff
            Organizational Resource     Group Assignment –
  July                                                         To Be Assigned
            Evaluation                   Presentation Part II
  16th
                           Week 8 - Professional Use of Self
                                                               Semester Recap
   Tue
                                                                  • Knowledge
  July      Social Work Education
                                                                  • Values
   21st
                                                                  • Skills
                                                              Personal Self Reflection
   Thu                                                            • Personality
  July                                                               Traits
                                        Post-Class Self-          • Belief Systems
  23rd
                  Personal Self         Assessment Survey
                                                                  • Life
                                                                     Experiences
                                                                  • Cultural
                                                                     Heritage
                   Week 9 - Professional Ethics & Lifelong Learning
   Tue
            Ethical Dilemmas in                               Social Work Code of
  July      Practice                                          Ethics
   28th
  Wed                                                         Supporting the
            Developing Spanish                                Development of Latino
  July      Speaking Mental Health
                                                              Bilingual Mental Health
   30th     Professions
                                                              Professionals
X.      BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ayón, C. (2014). Service Needs among Latino Immigrant Families: Implications for Social Work
        Practice. Social Work, 59(1), 13–23.
Congress, E.P. (2015). The Culturagram. In Corcaran, K. & Roberts, A.R. (Eds.), The Social Work
        Desk Reference (1011-1018). New York: Oxford University Press.
                                                                                                10


Corley, N., & Young, S. (2018). Is Social Work Still Racist? A Content Analysis of Recent
        Literature. Social Work, 63(4), 317–326
Kiehne, E. (2016). Latino Critical Perspective in Social Work. Social Work, 61(2), 119–126.
Perez, C., Brown, M., Whiting, J., & Harris, S. (2013). Experiences of Latino Couples in
        Relationship Education: A Critical Analysis. Family Journal: Counseling and Therapy for
        Couples and Families, 21(4), 377–385.
Parra-Cardona, J., Bybee, D., Sullivan, C., Rodríguez, M., Dates, B., Tams, L., & Bernal, G. (2017).
        Examining the impact of differential cultural adaptation with Latina/o immigrants exposed to
        adapted parent training interventions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 85(1),
        58–71.
Parra-Cardona, J., López-Zerón, G., Villa, M., Zamudio, E., Escobar-Chew, A., & Domenech
        Rodríguez, M. (2017). Enhancing Parenting Practices with Latino/a Immigrants: Integrating
        Evidence-Based Knowledge and Culture According to the Voices of Latino/a Parents.
        Clinical Social Work Journal, 45(1), 88–98.
Peters, M., Sawyer, C., Guzmán, M., & Graziani, C. (2014). Supporting the Development of Latino
        Bilingual Mental Health Professionals. Journal of Hispanic Higher Education, 13(1), 15–31.
U.S. Census Bureau. (2011). The Hispanic Population: 2010. 2010 Census Briefs. Retrieved from
        https://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-04.pdf
Villalba, J., Ivers, N., & Ohlms, A. (2010). Cuento Group Work in Emerging Rural Latino
        Communities: Promoting Personal-Social Development of Latina/o Middle School Students
        of Mexican Heritage. The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 35(1), 23–43.
Washburn Center for Children (2014, September) Spanish Clinical Language and Resource Guide.
        https://washburn.org/resources/for-clinicians/ Retrieved on May 25, 2020.
Zavala-Mendoza, E. (2017). Planificación estratégica en la organización y gestión de servicios
        sociales: la transformación administrativa en el trabajo social. Voces desde el Trabajo Social,
        5(1), 69–98.
                                                                                                    11
