Materials Engineering ME334
Summer 2019
Location: ETC 7146
8 – 10 am, M/W/F
INSTRUCTOR: David Mitlin, Department of Mechanical Engineering
FANCY TITLES AND WEBSITES:
David Allen Cockrell Endowed Professor
Walker Department of Mechanical Engineering
The University of Texas at Austin
Austin, Texas 78712-1591
Associate Editor, Sustainable Energy and Fuels - RSC
https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=hS5K8A8AAAAJ&hl=en&oi=ao
http://www.mitlingroup.com/
http://www.rsc.org/journals-books-databases/about-journals/sustainable-energy-fuels/
Office: TBT (for now let’s meet in ETC atrium, by the lunch place)
Phone: 315 261 3440 (cell)
Email: David.Mitlin@austin.utexas.edu
Emails are the best way to reach me since it allows me to work off my calendar. The only time I don’t respond
well is when I am traveling, which I will notify you head of time. If I am in China, you will get a response that’s 11
hours off, e.g. at 2 am. No, I am not up with insomnia, its business hours there!
Lectures: Mon, Wed, Fri; 8:00 am until 10:00 am
Classroom: ETC 7145
Office Hours: Mon, W; 10:00 – 11:00 am in atrium and by email appointment (usually same day, unless I am
out traveling)
*If you email me and don’t hear the same day, feel free to ping again, I won’t be offended!
I get over 100 non-spam emails per day, so occasionally some get missed.
                                                                                                                  1/6


Texbook: William D. Callister, Jr. and David G. Rethwisch. Materials Science and Engineering: An
Introduction, 10th Ed. (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Inc.) 2018. Students may purchase the E-Text
version from www.wiley.com ($76.00, ISBN 978-1-119-40549-8). The E-Text is also available with an
abridged print version of the text ($97.95, ISBN 978-1-119- 46315-3). The Kindle Edition is available from
Amazon.com for $76.00.
ATTENDANCE AND ABSENCES
Refer to the General Information Catalog, available on-line, for University policy on attendance and absences.
RESTRICTIONS:
PLEASE OUT OF RESPECT FOR YOU FELLOW STUDENTS AND THE INSTRUCTOR, DO NOT TALK IN
CLASS. IF THERE IS SOMETHING URGENT, FEEL FREE TO EXCUSE YOURSELF FROM THE
CLASSROOM AND COME BACK ONCE YOU ARE DONE. REFER TO THE GENERAL
INFORMATION CATALOG, AVAILABLE ON-LINE, FOR UNIVERSITY POLICY ON OTHER
RESTRICTIONS.
STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSABILITIES:
You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness;
You have a right to respect;
You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly;
You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression;
You have a right to privacy and confidentiality;
You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
environment;
You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming;
You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. Your
experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy
shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences;
You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded;
                                                                                                              2/6


You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal pronoun preference:
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your
request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the
semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following
web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
COURSE-INSTRUCTOR SURVEY:
The course and instructor will be evaluated using standard evaluation forms at the end of the course. Students
are encouraged to provide continuous feedback to the instructor throughout the course.
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS:
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of
the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to
share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let
                                                                                                               3/6


me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so
if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these
discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-
329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.If you or anyone you know experiences any
academic       stress,     difficult         life      events,       or    feelings      like     anxiety       or
                                                                                                             4/6


depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
 http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building;
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class;
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
OTHER ITEMS:
Web-based, password-protected class sites are associated with all academic courses taught at
the University. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class
rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building,
Room        1.     For    information      on      restricting    directory       information,      see:
                                                                                                         5/6


http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/records/restrictmyinfo .
Engineers are required to meet the highest levels of professional conduct and to responsibly
handle complicated and often dangerous equipment and technical tasks. You will be held to
those same expectations by your instructor during your studies and training. You are expected
to obtain all pertinent safety training and to follow all safety procedures for equipment you
handle and tasks you conduct. Failure to do so will result in a penalty on your course grade, a
penalty completely at the discretion of the instructor. For example, explosive launching of any
projectile in an inappropriate location or direction will result in a failing grade in this course.
This is set as course policy so that it will be administered by the University for the instructor
posthumously, if required.
OURSE OUTLINE AND REQUIRED READINGS FROM THE COURSE TEXT:
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas
website at https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions
about the course schedule.
Changes: to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is
your responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to
ensure that you receive the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
COURSE GOALS
Learn to explain the observed properties of engineering materials on the basis of an
understanding of fundamental concepts: chemical bonding, crystal structures, defects, diffusion,
phase diagrams, solidification, and development of microstructures;
Develop an understanding of the mechanical properties of metals and alloys, ceramics and
polymers;
Learn to tailor the mechanical properties of metals and alloys by mechanical processing, heat
treatment, and alteration of microstructures;
Develop an understanding of the differences in the structure and properties of metals, ceramics and
polymers.
                                                                                                    6/6


KNOWLEDGE, ABILITIES AND SKILLS NEEDED FOR THIS COURSE
Knowledge of introductory chemistry;
Ability to follow detailed instructions, definitions, and specifications;
Ability to quickly absorb and comprehend new concepts and information;
Ability to read, write, and speak clearly and effectively in English;
Ability to allocate resources towards the completion of homework assignments on schedule;
Ability to pay consistent attention to the course material daily throughout the semester.
KNOWLEDGE, ABILITIES AND SKILLS TO BE GAINED FROM THIS COURSE
Knowledge of the basic concepts that control the properties of engineering materials and the
structure-property relationships of materials;
Understanding of the mechanical properties of materials and the various ways by which
the mechanical properties of materials can be altered;
Ability to consider the selection of metal alloys for various applications based on mechanical
properties;
Ability to correlate materials theory to experimental data collected in the laboratory in a
separate laboratory course ME 134L on materials properties and processing;
Ability to apply a basic knowledge of chemistry, physics, and mathematics to understand the
properties of real- world materials;
Recognition and appreciation of the interdisciplinary nature of subjects at higher levels of
science and engineering.
IMPACT ON SUBSEQUENT COURSES IN THE CURRICULUM COURSE
The knowledge gained in ME 334 is utilized to understand the experimental data collected in
the ME 134L Materials Engineering Laboratory course;
ME 334 is a prerequisite for ME 338 Machine Elements and all the elective courses in
the “Materials Engineering” area of the Mechanical Engineering curriculum.
OUTCOMES
ABET EC 2000 outcomes are: 1. knowledge of and ability to apply engineering and science
fundamentals to real problems; and 8. ability and desire to lay a foundation for continued
                                                                                               7/6


learning beyond the baccalaureate degree. ASME outcomes are: a) knowledge of chemistry and
calculus-based physics with in-depth knowledge of at least one; and b) the ability to apply
advanced mathematics through multivariate calculus and differential equations.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
The properties and performance of engineering materials are controlled by crystal structure,
bonding, composition, and microstructure. The overall objective of this course is that students
learn to explain the observed properties of engineering materials on the basis of an
understanding of fundamental concepts such as crystal structures, defects, diffusion and phase
equilibria. To obtain this objective, the course establishes first the fundamentals of atomic
structure and bonding, crystal structures, imperfections (defects), diffusion, phase diagrams and
solidification. These ideas are then applied to the mechanical properties of the major classes of
materials: metals and alloys, ceramics, polymers, and composites. The course concludes with
a brief overview of the electrical, magnetic, and optical properties of materials. Some of the
above concepts will also be demonstrated through laboratory experiments taught in a separate
laboratory course, ME 134L Materials Engineering Laboratory.
* Exams will be scheduled to correspond to appropriate break points in the subject matter. You
will be informed of the exact exam date no later than one week before the exam).
Final Exam: Date and location assigned by UT. The final exam must be taken at the time and on
the date given in the Course Schedule. All exams are closed book and closed notes, and no
personal scratch paper may be used. You may use a calculator (or a slide rule), and a straight edge
may be useful.
Homework Assignments will be due approximately once per week. Completed assignments must
be turned in at the beginning of lecture on the assigned due dates. Late homework assignments
will not be accepted since it is unfair to everyone else. Solutions to assignments will be provided
at the end of lecture on the assigned due dates. Students are encouraged to discuss the homework
exercises and work together to understand solution strategies, but the solutions turned in by
each student must be the final work of the individual student. At the end, you really are just
                                                                                                    8/6


cheating yourself by copying homework from others.
All Exams, except the final exam, will be conducted during normal lecture periods in the
assigned classroom on dates specified by the instructor. Each in-class exam will be timed for
fifty (50) minutes. The final exam is cumulative and will be conducted only at the assigned
time and location scheduled by the University. All exams are closed book and closed notes.
The only items allowed for use during exams are calculators, pencils, pens, straight edges and
drafting triangles. The memory of any programmable calculator must be cleared prior to its use
for any exam.
Regrades: Refer to the General Information Catalog, available on-line, for University policy on
regrades.
PREREQUISITES:
Completion of CH 301, ME 302, PHY 303K and PHY 103M with a grade of at least C− in
each; credit or registration for ME 134L, PHY303L, PHY 103N and EM 319; admission to
an appropriate major sequence in engineering.
GRADING:
Course grades will be calculated using scores from three in-class exams, a final exam,
homework assignments and quizzes/class participation, with weights given in the table below on
the left. Letter grades will be assigned
based on these scores, as given in the table below on the right. Plus/minus designations will
be used for grades near the boundaries of the letter-grade transitions shown in the table.
Exam 1: 20%
Exam 2: 20%
Exam 3: 20%
Final Exam: 30%
Homework: 10%
                                                                                                9/6


Topic Topics                                                               Reading
/Week (approximate outline, see Course Notes for Key Concepts)
      Introduction, Elasticity, Stress – Strain, Stress – Strain Diagrams, Course Notes 1,
1     Hardness                                                             Callister Ch 6
      Exams 1 - 3 NOT Cumulative, Final Exam – YES Cumulative
2     Atomic Bonding                                                       Course Notes 2,
      Exam 1 on Topics 1 and 2 (yes, that quickly!)                        Callister Ch 2
3     Crystallography and Crystal Structures                               Course Notes 3
                                                                           Callister Ch 3,4
4     Basics of Phase Transformations, Diffusion and Phase Diagrams        Course Notes 4
      Exam 2 on Topics 3 and 4                                             Callister Ch 5, 9
5     Kinetics of phase transformations and solidification,                Course Notes 5
      Solid-state transformation kinetics, the Fe-C system                 Callister 9, 10
6     Dislocation - based Strengthening Mechanisms, martensite, grain Course Notes 6
      boundaries                                                           Callister 7, 10
      Exam 3 on Topics 5 and 6
7     Steels structure, heat treatment of ferrous and non-ferrous alloys, Course Notes 7
      creep, sensitization and other bad things that happen at high
      temperatures
8     Fast tour of Ceramics, Polymers and Composite Materials, Electrical Course Notes 8
      conductivity and thermal properties, Magnetic and optical properties
                                                                                             10/
