                          ALD 322 ² Applied Learning and Development ² Fall 2018
                         Sanchez Rm 330 ² Tuesdays and Thursdays 12:30pm – 2pm
                                Individual Differences - Secondary
                                          Course Syllabus
                                          Unique (09195)
Instructor:                Dr. Christina “Tina” Fragale, BCBA-D
Contact:                   tinafragale@utexas.edu
                           **Email is the best way to contact me. I will respond within 24 hours or please
                           send a follow up email. I will email you through Canvas also with updates.
Office:                    SZB 440L
Office Hours:              Mondays 1:30-3pm, Thursdays 2:30-3:30pm, immediately after class, or by
                           appointment
Welcome to the world of disability and difference. Actually, you have always been living in this world,
but for many of you, this may be your first formal introduction to the world of disabilities. One of my
main goals for this class is to challenge your ideas of what “normal” looks like, encourage that
“different” does not mean bad and that persons with disabilities can be jerks, too.
GENERAL INFORMATION
This introductory course provides an overview of individual differences among people across age levels
with an emphasis on students at the secondary level. Course content will include definitions,
methodologies, legal aspects, trends, and issues related to individuals with speech and language
disorders, learning disabilities, emotional disturbance, intellectual disabilities, autism spectrum disorder,
and ADHD. All issues will be discussed in the context of family involvement, cultural and linguistic
diversity, and a lifespan focus.
Course Objectives: Upon completion of this course, students will be able to
     • Describe basic concepts and issues related to diversity in schools, the workplace, and the
         community
     • Articulate their individual comfort level toward persons with disabilities
     • Describe the following concepts related to disabilities: legal and theoretical definitions,
         prevalence and etiologies, educational and social/emotional characteristics, family involvement
         and dynamics, life span issues, and assistive technology.
     • Describe the socio-cultural and linguistic factors that influence perceptions of disability, quality
         of life, and services for persons with special needs.
     • Discuss the legal mandates and controversial issues associated with addressing the needs of
         individuals who differ from those in the mainstream of society
     • Describe the legal and historical development of the field of special education
     • Describe how educators and other professionals determine the difference between “normal”
         and “atypical” behavior
                                                                      ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                 Course Syllabus (2018), Page 1


       This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with a variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one US cultural group that has experienced persistent
marginalization.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
      “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
      University and uphold academic integrity.”
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers/community.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Scholastic
dishonesty is broadly defined by the University as including, but not limited to “cheating, plagiarism,
collusion, falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair
academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of essentially the same
written assignment for two classes without the prior permission of the instructor), or the attempt to
commit such an act”. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty are strictly enforced. At a minimum, you should complete
any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you
to:
     • Avoid plagiarism (using the words and/or ideas of an author without citing the original source).
         Always acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts and cite your
         sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a previous
         class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism.
     • Complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
         assistance in preparing them.
     • Follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
         discipline; and
     • Avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
I reserve the right to submit your work to turnitin or safeassign, plagiarism detection services, for an
integrity assessment as needed. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy,
which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php]
Academic Accommodations
The University of Texas is committed to a quality education for all students. Qualified students with
                                                                       ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                  Course Syllabus (2018), Page 2


disabilities who require accommodations should request them by obtaining a letter documenting the
required accommodations from the Services for Students with Disabilities. This letter should be
presented to the instructor at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be
discussed at that time.
For more information, contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 voice or 512-471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing or visit the website: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you have any concerns regarding the attitude or actions of students, staff, or faculty, please call the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t
feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Be Safe Campaign
When moving about campus, especially during darkness, move with a friend and maintain awareness of
your surroundings. Please be aware of these FREE resources:
• SURE Walk program – This program provides walking partners from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m., seven days a
     week. (For help, call 512-232-9255.)
• If a student, staffer or faculty member needs a van ride on campus, they should call 512-441-4441
     Option 9.
• Check the “Be Safe” website at http://besafe.utexas.edu/ for the latest safety tips.
Evacuation Information
• An emergency that threatens the campus will be announced by several communications means. One
     of these will be the Outdoor Warning System (Siren). When someone outside hears the siren at a
     time OTHER than 11:50 a.m. on the first Wednesday of each month, they should immediately seek
     cover in the closest university building or facility. Campus emergency personnel will use other
     communication means to provide information on the correct protective action to take place in the
     interior of buildings. Please remember to:
         o Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and stairwells of the building you
              may occupy. Do not use elevators. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one
              you used when entering the building.
         o Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during
              the first week of class. This information must be provided to the Fire Prevention Services
              office.
         o In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
              enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
              University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
         o Review emergency instructions for “shelter-in-place” (seek immediate shelter indoors) and
              “lockdown” (protection against immediate threats by limiting access to buildings and rooms)
                                                                     ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                Course Syllabus (2018), Page 3


Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
CLASS CONSIDERATIONS
Attendance Policy
My philosophy on attendance is simple: you must be present (both physically AND mentally) to learn.
Attendance is stressed because you will have opportunities to (a) improve your knowledge base
through discussions of class topics and issues, (b) practice skills needed to engage in professional
dialogue/exchange with colleagues, (c) acquire information from lectures and presentations, (d)
participate in in-class activities that have points attached to them, and (e) learn from guest speakers
personal/professional perspectives.
Although attendance is not graded per se I will have a pretty good indication of whether you were in
class or not. Note that I have to report to various UT entities from time-to-time on the attendance of
students. There will be an attendance sheet to sign each class period. Please sign for ONLY yourself.
Signing for others is considered scholastic dishonesty and will be treated as so. You are responsible
for signing in (aka if you are late, it is your responsibility to find the sign-in sheet, etc.). In the case of
borderline grades, I may use attendance as a way to help determine your grade.
Holy Days
Policy for absences due to religious holy days is as set in the Texas Education Code. The code states
that a student who misses an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of
a religious holy day must be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable
time after the absence, provided he or she has properly notified each instructor. It is the policy of The
University of Texas at Austin that the student must notify each instructor as far in advance of the
absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
Please note, even excused and documented absences require timely submission of assignments.
Classroom Behavior Expectations
Preparing for class
     • Students are expected to come to class meetings THOROUGHLY PREPARED. “Thoroughly
         prepared” is defined as having sufficient knowledge of the assigned material to verbally and in
         writing (a) discuss definitions, concepts, issues, and procedures and (b) relate this information
         to content presented during previous class sessions or readings.
     • I do not have access to your mind and know what you are thinking. Therefore, I expect that
         you take responsibility for your learning. This means that if you are having trouble or a
         concept is unclear, please come talk to me or ask a question in class. If I don’t hear from you, I
         will assume everything is a-okay and you are understanding the content material sufficiently.
Behavior expectations DURING class
     • This class works best when you participate. I will do my best to make it as engaging as
         possible, but I am not an entertainer by trade nor can I do it alone. You have to help.
     • As an introductory course in disabilities, my main goal is to reframe how we think about
         persons with disabilities (identified or not). That being said, it is important to recognize two
         things: 1) we are all starting from different places and 2) we all have something to learn.
     • Life happens. Please let me know if things beyond this course are affecting your ability to
                                                                         ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                     Course Syllabus (2018), Page 4


         attend, participate in class or turn in assignments in a timely manner. I do not need to know all
         your business, but I promise am more willing to work with you if you open a line of
         communication with me. I promise I do not bite.
    •    Mobile devices should be powered off and put away during class time to avoid the temptation
         to use text, check email, surf the web, etc. If you are expecting an emergency call or text
         during class, please leave the classroom to take the call or text.
    •    Computers, tablets/iPads, smart phones or other forms of technology should only be used for
         the purposes of the course such as accessing course material, note taking, following the lecture
         slides, etc. The use of non- class related use such as social media, emailing, or other leisure
         websites or applications is not only distracting, but disrespectful to me and to your fellow
         classmates. In addition, the current research repeatedly concludes that use of technology to
         engage in unrelated class activities online is detrimental to learning and remembering lecture
         content (Paul, 2013). This even applies to peers who are not actually on a laptop specifically
         engaging in these activities, but in direct view of a multitasking peer (Sana, Weston, & Cepeda,
         2013)
    •    Given all the negative effects of using technology to multitask, please refrain from
         snapchatting, tweeting working on documents, shopping, etc. until our scheduled technology
         breaks. By doing so, you can avoid getting engagement points taken off (explained further in
         under “Assignments” below) AND I promise you will get more out of this class by being fully
         present.
References:
Paul, Annie Murphy. (2013, May 3). You’ll never learn! Students can’t resist multitasking, and it’s
impairing their memory. Slate, Retrieved from
http://www.slate.com/articles/health_and_science/science/2013/05/multitasking_while_studying_divi
ded_attention_and_technological_gadgets.html
Sana, F. Weston, T., & Cepeda, N.J. (2013). Laptop multitasking hinders classroom learning for both
users and nearby peers. Computers & Education, 62, 24-3
Miscellaneous
Turning in assignments
    • All assignments are due by the start of class, unless otherwise specified. Canvas does
         timestamp submissions, which is what I will go by (so plan accordingly). Assignments turned in
         past the designated time will be considered late. A point will be deducted from the assignment
         grade for every 24 hours late.
    • I will grant any extension as long as you let me know –via email – at least 7 days before the
         assignment is due. Maximum extension is 7 days.
    • All work must be turned in by December 7th by 5pm to be counted.
Incompletes
The assignment of INCOMPLETE OR “I” GRADES is discouraged and will be used only in cases of
extreme emergencies where satisfactory progress has been demonstrated and a passing grade may be
earned.
                                                                      ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                 Course Syllabus (2018), Page 5


COURSE MATERIALS
Daily access to Canvas is critical to success in this class. I will use the Announcement feature through
Canvas to communicate with the whole class, so set your notifications accordingly. All required content
is posted on Canvas under Files.
ASSIGNMENTS
Important note. Detailed guidelines and evaluation criteria for assignments will be provided in class. The
following descriptions serve as an overview of the expectations for each assignment. All assignments
may be turned in via hard copy or uploaded to Canvas by the beginning of class (12:30pm) on the due
date. Assignments turned in using Pages will not be accepted.
Engagement (27 meetings x 2 pts each; 54 points)
Due: weekly
Your involvement in class will add to your learning and the learning of those around you. You are
expected to attend class sessions and complete assigned readings/watch videos. That said, attendance
alone is NOT engagement. You will receive full points through contributing to class activities, sharing
insights, and being engaged.
Each tardy (arriving later than 12:40pm) or leaving class early (before 1:45pm), regardless of reason, will
result in the loss of one engagement point. Off-task technology use, sleeping, etc., will also lead to the
loss of engagement points. I will only warn you once before beginning to take off points. You are
welcome to check in with me at any point in the semester the current status of your engagement points.
Content Responses (11 x 2 pts each; 22 pts total)
Due: see schedule
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
The class is designed to move quickly in order to cover all the content. In order for you to be successful
in this endeavor, it is imperative that you access all the content necessary prior to class. Content
Response assignments not only have information about how to access the materials, but completion of
the assignments are designed to ensure you have accessed the content. There are 12 Content
Responses, so you may drop one for no penalty. However, by completing all 12, you may receive 2 extra
points toward your grade.
What I May Want to Be When I Grow Up – Teacher or Non-teacher Edition (15 pts)
Due: September 11
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This assignment requires you to think about where you are in terms of your career plans. Why do you
want (or not want) to be a teacher? Have you ever considered working with people in
disabilities/teaching special education? Why or why not? Write a brief paper (double-spaced, 2-3 pages)
about what you may want to be when you grow up (in regard to teaching and people with disabilities),
your experiences with people with disabilities, and the learning needs you currently have. A rubric is
provided on Canvas and will be discussed in class. You may choose to complete this assignment orally;
email me to set up a time to do this.
Examinations (2 exams x 15 pts each; 30 pts total)
Due: October 11, December 6
                                                                                   ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                              Course Syllabus (2018), Page 6


----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
As you may have noted from the syllabus thus far, a lot of this class is about your attitudes, beliefs, etc.
That said, there is some concrete knowledge I want you to have about special education and/or
disabilities. Most of what will be tested will be from the powerpoints and classroom discussion. You will
have two open-notes exams, to be done at home during our regular class period. Although you can only
take it once, they will not be cumulative, and they are not timed. They will be made available 4pm the
day before it is due.
Exceptionality Matrix (10 pts)
Due: December 4
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
You will complete a matrix for most exceptionality types after accessing the content and during class
lectures, activities, etc. This resource will cover accommodations teachers can make to help students
with this exceptionality succeed in school, implications across the lifespan, and things people should
know about this exceptionality. This work can be done during class if it doesn’t interfere with your
learning. It will be graded on overall completeness. Please make a scan/take a picture and upload it on
Canvas.
AIT Lab Orientation (10 pts)
Due: December 6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
A site visit to the Assistive and Instructional Technology Lab in SZB 518e will acquaint you with the use of
assistive technology (AT) across a number of settings with individuals with special needs. You will need
to sign up for the orientations online; specific information is posted on Canvas under the Files tab
(including screenshots to assist you). the sign-up period begins September 5, 2018. See AIT lab
orientation document uploaded to Canvas which has the information in the document regarding sign up
procedures and other details. The actual orientations begin on September 12, 2018 and end on
November 16, 2018. I strongly advise that you sign up as soon as you can – this class is not the only class
doing these visits so spots fill quickly. Work directly with the AIT lab supervisor (Ashley Bagwell at
afbagwell@utexas.edu) if you encounter problems in signing up.
After completing the orientation, you will turn in the AIT Lab Orientation Site Visit Form (on Canvas)
and upload a screen shot indicating you finished the online survey. You may choose to turn in the form
electronically or by turning in a hard copy. You may (and are encouraged) to turn this assignment in as
soon as you complete it. A rubric is provided on Canvas.
Field Work Activity (36 pts)
Due: Plan: September 13; Field Trip Reflection Forms: week after field trips; Verification Log –
December 6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Special education is an incredibly diverse field. No amount of reading or lecture can make the field of
special education come “alive.” Therefore, you need to spend some time knee-deep in the field. You
must spend 15 hours in the field; we will do 3 hours together as a class. You are responsible for
scheduling and fulfilling the remaining 12 hours.
You can meet the fieldwork requirement in a variety of ways, including:
     § Volunteering with a variety of organizations (see list on Canvas)
                                                                                   ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                              Course Syllabus (2017), Page 7


     §     Observing relevant school settings or community settings (e.g., special education classrooms,
           job sites, group homes)
     §     Shadowing/interviewing an individual in a position of interest to you (e.g., audiologist,
           counselor/social worker, physical therapist, speech and language pathologist, job coach, special
           education teacher)
You will indicate your plan for completing your remaining 12 hours of field work by submitting the Field
Work Plan form (worth 5 points.)
After each of our “field trips,” please complete the appropriate Field Trip Reflection Form (worth 8
points each).
You will complete a Field Work Verification Log (worth 15 points) to indicate when and where you
completed your field work (the remaining 12 hours).
Final Reflection Paper (12 pts)
Due: Dec 6
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
This assignment will have you apply two practices that I believe great teachers (and students and
people, in general) do consistently: a) reflect and b) identify what they still need to learn. For your final
assignment in this class, write a short paper identifying at least two “big ideas” that you have learned
from this course regarding teaching and/or working with students and/or adults with disabilities and any
gaps in your knowledge that remain. A rubric is available on Canvas and will be discussed in class. You
may choose to complete this assignment orally; email me to set up a time to do this.
EVALUATION
Below are the values of the various kinds of work required for the course, but students should always
bear in mind that grading is primarily a judgment about your performance on a particular assignment.
Grades are designed to indicate your success in completing assignments, not the level of effort you put
into them.
                                     Assignment                                        Possible Points             Due Date
  Engagement                                                                                  54                     Weekly
  Content Responses                                                                           22                     Weekly
  What I May Want to Be When I Grow Up Paper                                                  15                 September 11
  Field Work Plan*                                                                             5                 September 13
  Examinations (2 x 15 points each)                                                           30                 Oct 11; Dec 6
  Field Trip Reflection Form* (2 x 8 points each)                                             16                Oct 18; Nov 27
  Exceptionality Matrix                                                                       10                      Dec 4
  AIT Lab Orientation*                                                                        10                      Dec 6
  Field Work Verification Log*                                                                15                      Dec 6
  Final Reflection Paper                                                                      12                      Dec 6
  Total                                                                                      189
*Students are encouraged to complete and submit these assignments early.
                                                                                   ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                                              Course Syllabus (2017), Page 8


All work must be turned in by 5:00 pm on December 6th.
                           Grade         Percentage           Grade           Percentage
                            A             94–100%              C+              77–79%
                            A−             90–93%              C               73–76%
                            B+             87–89%              C−              70–72%
                            B              83–86%              F                < 70%
                            B−             80–82%
Borderline grades will be reviewed. The next highest grade may be awarded at the discretion of
the instructor based on the student’s overall effort, attendance, and participation in the class.
                                                                 ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                             Course Syllabus (2017), Page 9


 COURSE SCHEDULE
 **This schedule is an outline for the course this semester and is subject to change as needed. Common
 sense and instructor discretion will be the governing forces in dealing with any circumstances that may
 arise that are not explicitly addressed in this syllabus.
                                                                  Content to be
Module/ Date Date                         Topics                Accessed Before            Assignments Due
                                                                      Class
                                        Welcome
1         August 30                 Course Overview
                                        Semantics
                                                               Cohen- first reading
         September 4                                           or Front of the Class  Content Response #1
                                                                (YouTube video)
2                            History of Treatment of People
                                     with Disabilities
         September 6
                                                                                      What I May Want to Be
        September 11
                                                                                      When I Grow Up
3                              What is Special Education?
                              Who is in Special Education?
        September 13                                                                  Field Work Plan*
                                   SPED identification
4       September 18                                                 Hampton          Content Response #2
        September 20
5                                Teaching Students with
                                        Disabilities
        September 25
                                                                     ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                               Course Syllabus (2017), Page 10


                     Speech and Language
                                                 Accommodations
   September 27                                                       Content Response #3
                          Impairments              IRIS modules
                                                Embracing Dyslexia
     October 2                                                        Content Response #4
                                                       video
6                     Learning Disabilities
     October 4
                    Intellectual disabilities,  Teaching with UDL
     October 9                                   (YouTube video);     Content Response #5
                  multiple/severe disabilities
                                                       Simon
7
    October 11              Exam #1
                 Field Trip – no class; meet at
    October 16
                     Mary Lee Foundation
8
                Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
                                                  Schwarz; ADHD
    October 18                                                        Content Response #6
                            Disorder             (YouTube video)
                                                  YouTube video;      Content Response #7; Field
    October 23
                                                 Mullins (TED talk)   Trip Reflection Form I*
                Physical disabilities and other
 9
                      Health impairments
     October 25
10  October 30    Autism Spectrum Disorder            Haddon          Content Response #8
                                                     ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                               Course Syllabus (2017), Page 11


                Autism Spectrum Disorder
   November 1
    November 6  Autism Spectrum Disorder                Padawar          Content Response #9
11
   November 8        Profoundly gifted
   November 13                                       Cogan OR Ford       Content Response #10
12               Emotional Disturbance
   November 15
                                                       Addressing
                                                     Disruptive and
   November 20           Field Trip                  Noncompliant        Content Response #11
                                                     Behaviors IRIS
13                                                      Modules
   November 22                   No class – have a safe and happy Thanksgiving!
               Deafness or Hard of Hearing                               Field Trip Reflection Form
   November 27
                                                                         II*
14
   November 29     Blind or Low Vision            Downey (TED talk)
                    Burning Questions
                                                                         Content Response #12
15  December 4      Course Evaluations              Cohen - teaching
                                                                         Exceptionality Matrix
                    Closing Comments
                                                        ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                  Course Syllabus (2017), Page 12


                                                                               Field Work Verification Log
                                                                               for remaining 12 hours*;
       December 6                   Exam #2
                                                                               AIT Lab Orientation*; Final
                                                                               Reflection Paper
Note: *Students are encouraged to complete and submit these assignments early.
                                                              ALD 322 – Individual Differences - Fragale
                                                                       Course Syllabus (2017), Page 13
