                                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                               Department of Aerospace Engineering and Engineering Mechanics
                                               COE f311K: Engineering Computation
                                                             Summer 2020
                                                              SYLLABUS
                                 v2: revised June 6, 2020 (highlighted portions are new/revised items)
Unique Number:                 74797
Instructor:                    Dr. Thomas Connolly
                               e-mail: tjconn@austin.utexas.edu
                               office hours: Tu Th 11:00am – 12:30pm via Zoom: https://utexas.zoom.us/j/95443823074
Class Meetings:                Pre-recorded video lectures/tutorials on Canvas – listed under the Panopto Video section
                               Recitation sessions: live via Zoom, M W 10:00am – 12:00pm
Teaching Assistant:            Al-Amin
                               e-mail: m.alamin.ce.@gmail.com
                               office hours: M 4-5pm, Th 4-5pm, via Zoom
Computer and Software:
You should have MATLAB installed on your computer. To access the free student site license, go to:
https://ut.service-now.com/sp?id=ut_bs_service_detail&sys_id=f9d65c7c4ff9d200f6897bcd0210c77d
Textbook and Other Course Materials:
      You are required to have the current edition of the textbook
               Applied Numerical Methods with MATLAB for Engineers and Scientists, 4th Edition, by Steven Chapra
               McGraw-Hill Education, 2017
               ISBN: 978-0073397962
      Dr. Connolly will also post supplemental instructional materials on Canvas as appropriate
Catalog Description:
Fundamental numerical methods and software tools used in engineering computation. Subjects include linear systems of equations,
matrix computations, nonlinear equations, least squares approximations, interpolation, numerical integration and numerical solution of
differential equations.
Course Objectives: Develop a strong foundation in engineering computation concepts and practices, including:
      tolerance and calculation of numerical error
      convergence to a solution
      iterative approaches
      graphical approaches
      matrix operations
      interpolation
      nonlinear equations
      linear systems analysis
      numerical differentiation and integration
      efficient program design
      effective presentation and communication of computational results
Prerequisites: COE 301 with a grade of at least C–; and credit with a grade of at least C or registration for M 427J (differential
equations and linear algebra).


Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities Students Should Have Before Entering This Course:
      Proficiency in MATLAB programming: for loops, while loops, conditional structures (if, then, else, elseif), matrix
          operations, user-defined functions, and plotting (single & multiple plots on one set of axes, subplots, and annotation of plots.)
      A solid foundation in mathematics and calculus principles: matrices, systems of linear equations, differentiation, and
          integration.
Knowledge, Skills, and Abilities Students Gain from this Course (Learning Outcomes)
At the conclusion of the course, students will be able to apply a broad range of computational techniques to aid in the solution of
problems encountered in engineering coursework and design projects.
Relationship of Course to Program Outcomes
This course contributes to the ABET Criterion 3 student outcomes that took effect with the Fall 2019 semester. For more information,
see Criteria for Accrediting Engineering Programs, 2019 – 2020 at https://www.abet.org/accreditation/accreditation-criteria/criteria-
for-accrediting-engineering-programs-2019-2020/
                                              STUDENT OUTCOME
            1.  an ability to identify, formulate, and solve complex engineering problems by applying
                                                                                                                  
                principles of engineering, science, and mathematics
            2.  an ability to apply engineering design to produce solutions that meet specified needs
                with consideration of public health, safety, and welfare, as well as global, cultural,
                social, environmental, and economic factors
            3.  an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences
            4.  an ability to recognize ethical and professional responsibilities in engineering situations
                and make informed judgments, which must consider the impact of engineering solutions
                in global, economic, environmental, and societal contexts
            5.  an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership,
                create a collaborative and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet
                objectives
            6.  an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret
                data, and use engineering judgment to draw conclusions
            7.  an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning
                                                                                                                  
                strategies
ABET Program Criteria Achieved
Program criteria are unique to each degree program and are to be compiled from the program criteria given for each degree program
and listed in table format below.
                Criterion                               Criterion                              Criterion
   A. Aerodynamics                          G. Orbital Mechanics                   M. Preliminary/Conceptual Design
   B. Aerospace Materials                   H. Space Environment                   N. Other Design Content
   C. Structures                            I. Attitude Determination and          O. Professionalism
                                           Control
   D. Propulsion                            J. Telecommunications                  P. Computer Usage                   
   E. Flight Mechanics                      K. Space Structures
   F. Stability and Control                 L. Rocket Propulsion
Class Format
         This course will be conducted completely online. Pre-recorded videos will be posted by Dr. Connolly on a regular basis.
         Recitation sessions with the TA will be conducted live via Zoom twice a week, with each session lasting two hours. Unless
          otherwise noted, an active learning exercise (programming assignment) will be set for each session.


Class Outline: We will cover the following topics (textbook chapter/section numbers provided for reference)
      MATLAB review (Dr. Connolly’s notes and textbook sections: 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 2.5 and 3.1, 3.2, 3.3, 3.4)
      Convergence (Dr. Connolly’s notes)
      Error and tolerances (Dr. Connolly’s notes)
      Working with data files in MATLAB (Dr. Connolly’s notes and textbook section 3.2.1)
      Solving nonlinear equations (textbook Chapter 5)
      Linear Systems Analysis (textbook Chapters 8 and 13)
      Interpolation (textbook Chapter 17)
      Numerical Integration (textbook Chapter 19)
      Numerical Differentiation (textbook Chapter 21)
      Differential Equations: Initial Value Problems (textbook Chapter 22)
      Differential Equations: Solving Systems of Simultaneous Differential Equations (Chapter 22 and Dr. Connolly’s notes)
      Differential Equations: Boundary Value Problems (textbook Chapter 24)
Grading
Final course grades will be computed according to the following breakdown
                                  Programming assignments (homework)                              60%
                                  Active Learning Exercises (recitation)                          15%
                                  Exam – during recitation on June 29                             15%
                                  Final programming assignment/project – due July 11              10%
        Your course grade may be adjusted up or down by a half-letter grade, based on your professional conduct and scholarship
        To obtain a grade of A in this course, you must be prepared to do “outstanding” work: 90% does not guarantee an A. The
         following grading scale will be used to assign final course grades. Grades may be curved, if deemed appropriate.
                                                         95 or above      A
                                                         91 – 94          A–
                                                         87 – 90          B+
                                                         84 – 86          B
                                                         80 – 83          B–
                                                         77 – 79          C+
                                                         74 – 76          C
                                                         70 – 73          C–
                                                         65 – 69          D+
                                                         64 – 66          D
                                                         60 – 63          D–
                                                         59 or below      F
Homework Policy:
Homework is a significant component of the activities in this class and forms the majority of your course grade. Penalties will be
assessed for work that is submitted late. Given the accelerated pace of the summer course, falling even a little bit behind can be
disastrous. All work for this course will be submitted electronically on Canvas.
Examinations:
There will be one examination – held live during recitation on Monday, June 29 – to assess your programming skills in a controlled
and timed environment. You have to remain connected to Zoom while you are taking the exam.
Important Dates:
      June 5: Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration may require the approval of the
         department chair and usually the student’s dean.
        June 24: Last day a student may change registration in a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session class to or from the
         pass/fail or credit/no credit basis.
        July 9: Last class day
        July 11: Final programming assignment/project due by 5:00pm (more details to come)


Special Notes:
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. For
more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TDD or the Cockrell School of Engineering
Director of Students with Disabilities at 471-4321.
Evaluation:
Note that the Measurement and Evaluation Center forms for the Cockrell School of Engineering will be used during the last week of
class to evaluate the course and the instructor.
Prepared by: Thomas Connolly                          Date: June 6, 2020
