                                                  Sociocultural Influences on Learning
                                                          (ALD 327/AFR 372D)
                                                                   Fall 2018
                                                     Unique Number: 09045/30665
                                                      University of Texas at Austin
                                                  Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
                                                      Professor: Courtney B. Cook
                                                           Thursdays: 4:00 – 7:00
                                                                   SZB 424
Cross-Listings: African American Studies 372D                               Flag: Cultural Diversity
Instructor: Courtney B. Cook
Office Hours: 9:00 - 2:30 M-W (or by appointment)
Office: TNH 2.215
Email: courtneybcook@utexas.edu
REQUIRED TEXTS
     • Course Packet can be purchased from Jenn’s Copies
     • Te-Nehisi Coates, Between the World and Me
     • Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African American Students (full text available
          online through UT Library)
     • Amanda Lewis, Race in the Schoolyard (full text available online through UT Library)
Note: Please bring course packet or texts to all class meetings. If you choose to use the electronic resources, please
bring a hard copy of your notes to class.
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
What does it mean to be a teacher and a learner in today’s world? In what ways do society, culture, and politics impact schooling? How
does sociocultural knowledge (deeply rooted in histories that define what is “normal”) inform institutional practices and social inequalities in
schools? How do sociocultural influences fundamentally shape how students understand themselves, their place in the world, and others
around them? Why do we teach what we teach and standardize particular (dominant) ways of knowing? This course is devoted to
exploring these questions by examining relationships between education, culture, and society to better understand
how the past shapes the present. We will focus on: structures of social and educational inequality, in particular as they
relate to race, class and gender; processes of power and control in American education, as they are expressed in
curriculum, policy, and ideology; education as a process of social and cultural reproduction; and teaching as a form of
intervention in these processes. The course pays special attention to the experiences and educational conditions of
those who have been marginalized within U.S. schools. It is expected that in this course students will become familiar
with the sociological, cultural, and political contexts and dimensions of education in U.S. society; will critically
consider relationships of power within society and the ways they are expressed in schooling; and will develop the
foundational knowledge necessary for working with children and youth from diverse backgrounds. Throughout the
course, you will be encouraged to ask critical questions of your own beliefs and to listen to others’ perspectives in a
respectful manner that places listening at the forefront of our weekly practices of engaging in dialogue around issues
of race, gender, class, privilege, and sexual orientation.
PLEASE NOTE: This course includes a 15-hour service learning component. I will provide a list of locations and organizations that
might interest you. It is your responsibility find and establish your program of service-learning with a partner organization to engage in 15
hours of volunteer service learning.


                                                                                                      ALD 327, Cook, p. 2
CULTURAL DIVERSITY FLAG
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of
at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
TEACHING PHILOSOPHY
I believe that learning, growing, grappling, and being a reflective human in this world is something that is never
“finished;” that never has “right” answers; and is a process that is filled with both struggle and joy. Learning is a process
of asking tough questions (and sometimes learning what new questions need to be asked) and actively seeking deeper
understandings. In this course I will encourage you to cultivate a critical curiosity, to care about something on
purpose, to ask courageous questions and find comfort in not having a “right” or “clear” answer, but to be honest in
the process of grappling with the questions themselves in this community. I hope to help you develop a practice of
reflection that is dedicated to paying attention to your feelings, experiences, and developing questions – to your
growth as a learner along the way. I also feel it’s important that we educators engage intellectually with political,
historical, social, and ethical questions as we move down our own path of growing and learning in our practice of
teaching. I believe in the power of dialogue, of listening, of not understanding and insist that we must not shy away from
difficult dialogues, but seek to honestly reflect on our responsibilities as teachers, and fellow learners, and as members
of this small community to more firmly believe that education means confronting injustice. I am dedicated and open
to hearing from you, your questions, and your processes as you encounter new knowledge in this course. I will work
to foster an environment where everyone feels room enough to find comfort with your unique voice, and safety
enough to express our curiosities, confusions, and struggles as a community of learners who hold a deep respect for
one another. I am committed to the learning of all students and expect you to show up each week prepared, with
questions, and an eagerness to participate respectfully. Please don’t hesitate to reach out to me at any point over the
course of the semester.
POLICIES
Participation.
Since this course relies so much on your participation and effort, grades will reflect the degree to which your class
participation (group and individual) is thoughtful, active, engaging, and critical. Attendance and participation in class
are important to facilitate your own learning and the growth of others, and our discussions depend on all voices being
shared and heard. In order to actively engage in an informed way in class discussions, I expect you to carefully read all
assigned readings before class, and that you bring the readings with you to class in the form of a hard copy.
Participation will also reflect whether or not you submit assignments on time and whether or not these assignments
meet the requirements of the class. If you are ever unclear about assignment expectations, please reach out (in
advance) so I can help you. I will communicate via Canvas & you will be responsible for checking your
account in order to receive any correspondence, updates, or announcements made through Canvas.
Attendance:
The success of this course depends on the degree to which you attend class and thoughtfully and actively engage in
small/large class discussions. This means that prior to class meetings, you will have carefully read and critically considered
the week’s readings and other assigned materials. It is VITALLY important that you attend class in a timely and
consistent manner. Of course, over the course of the semester situations may arise that prohibit your attendance and,
for this reason, you may miss one (1) class – for any reason – without penalty. Each additional absence will result in a one
point deduction from your grade. The only absences excused from this policy are those accompanied with a doctor’s note
or some other documented valid. NOTE: IF YOU MISS MORE THAN THREE (3) CLASSES AND DO NOT
HAVE A DOCTOR’S NOTE OR OTHER VALID DOCUMENTATION JUSTIFYING YOUR ABSENCE,
YOU WILL FAIL THE COURSE.
Lateness:


                                                                                                   ALD 327, Cook, p. 3
Two (2) late arrivals equals one (1) absence. If you have a situation that keeps you from arriving to class on time you’ll
need to discuss this with me. Otherwise I expect you to be on time to class out of respect for this community.
Laptops:
I welcome laptops and will use mine as well but, of course, I ask that you refrain from checking Facebook, live-
tweeting our (exciting) class meetings, half-heartedly scrolling through Instagram, or texting while we are engaging
in our class discussion. During discussions you will put your computers and phones away and rely on printed copies
of the readings. This will help us tune-in and be present with one another in the short time we have together.
Academic Integrity:
All work must be your own. If referring to ideas or information from others, make sure that you cite the source. We use
APA format in this course which offers guidelines for how to approach citations and avoid plagiarism. No credit
will be given for work that violates this principle. If you have questions about how to accurately cite someone else’s
ideas then ask me so I can help you.
Late Work:
Reading responses will not be accepted if turned in after the deadline. All other written assignments will lose two
points if turned in past the deadline.
Writing Center:
As a writing teacher, writing is something I think we should always take pride in. As a writer, I also know that
writing is always challenging (this is true regardless of how long you practice writing) and so I want to remind you all
that the Sanger Learning Center has a writing center and writing specialists to help you come up with ideas, logically
organize those ideas, build a compelling story, adequately cite material in your work, and develop a cohesive
narrative. Of course, I am always happy to offer you support as you think, organize, and write. You must proofread
your work before you hand it in.
                                         ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING BASIS
Check-Ins
We will begin every class meeting with a quick check-in (which I’ll model on the first day). I am interested in your
well-being, what you are carrying with you into class each day, and how I can best meet each of you where you are as
individuals. Check-ins are meant to foster openness, communication, and community.
Critical Reflective Journals
You are required to have a journal for this course. Each class meeting will close with 5 minutes of personal reflection
which will be done in your journal and is meant to be a time of processing, questioning, exploring new
ideas/feelings/thoughts privately while they are still fresh. Digital journals will not be allowed – this is meant to be an
old-fashioned pen and paper place for your thoughts, and mostly a way to be in dialogue with yourself throughout the
semester as you grow. Your journal is your own – you may use it throughout the course to process readings, record
questions, and engage in dialogue with yourself and the world.
Responses to Weekly Questions
Each week, on Canvas, I will post guiding questions that derive from/relates to the weekly reading. The day before class
(on Wednesday by midnight), you will post a thoughtful response to the questions that: (1) directly engages the
readings, (2) makes reference to specific arguments presented within each article, and (3) pose two new questions
you have that were inspired by the readings. This response should be specific and brief, must reflect critical depth of
engagement with the ideas covered, and serve as evidence of your engagement. Enter your response in the
submissions field under Assignments on Canvas. No late assignments will be accepted.


                                                                                                   ALD 327, Cook, p. 4
Autobiographical Essay
Autobiography: auto (self) + bio (Life) + graphy (To write). Autobiography is the write a story about your own life, the
self you have always been becoming. It is a reflection on your own experiences and your own life, so it is personal. In
this personal essay you will reflect on your life experiences as they relate to the topics/ideas we consider in class. You
will describe how your own identity (race, class, gender, sexuality, etc.) and personal development (ideologically,
socially, culturally, etc.) have been influenced by the social and cultural factors within education we are studying, and
you will think through these experiences to offer more nuanced meaning and significance to the ways they have
shaped the you that you are becoming. The Autobiographical Essay is due on October 18.
Service Learning
This course includes a 15-hour service learning component which you must complete in order to receive credit
for the class. It is your responsibility to contact one of the sites on the Service Learning Opportunities list (or an
equivalent site with my approval) to complete your volunteer service learning. The supervising staff member at your
site will be asked to sign off on a form certifying that you have completed your required hours. You must select a
partner organization to participate with by September 27th.
Service Learning Analysis
Your Service Learning Project will be divided into two parts. Part I will include a 3-4 page, double-spaced, critically
reflective analysis that describes the context and mission of the organization you are working with through your
developing understanding of it, your role at the site, an asset-based (avoiding deficit thinking) description of the site
and the community, and ways in which the site you are participating is committed to a project of social justice that
aims to broadly transform social conditions for the communities it serves. Part I is due November 1.
Part II of your service learning write-up, you will conduct one 30-minute interview with a parent (preferred),
student, teacher, or other community member involved in the organization (someone who is not your supervisor).
You will turn in a transcribed copy of your interview, along with a 2-3 page, double-spaced, analysis of your
interview findings. In your analysis/findings, you may focus on the topic of your choice, but keep in mind that you
will be expected to provide an analysis that acknowledges the cultural wealth and/or funds of knowledge of the
community. That being said, be sure to structure your interview questions to get at these ideas discussed in class.
We will work on this in class when I assign the project. Part II is due November 29.
Partner Presentations: Bridging Our World and Our Studies
In partners (or groups), you will undertake a presentation at the beginning of one class session. This presentation will be
related to the topics and readings we are covering that week, but should bring a new perspective or direction to it in that it
directly engages with our current political, social, or cultural climate. In what ways are these topics relevant in today’s
world? How might the topic of the week help us gain perspective on a contemporary conversation in the public, political
sphere? How might the issues we are considering move beyond the classroom into non-traditional educational spaces?
How does popular media/culture engage with these issues? This is an open-ended and creative assignment which asks
you to take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening the discussion of it. At the end of these presentations you will ask
your classmates 2-3 questions. If you are not presenting, then I expect you to engage in thoughtful, engaging conversation
responding to the questions your peers ask.
Final Reflective Essay
In this essay you will reflect on what you have learned during the course, and how it has affected your thinking about
teaching, learning, and/or schooling. While you will engage with specific course concepts and readings that have made a
difference to you, the assignment is subjective in nature, and asks you to describe, from your own perspective, your
intellectual and emotional growth in relation to this material. The Final Reflective Essay is due on December 10.
Assignment                                                  Points
Critical Reflection/Journals                                 5
Reading Responses                                           10
Autobiographical Essay                                      15


                                                                                                  ALD 327, Cook, p. 5
Service Learning Analysis                               20
Partner Presentation                                    10
Final Reflective Essay                                  20
Participation                                           20
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F
UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES
Academic Integrity: University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be
checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating
your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
     • Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
        instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
        etc.).
     • Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
        required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
        transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     • Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
        reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
 discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
 among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
 Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy


                                                                                                       ALD 327, Cook, p. 6
   Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm
   is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
       • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit
           door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
       • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
       • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
  Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
  Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                           SEMETER SCHEDULE
Date        Topic                         Reading                                      Due
8/30
            Introductions                      •    Intro Survey
            What are “sociocultural                                                    Presentation sign-
                                               •    Letter to Students + Assignment    up sheet will be
            influences?”                       •    Syllabus Review                    posted to Canvas
            What is the purpose of
            education?
9/6
                                                                                       - Introduction
            History, Politics, &            • Spring: Ch. 1 (pp. 3 – 29)               Letter (hand-
            American Education              • Oakes: (pp. 34 – 45)                     written, no length
                                                                                       requirement)
                                                                                       - Presentation Sign-
                                                                                       up Completed
9/13                                         •    McLaren from Life in Schools
            Critical Theories of                   (pp. 10-19 & Ch. 5)
            Power, Society, &                • hooks, b.: Engaged Pedagogy from
            Schooling                             Teaching Community
                                             • Vocabulary Study List
9/20
            Historical and                  • Coates: Between the World and Me pp. 1   Group 1 Present
            Contemporary                        -64
            Connections in African          • Walker: Segregated schools for
            American Schooling                  AfAm children in the South
                                            • In-class viewing: A Conversation
                                                with my Black Son
9/27
            Race, Racism, and               • Coates Between the World and Me          Group 2 Present
            Deficit Thinking                                                           - Service Learning
                                                (finish)                               Site Confirmed
                                            • Weiner: Challenging Deficit Thinking
            Whose Knowledge Counts?         • Moll et al. Funds of Knowledge for
            Whose is discounted?                Teaching


                                                                                               ALD 327, Cook, p. 7
10/4
      Race, Class, & Social            • Lewis, A: Race in the Schoolyard (pp. 1 Group 3 Present
      Reproduction                       – 86)
                                       • Yosso, T: Whose culture has capital?
10/11
      Race, Class, & Social            • Lewis, A: Race in the Schoolyard (pp. 87 Group 4 Present
      Reproduction                       – 196)
                                       • Chang, B & Au, W: You’re Asian.
                                         How Could You Fail Math?:
                                         Unmasking the myth of the model
                                         minority
10/18
      Social Contexts of               • Ladson-Billings, from Dreamkeepers,         Autobio-
      Teaching and                        Ch. 2 -7 (pp. 17-156)                      graphical
      Curriculum and                   • In-Class Viewing: No Child Left Behind        Essay
      Culturally-Relevant                 performed by Sister Outsider
      Pedagogy
10/25
      Contemporary                     • Marx, from Revealing the Invisible       Group 5 Present
      Discourses of Race –                  (Intro, Ch. 1)
      Making whiteness visible &       • McIntosh, Unpacking the Invisible
      developing a language to              Backpack
      facilitate “difficult dialogues” • In-class viewing: Race: The Power of an
                                          Illusion, “The House we Live in”
11/1
      Gender and Racialized            • Garcia: Now Why do you want to know      Service
      Sexualities                         about that?                             Learning
                                       • Watson: Boys, masculinity, & school      Analysis I
                                          violence
                                       • Wozolek, B.: The school-to-coffin
                                          pipeline
                                       • In-Class Viewing: Killing Us Softly
11/8
      Gender, Sexuality, and           • Mayo: The Tolerance that Dare Not        Group 6 Present
AESA  Discrimination                      Speak Its Name
Conf.
                                       • Fine: Discourse of Desire
                                       • In-class viewing: “Somewhere in
                                          America”
11/15
      Ideology                         • Hursh, “Assessing NCLB and the           Group 7 Present
                                          Rise of Neoliberal Educational
                                          Policies”


                                                                                                                ALD 327, Cook, p. 8
11/29
                                                • Valenzuela, Chapter 3 (partial): pp.          Service
            Culture, Language, and                 75-113; Chapter 5 (partial) pp. 161-         Learning
            Schooling                              181                                          Analysis II &
                                                • Daniel Solórzano & Dolores                    Form
                                                   Delgado Bernal: “Examining                   Submitted
                                                   transformational resistance”
                                                • In-Class viewing:
                                                   “3 Ways to Speak English” by Jamila
                                                   Lyiscot
                                                                                                Group 8 Present
12/6        Critical Pedagogy &                   •    Anzaldúa, G.: from
            Intersectionality                          Borderlands/LaFrontera (pp. 75 –         Final Reflective
                                                       86)                                      Essay Due
                                                  •    Greene, Releasing the Imagination        December 10.
  Reading Responses
  Each week I will post a question that derives from/relates to the topic of study. The day before class (on Wednesday by
  midnight), you will post a thoughtful response to the weekly question that (1) explicitly engages the readings, (2)
  makes reference to specific arguments presented within each article, and (3) poses a new question that derives from
  the reading. This response should be specific and brief, must reflect critical depth of engagement with the ideas
  covered, and serve as evidence of your engagement. Enter your response in the submissions field under
  Assignments on Canvas.
  You will make use of the Critical Reading guide throughout the semester to practice critical analysis of
  The reading responses are due on the Wednesday before class by 11:59pm. No late assignments will be accepted.
  Additional Notes:
      •   Responses should be approximately 200-300 words.
      •   If you are having technical difficulties with Canvas, email your response directly to
          courtneybcook@utexas.edu. Responses must be posted or received by 11:59pm on Wednesday to receive
          credit.
      •   Don’t use quotations from the text, but DO make specific references. The 200-300 words needs to be your own
          comments, thoughts, and questions.
      •   Your response should focus on the key points of the text, rather than on general speculations. Be specific in
          your writing.


                                                                                          ALD 327, Cook, p. 9
• Each response must end with a critical question that is well-crafted. I may use these questions for prompts
  during class meeting.
• Ten reading responses will be due during the course; each is worth 1 point.


                                                                                                  ALD 327, Cook, p. 10
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay (4-5 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on your own life experience as it relates to the
topics and ideas we have been considering in class. The question for you to respond to in this assignment is:
    •    Who are you, and how has your identity been influenced by, and constructed in relationship to your
         educational experiences?
“Educational experiences” includes school, but can also include other significant learning moments in your life with
your family, peers, strangers, or in other contexts. This essay is meant to be a critical narrative of your growth and
development and to explore the ways your development is connected to the educational, social, and cultural context
you have come from. Along the way you should consider how some of the racial, class, cultural, and gender
understandings, differences, and processes that we have discussed have shaped and changed you (and also, if
you want, how you have responded). You should provide specific descriptions of experiences to make your
essay more vivid, and should think deeply and in a critical way about how these experiences and particular
moments have shaped your understanding of yourself in our world.
Tips (and requirements):
    • Think specifically, about moments, about relationships, about events as they have unfolded in your life.
    • Choose a few meaningful encounters
    • Describe these encounters in specific terms:
             o Who “were you” then?
             o How did you understand yourself in relation to the experience?
             o How did the experience change you?
             o Upon reflection, why was this moment so meaningful to you and your growth?
             o Do not simply tell a chronological story of your entire life
    • Connect these moments to the ideas we are exploring in class and use specific language you have learned in
         our time together.
    • This is a reflective paper, meaning that you are thinking back from where you are now, making use of the
         new language and ideas you are developing in this course as a new lens to examine your past.
Evaluation
This essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1) specific discussion of personal experience and
identity, 2) depth of analysis and insights, 3) connections drawn to ideas and topics considered in the course.
Group Presentations: Critical Connections
With a small group organized by interest you will undertake an oral presentation at the beginning of one class session.
The goal of this presentation is to connect the concepts we are learning about with our current political/education
landscape. This presentation should be related to the topic and reading of the day, but should bring a new perspective or
direction to it. This is an open-ended and creative assignment, which asks you to take initiative in analyzing the topic,
finding a contemporary issue to which this topic is relevant, and asking new questions of it. Put simply, you are to make
this topic relevant to us in our current lives and work.
You are expected to engage with the text, but please do not summarize it. This is not a report, but rather an
analysis and discussion. Plan your presentation carefully for about 15 minutes; if you reach 20 minutes you will be
stopped. Please send me your presentation the day before class is scheduled.
Key guidelines: 1) do not summarize the text; 2) offer a contemporary issue that shows the topics relevance for
us today 2) plan for 15 minutes.


                                                                                                 ALD 327, Cook, p. 11
Some ways to approach the presentation (there are other possibilities):
    • What are some key ideas in the reading? How are they meaningful? Why are they important?
    • How might these ideas apply in a school or other context contemporarily?
    • Can you think of a particular context, event, organization, or institution for which the topic of the day is
        relevant or dramatized?
    • How might this reading help us make sense of a current event?
    • Does the reading/author fall into a broader tradition, social movement, school of thought, etc.?
    • Where and in what ways do these topics emerge in the world of popular culture or non-institutional
        schooling (remember: learning is taking place everywhere, all the time)?
Notes:
    • You will come up to the front of the class for the presentation.
    • Powerpoint/Prezi is good, but not required; however, it helps to have some kind of visual aid.
    • If you invite interaction from the class, make sure it is for no more than 5 minutes (it should be well-
        structured and relevant).
    • If you show a video clip, it should be no more than a few minutes so that you have time to present your
        own analysis.
    • After your presentation, I would like you to pose 3-5 questions for class discussion. I will help facililtate the
        discussion at this point.
Evaluation
Presentations will be evaluated on: 1) depth of analysis and creativity of presentation; 2) quality of planning and
collaboration among presenters; 3) insights offered on topic and/or reading of the day.
NOTE: The week you present you do not have to post a Reading Response.
Service Learning Analysis
Your Service Learning Project will be divided into two parts. Part I will include a 3-4 page, double-spaced, reflective
analysis that describes the context and mission of the organization you are working with, your role at the site, an
asset-based description of the site and the community, and ways in which the site you are participating is committed
to a project of social justice that aims to broadly transform social conditions for the communities it serves.
Service Learning Analysis
This assignment should be 3-4 double-spaced pages of reflective analysis that:
    1.  Describes the context and mission of the organization you are working with
    2.  Describes the community that the organization seeks to serve
    3.  Describes your role in the organization and at the site
    4.  Examines the ways in which the site is committed to a project of social justice
    5.  Examines the ways in which the organization seeks to, succeeds at, or could improve upon the ways in
        which it transforms social conditions for the community
Guiding Questions that May Help You
    Ø Why has this organization chosen to focus on their particular mission? What are some of the key challenges
        associated with the central projects that this organization has taken on? What are your initial impressions of
        the structure and relationships at the site?
    Ø How does it feel to you so far to be engaged in this project? What is exciting about your experience? What
        is difficult? How are you negotiating the relationships you are involved in with participants?


                                                                                                ALD 327, Cook, p. 12
    Ø   How can the work of the organization, or a volunteer’s (like you) work at the organization be sustained and
        deepened?
    Ø   What can be learned from this experience that could be applied to other similar situations?
    Ø   What gives rise to the challenges you have described? What are the most promising avenues for confronting
        these challenges? What do you think the organization might do differently?
    Ø   What does social justice mean to this organization? In your view, does the work of this site move toward
        this goal? Has your participation altered your own understandings and views of social justice?
Evaluation
The Service Learning Analysis will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1) carefulness and specificity of
descriptions of site and experiences, 2) depth and interest of interpretive comments, 3) evidence provided of
engagement with service learning organization, 4) clarity and coherence of writing.
Service Learning Part II
You will conduct one 30-minute interview with a parent (preferred), student, teacher, or other community member
involved in the organization (someone who is not your supervisor). You will turn in a transcribed copy of your
interview, along with a 2-3 page, double-spaced, summary of your interview findings. In your analysis/findings, you
may focus on the topic of your choice, but keep in mind that you will be expected to provide an analysis that
acknowledges the cultural wealth and/or funds of knowledge of the community, and you are to avoid deficit
thinking. This is a project that is meant to put your knowledge into practice. Be sure to structure your interview
questions to get at these ideas discussed in class.
A guide for structuring interview questions can be found at the end of this syllabus. You will be offered
opportunities to ask questions regarding approaches to interviews, ways to record interviews, and tips for
transcribing.


                                                                                                 ALD 327, Cook, p. 13
 Final Reflective Essay
In this essay (5-7 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on what you have learned during the course and its
various assignments, and how it has affected your thinking about teaching, learning, and/or schooling as well as
how you feel you have come to understand yourself in a new way through the process of learning. Return to the
question we examined in the beginning of the semester: what is the purpose of education? In the course of your
discussion, you should engage specifically with course concepts and readings that have made a difference to
you. The assignment is subjective in nature; in this essay, you should coherently describe, from your own
perspective, your intellectual and emotional growth in relation to this material. (Some questions that might spur
your thinking for this assignment: How did the course, and connected field experiences, challenge or change your
thinking? How did it confirm or extend your own insights or experiences? How did it feel to you to work through
the arguments presented? What still feels unanswered? What was uncomfortable? did you grow through that
discomfort? What do you still feel are your areas for growth as a learner, teacher, human? What feels like an
important problem to you in the world of sociocultural knowledges and schooling?)
When you refer to course texts, you must use specific references, including quotations (provide page
numbers). Do not summarize the texts; instead, they will serve as tools to help you work through your ideas. You
can also refer to your own life experience to help you develop your narrative if you wish; however, this is not an
autobiographical essay but rather a critical reflection and narrative of your own response to the course content.
You may make use of your weekly reflections we write in class to build a foundational narrative for this essay.
Evaluation
The final reflective essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1) depth and interest of reflections,
analysis, and ideas, 2) specific engagement with course readings and concepts, and 3) organization and coherence of
overall argument/narrative.


                                                                                     ALD 327, Cook, p. 14
CRITICAL ANALYSIS GUIDE
                 INDIVIDUAL                                                SYSTEMIC
                 HISTORICAL                                           SOCIAL/CULTURAL
                  PERSONAL                                                SCHOOLING
   1. What are three words you encountered in your reading that you had never encountered before?
   2. What is one topic you considered either for the first time or in a new way as you read this week’s
      material?


                                                                                                             ALD 327, Cook, p. 15
                                                                                                        APA CITATION HINTS
PAGE SET-UP
Margins
Your paper should have 1” margins all around
Spacing and Font
Double-spaced, 12 inch font (Times New Roman, Garamond, Palatino, Courier)
CITATIONS
Summarized ideas from one author
Johnson (1998) points out that education is a building block for life.
Summarized ideas from multiple authors
Several readings discuss the importance of reflection in effective teaching practice (Abelson, 1996; Carter, 1993; Tang, 2000;
Yazzie, 2001) NOTICE THAT THE AUTHORS ARE LISTED IN ALPHABETICAL ORDER ACCORDING TO
THEIR LAST NAMES
Direct quote from an author
Johnson (1998) states, “Education is only the beginning for a child. Education, then, prepares the child for life. And as a
stepping stone, it is vital that teachers hold the process of education in high esteem” (p. 12).
OR
I agree with the following statement, “Education is only the beginning for a child. Education, then, prepares the child for life.
And as a stepping stone, it is vital that teachers hold the process of education in high esteem” (Johnson, 1998, p. 12).
Direct, long quote from the author (over thirty words, or about three complete lines of text)
Cisneros (2002) says:
         In order for teachers to become multicultural, it is necessary for them to first consider their own experiences in a
         multicultural world. To what degree were they exposed to different perspectives, people, cultures, and experiences?
         To what degree have they considered issues related to inequality and power relations in the larger society? Reflection,
         then, is one of the first steps in becoming a multicultural educator. (p. 147)
OR
In my quest to become a multicultural teacher, I have taken the following advice seriously:
         In order for teachers to become multicultural, it is necessary for them to first consider their own experiences in a
         multicultural world. To what degree were they exposed to different perspectives, people, cultures, and experiences?
         To what degree have they considered issues related to inequality and power relations in the larger society? Reflection,
         then, is one of the first steps in becoming a multicultural educator. (Cisneros, 2002, p. 147)
REFERENCES
Single author (selected passages, not an entire book)
hooks, b. (1994). Teaching to transgress: Education as the practice of freedom. (pp. 1-12). New York: Routledge.
Single author, edited book


                                                                                                               ALD 327, Cook, p. 16
Ayers, W. (2001). To teach: The journey of a teacher. 2nd edition. (pp.85-108). New York: Teachers College.
Single author, text/chapter from an edited book
Sylvester, P. S. (1994). Elementary school curricula and urban transformation. In I. Hall, C. H. Campbell, &
         E. J. Miech (Eds.), Class Acts: Teachers reflect on their own classroom practice. (pp. 179-202). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
         Educational Review.
Single author, journal article
Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). But that’s just good teaching! The case for culturally relevant pedagogy. Theory
         into Practice, 34(3), 159-165.
Single author, journal article (on-line)
Gibson, L. S. (1998). Teaching as an encounter with the self: Unraveling the mix of personal beliefs,
         education ideologies, and pedagogical practices. [On-line version]. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 29(3), 360-371
Service Learning Part II: Interview, Transcription, & Analysis
Requirements:
    • 30 minutes interview with a parent, other adult community member (other than your supervisor),
         or student.
    • Transcribe interview
    • 2-3 page, double-spaced summary/analysis of your interview findings
                                                                     ***
Interview Guidelines:
    1. You will need to get permission from interviewee first.
    2. Schedule a time to sit together and conduct a face-to-face interview.
    3. Say thank you.
BEFORE INTERVIEW
You will need to:
    • decide what you you’d like to learn more about (this should be informed by the work you did in
         Service Learning #1) from this person you’ve chosen to interview.
    • Make a list of open-ended questions and print those questions out to bring to interview with you.
    • Remind the interviewee that you will be recording the interview. Get permission at beginning of
         recording.
DURING INTERVIEW
    • Be a good, respectful listener.
    • If something someone said intrigues you, ask a follow-up question
    • Enjoy the conversation
    • Remember it isn’t about you but about whatever your question is
AFTER INTERVIEW
    • Say thank you. Be kind.
    • Keep interview material confidential.


                                                                                             ALD 327, Cook, p. 17
DEVELOPING YOUR QUESTION:
        You’ll need to think about what you’ve learned in class, what you learned by considering your service
learning organization through these frameworks, and gear your overall curiosity/interest towards that. Example:
If I were doing a service learning at a place that claims to support the community but still, I have noticed, does
not acknowledge the cultural wealth of the community members then I might ask a participant about his/her
relationship, how s/he sees herself as essential to that community, whether or not s/he does. Basically, I’d be
interested in knowing if my observation was accurate in any way and so I’d ask questions that would allow me
to gain insight into that. I WOULD NOT say “I think this organization fails to recognize the community’s
cultural wealth…what do you think?” No, you have to be more careful with your language that that.
