The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | School of Design and Creative Technologies | Department of Arts and Entertainment Technologies
           AET Interaction Design with HTML5
         324k Introduction to web design and interactive programming
                           (Unique No. 20461)
                   Fall 2019 | Tue/Thur 11:00am–12:30pm | DFA 4.106
                   INSTRUCTOR: Greg Hervey - ghervey@utexas.edu
                   Office Hours (by appointment): T/TH 7:00am-8:00am
                   CLASS WEBSITE: canvas.utexas.edu
                 COURSE OVERVIEW
                 Learn fundamentals of HTML5 to design and develop interactive and responsive web pages. Leverage popular JavaScript
                 libraries and write custom JavaScript to add interactivity. Build responsive web pages that adjust for optimal display on
                 mobile devices using the latest CSS layout modules. Learn programmatic constructs for event handling and design patterns
                 for common user interactions.
                 The course website is required reading (there is no required textbook). Other than grading and attendance policies, parts of
                 this syllabus are subject to change with advance notice, as deemed necessary by the instructor.
                 COURSE MODULES
                   ■ HTML5/CSS Basics: Learn basics of web technology and foundational front-end coding.
                   ■ Layout: Explore the Flexbox and Grid CSS layout modules, and responsive design.
                   ■ Animation: Learn to animate the user interface.
                   ■ Interaction Design: Examine HTML form elements, leverage JavaScript libraries, and learn event-handling.
                 COURSE REQUIREMENTS
                 • Mac or PC Laptop
                 • Adobe Creative Cloud (UT student price: $99/yr at CampusComputer.com) and Brackets (free at www.brackets.io)
                 • Internet access and a working email address (class notifications, assignments, and quizzes will all be administered
                   through Canvas)
                 • Cloud Storage (Dropbox, Google Drive, Box, etc. All UT students have free Box access)
                   ***backup of your data is solely your responsibility and should be done frequently to avoid loss of any work***
                 “My computer crashed” or “my files got corrupted” is the 21st century equivalent of “the dog ate my homework”
                         Archive all work files until you receive a final grade in the course (in case files get corrupted when uploading).
                 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
                 By the end of the course, students should:
                 • understand web technologies & languages,
                 • be able to code responsive HTML pages,
                 • be able to program web interactions (drag-and-drop, toggle, slider, animate on scroll),
                 • be able to control the triggering and timing of animated elements,
                 • create and upload a responsive self-promotional website.


CALENDAR
Subject to change; provided as general outline only. Additional non-graded classroom exercises are not listed.
WEEK                          TOPIC/PROJECT                                                    POINTS (130 TOTAL)
Week 1         MODULE 1 Introduction to HTML
Week 2		                   Introduction to CSS
Week 3		                   Project 1: HTML marketing email                                            10
 		                        Module 1 Quiz                                                              10
Week 4         MODULE 2 CSS layout & Responsive Design
Week 5		                   Flexbox & grid layout
Week 6		                   Project 2: responsive multi-page website                                   10
 		                        Module 2 Quiz                                                              10
Week 7         MODULE 3 CSS Animation
Week 8		                   JavaScript, jQuery, GSAP
Week 9		                   Project 3: animation sequence                                              10
		                         Module 3 Quiz                                                              10
Week 10        MODULE 4 Interaction Design
Week 11		                  Forms & events
Week 12		                  Project 4: parallax animation                                              20
Week 13-15		               FINAL PROJECT (portfolio site)                                             30
Week 15		                  FINAL QUIZ                                                                 20
GRADING
Your final grade in this course will be the total of four module grades (above), and a ‘professionalism’ grade. The
professionalism grade is determined by attendance, punctuality, and participation. The Professionalism grade is 130 points
(120 of which are for attendance/punctuality), for a maximum point total of 260 for the course.
Grades are calculated as a percentage of total points available. A* = 100–94%, A– = 93–90%, B+ = 89–87%,
B = 86–84%, B– = 83–80%, C+ = 79–77%, C = 76–74% C– = 73–70%, D+ = 69–67%, D = 66–64%, D– = 63–60%,
F=<60%. (*UT Austin does not recognize the grade of A+)
Late or incomplete work will seriously affect your grade. If you feel you may not be able to get to class on time and complete
all work on time, you should ask me for a grade of Q, or drop before the deadline (see Q drop Policy, below).
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Attendance and use of the full class period is expected. This is a hands-on, instructor-led, project-based course so
punctuality is essential: you MUST arrive to class on time. If you are more than 20 minutes late (or leave class more than 20
minutes early), it counts as an absence. Four absences will drop your final grade in the course by one letter grade.
Each additional absence beyond that will result in another incremental grade drop (e.g. from B to B–, B– to C+, etc.). If a
medical or personal situation affects your attendance or punctuality, discuss it with me ASAP. Absences or arriving late/
leaving early will adversely affect your grade—and when excessive, may result in failing the course.
Roll will be taken daily at the start of the class. Roll call is visual and based on seating assignments. If you arrive late, or are
out of your seat during visual roll call you may be marked late or absent. It is your responsibility to contact me or the TA
within 48 hours to ensure your attendance/punctuality is correctly recorded (you cannot contest your attendance record
later in the semester, when there is no way to verify it).
I do not distinguish excused from unexcused absences; if you’re not in the classroom participating in the lesson, you are
absent (unless you’ve prescheduled a religious holiday; see religious holy days below). ONE absence alone will not impact
your grade (however it will count as one of the four that could cause your grade to be dropped). If you are absent, you
MUST schedule office hours with me to make up the missed work, within one week of the absence.
Q drop Policy The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit
an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”


UNIVERSITY ATTENDANCE POLICY: RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day, or it will be counted as an absence. If you miss a class to observe a religious holy day, you MUST schedule
office hours with me to make up the missed coursework within one week of the absence (before or after).
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s
responsibility to keep the University and instructor(s) informed as to changes in his/her e-mail address. Students
are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. The complete text of this policy and
instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
CLASSROOM AND CLASS WEBSITE
The class will be held in DFA 4.106. This room is locked outside of classroom hours. Additional computers with Adobe
software are available on the 3rd floor of DFA. I use Canvas to distribute course materials, communicate and collaborate
online, post grades, receive your assignments, and to give you online quizzes and/or surveys. You can find support for using
Canvas at https://canvas.utexas.edu
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu,
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the
first week of class, so that I can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
ACADEMIC HONESTY
University of Texas Honor Code The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of Class Materials The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law
and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without
the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University’s Honor Code and an act of academic
dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to
websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE
Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers. Many of the uses we will
make of text, images, and videos will be covered by the doctrine of Fair Use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of
your own and other copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will
discuss these issues as needed.
A useful resource is the Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal


EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be
  the one you used when you entered the building.
• If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class proctors/TAs. After evacuation, do not leave the
  vacinity without checking in with me or our TA.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department,
or the Fire Prevention Services office.
CAMPUS CARRY
The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as buildings and spaces
that are accessible to the public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms.
It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while
on campus. “About” the person means that a license holder may carry a holstered handgun in a backpack or handbag, but
the backpack or handbag must always be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing
position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
A license holder may not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university
driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried gun on campus should
immediately call 911. (from https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
CELL PHONES
You must silence your cell phone in class (if your phone interrupts my class, you owe me a Frappuccino™). Texting or social
networking in class—even during free lab time—is prohibited.
