                                       Integrated Communication for Sports
                              ADV 305s, (0582) PR305s (06355), ADV391k (06325)
                                                     Fall 2018 Rev
 Class Meets: MWF 10-11a.m. CMA 2.306
 Instructor: Steve Wille (Professor Wille] Office: CMA 4.304
 Email: swille@austin.utexas.edu
 Office hours: Wednesdays 11:15 a.m. and by apt.
    :
 TA Dilara Dagoglus
 Email dilara.dagoglu@utexas.edu
 Office: TBD
 Office Hours TBD
                                               Course Description
The course provides a foundational perspective on how brands use integrated marketing communications to
connect with and impact their target audiences as well as how sports organizations (leagues, teams, tours,
etc. use integrated communications to reach prospective fans and customers.
 What will I learn?
              •   How an integrated approach to marketing communications enables impact and efficiency
                  compared to non-integrated approaches
              •   How major brands use this technique within their sports marketing to behind a large number
                  of tactics
              •   How sports advertising offers unique benefits to large brand advertisers
              •   How sponsorship provides an opportunity for brands to associate with popular sports, teams
                  and athletes
              •   How sport organizations seek profit and use analytics together with integrated marketing
                  communications to drive fan enthusiasm and business results
              •   How sports organizations use business storytelling to maximize the effectiveness of marketing
                  communications
 Learning Outcomes
     1.   Be able to discern whether a marketing communications effort as integrated or non-integrated
     2.   Be able to envision how particular integrated marketing techniques might fit a market situation
     3.   Understand how sports organizations use tools like analytics to decide on marketing communications direction
     4.   Be able to build integration into various tactics that might make up a brand or sports organization campaign
     5.   Be able to identify within a sports organization’s activities, productive narratives and then use a knowledge of
          business storytelling to bring those narratives to life
 How will I learn?
                                                                 1


A combination of lectures, discussions, readings, case examples, industry guests, short assignments and one group
project will be used to achieve the learning outcomes. How our course topic is playing out in real time will be
accomplished with the use of Sports Business Journal discussions.
 Pre-requisites for the course: University GPA of 2.25 or higher
 How to succeed in this course:
 Successful students in their class keep up with the readings and come to class prepared to participate in lively
 discussion. Your enthusiasm and love for sports is a plus, but remember we will be looking at the course material from
 the perspective of a business’s trying to thrive – a very competitive game in its own right with a great deal of strategy
 and nuance
                                                  Course Requirements
Required Materials
Most readings will be made available on Canvas. One required textbook will be used primarily in the second half of the
course:
The Sports Strategist Irving Rein, Ben Shields, Adam Grossman
Oxford University Press
ISBN 978-0-19-026744
Copyright 2015
Additionally, students are required to take an on line semester subscription to Sports Business Journal within a discounted program
offered by the publication. Sign up information will be posted on Canvas
Electronic Devices
 Devices will be allowed as we begin the semester but are subject to being banned if non class use is significant and
persistent. Don’t be the person who contributes to this action being taken. A lack of involvement in class discussion is
the first tell-tale sign that the experts are right. None of us can learn in class and surf at the same time!
Classroom expectations
Class participation
Class participation is essential and ranks at the top of factors students use to define a valuable course. Class participation forms part of
your grade in this class. Credit for the 6 participation points available will be based upon the student turning in 3x5 index cards
(which students should always carry a supply of) with their name, EID the topic they contributed to and a description of the
contribution. Two points will be awarded for each appropriately completed and accepted card.
Behavior expectations
Disruptive behavior including excessive conversations during lectures will not be tolerated. Offenders are subject to
being dismissed from the class that day with attendance going uncounted.
 Assignments
 1. 15 Reading assignments tied to class topics are accompanied by either a Canvas Discussion or Canvas Quiz,
      including 3 Sports Business Journal Days which require reading and a written summary of 3 articles, plus the Bio
      Assignment (2 pts) (Quizzes are designed to make sure top line content is absorbed and to alert the instructor to
      areas of reinforcement (17% of grade)
 2. A group project will be assigned that asks students to analyze a sport teams marketing situation and develop
                                                                        2


           plausible narratives and communications examples using practices discussed in class. (23% of grade)
 Exams
 Two exams will be given, one near the middle and another non-cumulative one at the end of the term.
 Typically, they are a mix of multiple choice and True/False but may contain other types of questions at times.
 Each counts for 25% of the final grade
     Grading for this Course
     The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to which
     you have done so.
      Graded Elements                                                  Points possible             Percent of Total Grade
       Class Prep Assignments:15 Reading                               1 each                     17
      Discussion/Quizzes including 3 Sports
      Business Journal Day, plus Bio
      Assignment (2 points)
      Attendance                                                    4                             4
                                                                                                  6
     Participation                                                  6
3.    Exam 1                                                        25                            25
4.    Exam 2                                                        25                            25
5.    Group Project                                                 25                            23
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.                                                                 100                           100
     Course Outline
           All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
           https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
           Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
           note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
           much advanced notice as possible).
       Week         Date   Day
                                 Class Topic                            Out of class activities   Assignments due
       1       29 AUG w          Introduction syllabus review     Avidity Reading
                                 Avidity’s importance to Brands
               31          f                                      Reading 1. Quiz 1               Avidity Reading
                                 Marketing Through Sports
                                                                   3


                                                   Reading 1: Integrated Marketing
           Introducing Integrated Marketing                                          5 pm Tuesday, Sep 4. Finish
2 5 SEPT w                                         Communication
           Communications: 1+1= 3                                                    Reading 1 and Quiz 1
                                                   Prepare your Bio Assignment
                                                                                     Bio Assignment due Sep 7 5
  7      f IMC Case History Bud Light              Read Sports Business Journal
                                                                                     pm
                                                   Re-read “Barriers to IMC”
3 10     m IMC Case History; Thank You Mom
                                                   portion of Reading #1
                                                                                                                     th,
           Managing IMC: As Easy as Spinning                                         Prior to class on Wed Sep 12
  12     w Plates while Chewing Gum: In class      Prepare for SBJ Day               re-read “Barriers to IMC”
           simulation                                                                portion of Reading #1
                                                                                     By 4 pm Thursday September
                                                                                        th
                                                                                     13 , summarize 3 chosen SBJ
           Sports Business Journal Day: The       In Class Discussion
  14     f                                                                           articles in bullet points, turn
           Here and Now                           Reading 2 and Quiz
                                                                                     in on Canvas as prep for SBJ
                                                                                     Day.
           Lecture and Discussion: The Power of                                      By 5 pm Sunday Sep 16,
4 17     m
           Sports for Large Brand Advertisers 1                                      complete Reading 2 Quiz 2
           Lecture and Discussion: The Power of
  19     w                                         Sponsorship Reading3
           Sports for Large Brand Advertisers 1
           Sponsorship: The Power of                                                 By 5pmThursday, September
  21     f                                                                              th
           Association 1                                                             20 Complete 3 Quiz 3
           Sponsorship: The Power of
5 24     m
           Association 2
                                                   Ambush Marketing Reading 4
  26     w Sponsorship Activation, Negotiation
                                                   and Quiz/Discussion 4
                                                                                     By 5pm Thursday, Sep 27
           Ambush Marketing lecture and                                              complete the Ambush
  28     f                                         Digital Strategies Reading
           discussion                                                                marketing Reading 4 and
                                                                                     Discussion 4
                                                   Sales Promotion and Brand         By 5 pm Sunday Sep 30,
6 1 OCT  m Sports Digital l Strategies for Brands  Visibility Strategies Reading and Complete Reading 5 and Quiz
                                                   quiz/discussion.                  5
                                                                                     By 5 pm Tuesday, Oct. Turn in
           Sales Promotion and Brand Visibility    Read Sports Business Journal      you bullet point summary of 3
  3      w
           Strategies                              and prepare 3 article summaries   Sports Business Journal
                                                                                     articles on Canvas
                                                   Study for Exam 1. Identify areas
                                                                                     Look over distributed Review
  5      f Sports Business Journal Day #2          of most interest for Monday
                                                                                     Outline prior to class Monday
                                                   Review
7 8      m Exam Review                             Study for Test                    Study for Test
                                                                                     By 5pm Thursday, October 9,
  10     w Exam 1                                  Fan Avidity Reading               complete Fan Avidity reading
                                                                                     6 and quiz/discussion 6.
                                                     4


   12    f Fan Avidity 2
                                                 Reading #6 The Winning
8  15    m Fan Avidity 2
                                                 Business
                                                                                                     th
                                                                               By 5 pm Tues, Oct. 16
           The Winning Business / How Teams
   17    w                                       Reading # 7 Team Ticket Sales complete Reading #6 and
           Make Money
                                                                               quiz/discussion #6
                                                                               By 5pm Thursday October 18,
                                                 Review plot of the book or
   19    f Ticket Sales Strategies                                             complete Reading # 8 and
                                                 movie, Moneyball
                                                                               Discussion/Quiz#8
                                                                               By 5pm October 21, review
                                                                               the book or movie Moneyball
9  22    m Moneyball and Analytics
                                                                               and complete the
                                                                               discussion/quiz #9
   24    w Moneyball and Analytics
                                                                                                        th
                                                                               By Thursday, October 25
   26    f Business Storytelling                                               complete the reading# on
                                                                               Analytics
                                                                               By Sunday at 5 pm, complete
10 29    m Identity
                                                                               Reading #9 on Identity
                                                                               By Tuesday October 30 at 5
                                                 Project Assigned. Read over   pm, complete the Narrative
   31    w Narrative and its components
                                                 Group Project Document        Reading #10 and complete
                                                                               the question/quiz # 10
                                                                               By Monday, November 4 at 5
           Discussion of Project In Class and In Read Sports Business Journal
   2 NOV f                                                                     pm complete Sport Business
           Class Project Group Work              Day
                                                                               Journal summaries to Canvas
11 5     m Sports Business Journal Day #3
   7     w Narrative case study: Brooklyn Nets
   9     f Narrative Case Study: Chicago Cubs
12 12    m Hold/TBD/Possibly Cause Marketing
   14    w Hold/TBD/Possibly Endorsement
           Planning the team story: situation    Reading 11: Segmentation and
   16    f
           analysis                              Targeting
                                                                                                        th
                                                                               By 5 pm Sunday, Nov. 12
           Planning the Team Story: target
13 19    m                                                                     ,complete reading #11and the
           market selection/segmentation
                                                                               quiz/discussion 11
                                                  5


   21    w No class                           Thanksgiving
   23    f No class                           Thanksgiving
           Planning the Team Story
   26    m
14         Product Design
           Planning the Team Story: Creative  Reading 12. Owned, Earned and
   28    w
           Messaging                          Paid Media
                                                                            By 5 pm Thursday November
           Planning the Team Story: Channel                                 29, complete Reading 12 and
   30    f                                    Group Projects Due            Discussion/Quiz 12. Group
           Selection (Paid, owned and Earned)
                                                                            Projects Due
15 3 DEC m Hold for project presentations
   5     w Hold for project presentations
   7     f Exam Review
14 10      Exam 2
                                               6


Policies
 Classroom Policies
 Statement on Learning Success
 Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
 differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
 me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
 requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
 through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if
 you would like.
 Grading Policies
[Description of your general approach; e.g. assignments are flexible but grades are firm; there is no
curve; etc.]
            Grade            Cutoff
            A                94%
            A-               90%
            B+               87%
            B                84%
            B-               80%
            C+               77%
            C                74%
            C-               70%
            D                65%
            F                <65%
 Late work
All late work runs the risk of most likely earning none of the avaialbe points for the assignment.
Exceptions will only be made under extreme circumstances. If you turn work in late, do not expect to
earn points on it.
 Absences
 Attendance is required for all class meetings and contributes a potential of 4 points to your final grade. In class
 assignments will get a score of zero in the case of unexcused absences. For each unexcused absence after the
 second instance, a student will lose one of the available 4 attendance points. An excused absence is defined as a
 documented illness, documented University-related absence (sports team travel) and religious holidays (prior
 notification required). Excused absence for illness requires health provider documentation.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •   You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •   You have a right to respect.
                                                           7


    •     You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    •     You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    •     You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    •     You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
          learning environment.
    •     You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
          isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
          the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
    • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
          • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring
          to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
          excluded.
    • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
          these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
      Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As
      a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
      University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
      Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
      previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
      subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible
      for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be
      found at the following web address:
      http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
      If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
      drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
      only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
      information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
      Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
      differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please
      let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and
      the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
      circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
                                                        8


      information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the
      building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
      learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early
      as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also
      contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video
      phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
      Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs
      and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your
      goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
      resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to
      ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
      anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
      http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
      Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
      advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
      academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
      information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
      BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
      something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
      harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
      funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
      environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
      community, the university can:
              1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
              2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
                    or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
              3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
                                                        9


     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
     “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
     Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents
     that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty
     or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
     employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official
     report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting
     options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
     titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
 •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
     that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
     week of class.
 • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter
     a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
     Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
 • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
     found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                       1
                                                       0
