                           SUMMER 2019
Gov. 310L                                David Prindle
Introduction to American                 Office: Batts Hall 4.104
  and Texas Politics                     Phone: 232-7214
Unique # 81770                           Office hours: Tu-Wed-Th,
Lectures: 10 a. m. to 11:15 a. m.          11:30 a. m. to 1 p. m.
RLP 0.112
                        Teaching Assistant
(all TAs have offices in Batts 1.118):
Chun-Ying Wu                   email: chunyingwu@utexas.edu
Office hours: Thursday, 1 to 4 p. m.
                       Statement of Purpose
          The purpose of this course is not only to provide
useful information and a point of view with which to understand
politics in the state and the nation. I am an explicitly
normative teacher; that is, I try to supply students with the
ideal of a democratic polity as well as the reality of the
system, in order that they may compare the reality with the
ideal and evaluate the results. In other words, I hope to help
my students become better citizens.
                         Required Reading
Cal Jillson, American Government, 9th edition, (Routledge: 2018),
     selected chapters
Cal Jillson, Texas Politics, 6th edition, (Routledge: 2018),
     selected chapters
     EXPLANATION: I have chosen specific chapters from both of
Jillson's textbooks, and had Routledge (through Cognella) put
them into a "bundled" etextbook. Here are the directions for
accessing the etext:
     The required course materials for this section of Gov. 310L
is now available for purchase. It is published and distributed
by Cognella, Inc. When you purchase directly from Cognella, you
will receive the lowest price, as well as immediate access to
your materials.
     Purchase your course materials here:
     https://store.cognella.com/19034
                                 1


     This course material includes information that we will
reference and use in class regularly, so you should be sure to
purchase your own copy. Please keep in mind that the University
of Texas follows the U. S. copyright laws. Course material
should never be copied or duplicated in any manner.
      If you need help with ordering from Cognella, feel free to
email orders@cognella.com or phone (800) 200-3908, X503. And if
you still have trouble, email me and I will contact them.
                             Lecture Topics
I.   Background and context
     Read: 1. Jillson on American politics, reading packet chapters
               One (Revolution and Constitution) and Six (Civil
                 Liberties)
           2. Declaration of Independence, page 415 of reading
                packet
           3. Federalist #51, page 421 of reading packet
Date                                  Topic
June         6              What is "politics?"; The Liberal legacy
                               in American Politics
             7              Liberal legacy (cont.); Democratic
                               theory
           10               Background to the Constitution
           11               Freedom of expression
II.   Participation
      Read: Jillson on American politics, reading packet chapters
            Two (Political Parties) and Three(Voting, Campaigns,
            and Elections)
June       12               Formal participation; Parties
           13               Interest Groups
           14               Election of 2016
           17                  Election of 2016 (continued)
           18               Test review
           19               FIRST TEST
           III.   Institutions
       Read:   Jillson on American politics, reading packet chapters
                 4 (Congress) and 5 (The President)
June       20               Congress, I: Structure and Behavior; and
                                   2


                              Congress, II: Legislating
June       21             Congress, II (cont.), and Presidency I,
                              The office
           24             Presidency, II: Examples
           25             The courts
IV.   Implementation
      Read: no reading from Jillson in this section
      Date                          Topic
June       26             Bureaucracy
           27             Bureaucracy (cont.); Implementation
           28             Test review
July        1             SECOND TEST
V.   Texas
     Read: Jillson on Texas, reading packet chapters 7 (Texas and
                the Texans), 8 (Texas Constitution), 9 (Political
                Participation in Texas), 10 (Interest Groups in
                Texas), 11 (The Texas Legislature), 12 (Governor
                and Executive Branch)
July        2             History, society and constitution;
                              Voting and parties
            3             Voting and parties (cont.); Legislature
            4             INDEPENDENCE DAY HOLIDAY; NO CLASS
            5             Legislature (cont.); Executive
            8             Executive (cont.); Courts
            9             Policy problem: water supply
           10             Test review
           11             Overflow
           13 (Saturday)  FINAL EXAM, 7 to 10 p.m.
                           Grading Policy
      There are three tests in this class, the score on each of
which counts one third of your grade. At the end of the
semester, an average of 92.3 or higher will earn an "A,", 90 to
92 will earn an “A-,” 88 to 89.7 will earn a “B+,” 82.3 to 87.7
will earn a "B," 80 to 82 will earn a "B-," 78 to 79.7 will earn
a "C+," 62.3 to 77.7 will earn a "C," 60 to 62 will earn a "C-,"
and 50 to 59.7 will earn a "D." People who have missed one or
more of the three assignments, or who average below 50, will
receive an “F.”
      I may make some minor adjustments in these averages to
                                 3


reflect class participation.
     Test days are Wednesday, June 19, Monday, July 1 and the
day of the scheduled final exam, Saturday, July 13. The first
two tests will be given during class session. The final exam is
scheduled from 7 to 10 p. m. on Saturday, July 13.
     Each test will consist of twenty-five multiple-choice
questions, worth two points each (fifty points) and ten short-
answer questions worth five points each (fifty points).
     Multiple-choice questions: These will be in standard format,
in which you will be given five possible choices with which to
complete or answer a sentence. Almost all the concepts to be found
on the tests are listed later in this syllabus.
     Short-answer questions: You will be asked to define, then
give the importance of a concept to American or Texas politics.
These concepts will be drawn from the same list as those on the
multiple-choice part of the exam, listed below.
     Because it is impossible to predict the direction of every
discussion ahead of time, I may add or subtract a few concepts
from the following list during the course of the semester.
Basically, however, the following list contains all the concepts
that you will be expected to know for the tests.
                            First Test:
Concepts from the reading: From Jillson, American Government, in
reading packet:
Chapter 2 (chapter 1 in packet): Shays's Rebellion; The Great
Compromise; from 13 to 125; the Bill of Rights;
Chapter 7 (chapter 2 in packet): political party; labor-
intensive campaigns; capital-intensive campaigns; Duverger's
Law; the future of minor parties;
Chapter 8 (chapter 2 in packet): 19th Amendment; 47.4% to 21.6%;
incumbency advantage; soft money;
Chapter 13 (chapter 6 in packet): District of Columbia v.
Heller; Gitlow v. New York; Lemon v. Kurtzman; Engel v. Vitale;
exclusionary rule;
From the "Declaration of Independence:” ”the consent of the
governed”
From Federalist #51: “opposite and rival interests”
Concepts from the lectures: "voter identification” law;
politics; The Keating Five; ideology; political ideology;
                                 4


Classical Conservatism; Classical Liberalism; Classical
Socialism; modern conservatism; modern liberalism; ideological
opinions; operational opinions; legitimacy; democracy; majority
rule; personal liberty; legal equality; choice among
alternatives; freedom of speech; public processes; 22 nd
Amendment; consent; republicanism; Articles of Confederation;
ambition to counteract ambition; separation of powers;
"contract" clause; annexation of Texas; First Amendment; tyranny
of the majority; clear and present danger; marketplace of ideas;
New York Times v. Sullivan; Skokie v. National Socialist Party;
Westboro Baptist Church; Freedom House; rules of participation;
American vs. foreign party organization; weak parties; party
identification; comparative national turnout; single-member
district system; proportional representation; party voting
cohesion; direct primary; Kelly Ayotte; Republican Governors
Public Policy Committee; "the right of the people peaceably to
assemble;" rules of formation of interest groups; individual
goods; collective goods; access; PhRMA; iron triangles; Boeing;
MADD; dialogue of democracy; Reagan coalition; Democratic
coalition; 60% negative; cross-cutting issues; "the post-truth
Presidency"; Fascism?; "email scandal"; Electoral College;
"uneducated White male gun owners in strategic states;" a good
democratic election?
                           Second Test:
Concepts from the reading: Jillson, American Government, in
reading packet—
Chapter 9 (chapter 4 in packet): Edmund Burke; the seniority
norm; A 60-vote Senate?; 14.3%
Chapter 10 (chapter 5 in packet): executive privilege; the
"stewardship theory;" "inherent power;" War Powers Resolution;
Dick Cheney
Concepts from the lectures: constituency service; Gene Green;
pork barrel; committees; party differences in Congressional
voting; Speaker of the House; Senate Majority Leader;
filibuster; veto; the paradox of Congress; logrolling; The
Distributive Tendency; rider; African drought bill; Consolidated
Appropriations Act of 2005; NAFTA; Emergency Economic
Stabilization Act of 2008; Head of State; Head of Government;
the transformation of George W. Bush; “commander-in-chief”
clause; power to persuade; "Repeal and Replace;" capital-gains
taxes; health care reform (1993-94); ANWR; Deepwater Horizon;
opening to China; Libyan bombing campaign; "Imperial
Presidency;" Korematsu v. United States; signing statements;
non-political myth; judicial review; partisan appointments (of
                                5


federal judges); Wesberry v. Sanders; Roe v. Wade; Texas v.
Johnson; Bush v. Gore; Citizens United v. Federal Election
Commission; "imperial judiciary;" bureaucracy; bureaupathology;
Parkinson’s Law; Dairy Management and Center for Nutrition
Policy and Promotion; National Intelligence Director; FEMA;
Sibel Edmonds; Peter Principle; Pendleton Act; implementation;
New Towns; Nuclear Waste Policy Act; Project Apollo; Head Start;
60%
                           Third Test:
Concepts from the reading: From Jillson, Texas Politics, in
reading packet—
Chapter 1 (chapter 7 in packet): Texas' political culture;
"business climate"
Chapter 2 (chapter 8 in packet): Texas v. White; 87,000 words;
Obergefell v. Hedges;
Chapter 3 (chapter 9 in packet): poll tax; 12.1% turnout; $1
million a week; Texas Campaign Reporting and Disclosure Act of
1973;
Chapter 4 (chapter 10 in packet): Jim Pitts; Center for Public
Policy Priorities AND Texas Public Policy Foundation; Texas
Ethics Commission
Chapter 6 (chapter 11 in packet): hybrid legislature; standing
committee; "two-thirds rule;" legislators-turned-lobbyists
Chapter 7 (chapter 12 in packet): governor's removal power;
governor's executive orders; "cabinet government"
Concepts from the lectures: Southern heritage; Western
heritage; historical context of Texas constitution;
disintegrated executive; Texas rank among states in public
expenditure; Texas rank among states in objective quality of
life; Texas rank among state in subjective quality of life;
tradition of one-partyism; party organization (in Texas); Tom
Pauken; Texas voter turnout; minority voter turnout; minority
opinions; 140 days; $7200; power of presiding officers; Joe
Straus and Dan Patrick; a more partisan legislature?; "Bo"
Pilgrim; responsible policy-making; sources of state income; oil
and gas severance taxes; patterns of state expenditure;
functions of state chief executives; power of governor;
governor's control of administration; Board of Pardons and
Paroles; Governor Ann Richards; chief legislator; Governor
George W. Bush; Governor Rick Perry; Texas Office of Homeland
Security; Comptroller; Texas Court of Criminal Appeals; Texas
Supreme Court; Letter Opinion 97-001; Is justice for sale?;
Robin Hood law; tort reform; Cameron Todd Willingham; Michael
Morton Act; LCRA; whooping cranes; Texas Water Plan; Rule of
                                6


Capture; Rio Grande Compact; TWDB
 A.  TIPS ON TAKING MY TESTS:
     In studying these concepts to understand their importance
     to American politics, it might help to ask yourself several
     study questions. They are:
     1. What is the causal argument of which this term or
         phrase is a part? Some of the causal arguments that
         may be discussed in lecture or the textbook are:
         a. How the rules of a particular "game" (such as an
             institution or laws) tend to help some individuals
             or groups to win, and some to lose?
         b. How does the American political system differ from
             the system in other democracies, why it is
             different, and what are the consequences of the
             differences?
        c.   How has the American system changed over time, why
             has it changed, and what are the consequences of
             the change?
    2. What is the moral argument of which this term is a part?
        In particular, how does this term fit into the
        democratic theory of legitimacy, or how does this actual
        American political practice or institution compare to
        the ideal of democratic theory?
    3. How does this concept fit in to an interpretive argument
        from lecture or the reading? Such an argument is an
        attempt to help you understand the way we should
        conceptualize a system or institution. For example,
        when I maintain that the wrong way to understand the
        Constitution is as a "separation of powers" system, and
        the right way to understand it is as a system of
        "separate institutions sharing powers," I am making an
        interpretive argument.
     Notice that I am NOT assigning you to answer one or more of
     these questions for each concept. I am offering them to
     you because I think that they may help you understand why a
     term or phrase is important.
B.  Here are some answers to miscellaneous questions I am
    sometimes asked about these terms--
    1. Do I count off for writing more than 60 words for an
        answer? YES, ONE POINT PER QUESTION.
    2. Are dates important to know? YES; IF A DATE OCCURS IN
        THE TEXTBOOK OR A LECTURE, IT IS IMPORTANT FOR THE TEST.
    3. Do we have to discuss these terms in complete sentences?
        NO, BUT IF I AND THE TEACHING ASSISTANTS CANNOT
        UNDERSTAND YOUR MEANING, IT'S WRONG.
                                7


C. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES: Any disabled student may
request
    appropriate academic accommodations from the office of
    Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259.
    http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
D.  DISHONESTY: I hope it goes without saying that cheating will
    be dealt with in a merciless manner. But because the
    University requires me to say it anyway, let me direct you
    to the UT Honor Code (or statement of ethics) and an
    explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism (Link
    to University Honor Code:
           http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-
                       10/ch01/index.html)
E.  Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me
    of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
    date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
    a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
    order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
    opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
    time after the absence.
          Because I do not take roll, you do not need to
    “notify” me if you are simply going to miss an ordinary
    class session, for religious reasons, because you are ill,
    or for any other cause. (You should, of course, get the
    lecture material from a friend or from some other source,
    but you do not have to tell me of your absence in advance).
    You only need to let me and the TA know of your absence if
    it will interfere with your taking of a test or completing
    some other assignment.
                                8
