The University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
Syllabus Summer 2019
Course:           ARC327R / ARC F386M / CRP F384 / LAR F388 / LAS F381
Latin American Landscapes (LALA)
Course type: LECTURE / SEMINAR
Credits:          3
Enrollment prerequisites & Catalog Subject Matter Description:
70379 ARC f327R LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES
Advanced topics in architecture and associated disciplines to encourage critical and theoretical thinking.
Prerequisite: Upper-division standing.
70405 ARC f386M LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES
Study of critical theories and practices that affect the built environment.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing and consent of the graduate adviser.
70605 CRP f384 LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES
Neighborhood, city, and regional transportation policy and practice.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing and consent of graduate adviser.
70745 LAR f388 LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES
Seminars on advanced topics in history and theory, including analysis, readings, and critique of significant
positions, practice, and discourse.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing, and Landscape Architecture 388L or consent of the graduate adviser.
82200 LAS f381 LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES
A varied selection of topics each semester, taught by different faculty members and visiting professors.
Prerequisite: Graduate standing; additional prerequisites vary with the topic.
Instructor:               Gabriel Díaz Montemayor, ASLA
                          Assistant Professor of Landscape Architecture
                          Landscape Architecture Graduate Adviser Office Telephone: (512) 471-0752
                          diaz.montemayor@utexas.edu
                          Office location: WMB (West Mall Office Building) Room 4.102C.
Schedule:                 Mondays, Tuesdays and Wednesdays from 1:30 to 4:00 pm.
Location:                 West Mall Building 5.112
Office hours:             By appointment. Set up via email.
Course Description:
This course will study the shaping of contemporary Latin American Landscapes (LALA) by examining their cultural
and environmental conditions as reflected on the built realm. The main scope of study is the conception and
meaning of public space in the region. This will be investigated at various scales and by studying urban landscapes,
while understanding how the Latin American continent is not a homogeneous condition. Too often, the Latin
American Continent and its landscapes is simplistically reduced to a generic, shared or similar condition. This
course shall reveal a much more complex reality.
For the purposes of this course, the concept of Landscape will be understood as a broad construct. This is, it not
only has to do with bio-physical conditions, but also with cultural origins. These include the hybridization process
encompassing pre-european or native American, Spanish, Portuguese, French, and others. For the purposes of
this course, the concept of what’s “native American” includes original populations from all of the American
continent, not only from the United States. Within all these cultural origins, we will investigate historical
development, economic activity, rural and urban settings, among other conditions reflecting the social wealth of
the continent.
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


In LALA, the idea of Landscape is not strictly related to the practice of Landscape Architecture, but also to all other
disciplines shaping the built realm, including architecture, urban planning, urban design, and others. As this
course tries to understand culture and place, it will also look at socio-economic conditions and society in general.
Latin American Landscapes are without a doubt a very specific but diverse cultural product. This is a region where
the conception, planning, and design of landscapes is certainly different than the practices exercised in other
countries, particularly those of economic and geopolitical hegemony.
The political circumstance of LALA displays a range of functional to semi-functional democracies –where
landscape and public space have recently regained a prominent role-, and some countries with totalitarian regimes
with little known or published production of public space. Economically, in general, the region suffers from limited
resources for the creation and maintenance of public space and urban/environmental infrastructure. This may be
one of the unifying factors to be uncovered as the course progresses.
In Latin America, there are very few academic programs focused on landscape architecture, and limited
specialization happening on urban design and planning. Jimena Martignoni writes in “Latinscapes” (see main
booklist) that the practice of Landscape Architecture in Latin America is more than anything an attitude. So, let’s
join in the study of LALA with an attitude.
Focus:
The scope of the course will be directed towards two main topics: cities and public space. For both, the course will
study its historical development, its planning, and design. The course will concentrate on select metropolitan areas
and cities of the region. This will be done in multiple scales, from the regional, to the urban, and the site specific
by analyzing case studies.
Public spaces will be studied in a broad historical range from the ceremonial spaces of Mesoamerican or pre-
Columbian cultures, to the plaza and the Laws of the Indies of the Spanish colony, the emergence of the public
metropolitan park, new public space typologies related to urban recovery and redevelopment, public
transportation, and contemporary responses to chronic inefficient urban administration, urban planning, the
effects of disorganized urban sprawl, and grassroots/community driven efforts for the production and recovery of
public space.
Relevant public space landscapes are to be studied as case studies for typological and regional characterization.
Some of these case studies are going to be representative of historical phases such as the colonial era, the XIX
century –the era of Latin American independence movements-, modernity as reflected by the twentieth century;
while other case studies are going to represent the issues and topics of the XXI century, setting the stage to
conclude with articulate questions about the future.
Chronological perspective:
The study of pre-Columbian landscapes will briefly analyze the spatial conception of Native American cultures and
how this was transformed by the arrival of Europeans, who had a radically different culture and technical capacity,
but would eventually hybridize to produce a unique cultural result.
As Latin American countries began to obtain independence from Spain and Portugal -Mexico in 1821, Colombia in
1819, Argentina in 1816, Brazil in 1825, among others- the new political regimes changed societal order and new
public space typologies surged, such as the notion of the public park as we know it today.
The XIX century would prove to be a turbulent era in the region. The new republics were still being organized by
their own peoples and various external pressures often determined by the natural resource wealth of the continent.
Growth and development were, since then, mostly irregular and unstable. A new economic stability came with the
early decades of the XX century, paired with revolutions and military dictatorships, but also fueled by rich natural
resources necessary to sustain war efforts in Europe and abroad. When World War II came to an end, modernity
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


was fully released in Latin America.
The study of modern LALA will incorporate a significant focus on Luis Barragan and Roberto Burle Marx, the most
important LALA designers of the twentieth century in Mexico and Brazil, at the same time the best representatives
of Hispanic North American and South American landscape modernism. New universities emerged and with it the
modern Latin American Campus such as the National University of Mexico in Mexico City in the early 1950’s,
planned and designed by multiple architects, or the University City of Caracas, designed by architect Carlos Raul
Villanueva. New cities were also planned and built under the modernist premise. Of course, the prime example is
Brasilia, the new capital of Brazil, planned by Lucio Costa, including the participation of architect Oscar Niemeyer
and landscape architect Burle Marx.
Contemporary LALA case studies will focus on designers and a handful of politicians who have made public space
and landscape central to the recovery of cities within the region after decades of urban neglect, informal
development and a car-oriented, suburban mimicking of the American Dream sprawl. These designers have also
participated in the design and construction of post-modern landscapes such as the recovery of post-industrial
sites as public parks.
In the case of contemporary designers, Mario Schjetnan from Mexico is without a doubt the most visible Latin
American Landscape Architect in practice today. Other relevant contemporary LALA designers to be studied are:
Lorenzo Castro and Diana Wiesner from Colombia: Teresa Moller from Chile; and Rosa Grena Kliass from Brazil.
More recently, an emerging type of Latin American politician has understood the role and political capital that can
be leveraged from urban recovery, public transportation, and public space as a central policy. Jaime Lerner in
Curitiba, Antanas Mockus and Enrique Peñaloza in Bogota, Sergio Fajardo in Medellin, and more recently the
Mexico City mayors –including Andres Manuel Lopez Obrador, now president of Mexico and Marcelo Ebrard, with
the help of architect and academic Felipe Leal- have all embraced this approach to public investment, urban
development, and politics. These mayors are responsible for the production of some of the most important
contemporary Latin American Landscapes. The new public spaces and infrastructure of these large metropolitan
areas is setting the example for many smaller cities.
LALA will study a promising future set up by today’s trajectory of public space recovery with the capacity for more
just cities and higher quality urban environments if the practice of “coming back” to public space continues to grow
and change the status quo of urbanization and development in the region. A critical, but emerging, public space
phenomenon in the region is determined by “informal,” grassroots, community driven, often government, designer
(as agent) or NGO organized, efforts to reclaim public spaces in disenfranchised, low-income, and high-crime
neighborhoods of various cities and metropolis of Latin America. With a growing awareness of the role of citizen
empowerment to appropriate, manage and maintain, public spaces, many communities have demonstrated a
viable trajectory to make up for infrastructural deficits and social reconstruction. We will dedicate a session
looking at recent experiences in this topic.
The final section of the course will look at the education of the disciplines related to the production of public space
in LALA. It will also look at how research is done in a region dominated by the practice of architecture, urban
design, and landscape architecture.
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


Learning Objectives:
     •   To understand the built realm as a reflection of culture and society inherently dependent on natural
         resources and economy. This, with a particular emphasis on the concept of public space.
     •   To learn about the historical construction of the Latin American Continent, and, by doing so, acquire a
         critical perspective on the shared contemporary issues and topics faced by both developing countries and
         industrialized countries.
     •   To embrace the multi-disciplinary nature of the built realm.
     •   To trigger intellectual curiosity on further research in the Latin American region and Landscape
         Architecture, Urban Planning, Urban Design, and Architecture.
Instructional Methods:
This is a lecture / seminar course and will incorporate the following components:
     • Lectures by the instructor.
     • Group discussions of reading assignments.
     • Assignment presentations by the students.
Assignments and Evaluation:
There will be 3 main assignments during the course. These are research assignments where the student will select
a topic in response to the class’ topics, readings, and discussions, write an abstract, email it to the instructor for
approval and feedback commentary, and then proceed to write short to middle length papers due in 2 formats:
     • A research essay format (8.5 by 11 inches) to be submitted in PDF format.
              o Including text, references and images.
     • A Powerpoint or PDF presentation summarizing the essay to be presented during class time to all
         students.
              o The Powerpoint presentation, or PDF, cannot be of more than 10 slides and will be presented in
                   no more than 7 minutes to allow for 2-3 minutes of quick feedback from students and the
                   instructor.
The research topics range from the selection of relevant case studies (i.e. plazas, public spaces, towns, cities,
metropolis, specific issues in specific regions, urban plans and designers) to narratives of public space as used in
social-political events, to comparative analysis of regional and cultural differences within the continent. The
intention of the abstract is to have the opportunity to discuss and enrich the proposed topic before the assignment
submission.
     1. Assignment 1 will focus on pre-European, colonial, and independent LALA up to year 1900.
              a. 250 word abstract due by noon on June 13 by email.
                        i. Feedback will be sent that afternoon.
              b. 1000 word essay + ppt/pdf due on June 17 by email before 12,00 p.m.
                        i. Presentations and discussion during class time.
     2. Assignment 2 will focus on Latin American Landscapes Modernity, specifically the twentieth century.
              a. 250 word abstract due by noon on June 27 by email.
                        i. Feedback will be sent that afternoon.
              b. 1500 word essay + ppt/pdf due by noon on July 1st by email before 12,00 p.m.
                        i. Presentations and discussion during class time.
     3. Assignment 3 will focus on current issues and topics for LALA.
              a. 250 word abstract due by noon on July 5 by email.
                        i. Feedback will be sent that afternoon.
              b. 1500 word essay + ppt/pdf due on July 10 by email before 12,00 p.m.
                        i. Presentations and discussion during class time both on July 10 and 11.
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


Evaluation/Construction of the Final Grade:
Assignment 1                                         25%
Abstract                                 5%
Essay                                    15%
Presentation & discussion                5%
Assignment 2                                         30%
Abstract                                 5%
Essay                                    20%
Presentation & discussion                5%
Assignment 2                                         35%
Abstract                                 5%
Essay                                    20%
Presentation & discussion                10%
Participation in class                               10%
Includes participating in discussions, doing the readings, arriving early and paying attention to lectures and
discussions.
Attendance Policy:
     •   With the exception of an excused absence, attendance and participation in the course sessions are mandatory.
     •   Excused absences include family emergencies, personal emergencies, and illnesses. In the case of a family emergency an
         explanation will be required by the instructor. Family emergencies include a family member’s illness, a death in the family,
         accidents, or any other health related issues in the family. In the case of a personal emergency an explanation will be required by
         the instructor. In the case of an illness, a doctor’s notice explaining the absence will be required by the instructor. Attending, for
         example, weddings, graduations, or family trips are not family emergencies and therefore are not excused absences.
     •   All of these situations should be communicated via email with the instructor.
     •   Acquiring more than 2 unexcused absences will result in the lowering of the final course grade by half a point. i.e. from A to A-.
     •   Acquiring more than 3 unexcused absences will result in the receipt of a failing grade for the course. Meaning: F.
     •   Arriving late, after 20 minutes of the start of class, or leaving early, before 20 minutes the end of class, will be assessed as one half
         of an absence.
     •   Religious Holy Days:
               o    By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
                    observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
                    observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
                    the absence.
Grading Policy:
All assignments are graded and tabulated in a spreadsheet using a number scale which is then translated to a
letter scale. These scales correspond as follows:
A        94 to 100
A-       90 to 93
B+       87 to 89
B        84 to 86
B-       80 to 83
C+       77 to 79
C        74 to 76
C-       70 to 73
D        60 to 69
F        0 to 59
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


Final grades will be computed in accordance with University Academic Policies as follows:
 grade      performance level
 A          The assignment is complete at all levels, and is sound in its technical application and
            description.
 A-         The assignment is complete at almost all levels with slight room for improvement.
 B+         The assignment is thorough, with the potential to become superior with additional
            technical or graphic development.
 B          The assignment resolves the stated intent, and accounts for the assignment's main
            concerns. Both process and resolution are complete, but contain minor deficiencies.
 B-
 C+         The assignment is undertaken with the minimum effort required to resolve the stated
            issues; it lacks rigor, precision, and extended exploration. This grade must be offset
            with higher grades in support courses in order to maintain graduate standing.
 C          The assignment is passing but contains deficiencies in regard to intent, development,
            and resolution. The project's conceptual framework is poorly constructed, while graphic
            and verbal materials are fairly imprecise and incomplete. This grade must be
            offset with higher grades in support courses in order to maintain graduate standing.
 C-
 D          The assignment is incomplete, and skills are not level appropriate. Technical
            comprehension and capability are not demonstrated.
 D-
 F          The assignment is incomplete. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
            acceptable. Note that this grade will also be assigned when you have excessive
            unexcused absences.
Excused Incomplete grades (X) will only be assigned when the student is absent from class according to University approved
criteria, and is unable to make up the work by the end of the term.
Assignments are to be completed in the time allowed. With the exception of a medical, family or personal emergency, late
work will be reduced by one letter grade per each 24 hour period after the stated assignment deadline.
Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the grade to be reduced, remain
unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an individual basis, not as a comparison with other students'
grades.
Academic Integrity:
Plagiarism or violations of academic integrity in any form will be handled according to measures as outlined by the General
Information catalog and the University.
Students are expected to abide to the Student Honor Code and the University Code of Conduct:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
University Code of Conduct:
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.”
http://www.utexas.edu/about-ut/mission-core-purpose-honor-code
Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action, including the receipt of a failing
grade for the course, and possible dismissal from the University. Policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


Accommodations:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with disabilities: 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
     •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
         alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
         exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
     •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     •   Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
         at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     •   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
     •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
         www.utexas.edu/emergency
Communication Between Students And Instructor Outside Of Class Hours:
Email and/or CANVAS will be used by the instructor to communicate with students when not in class time. Email
should be used by students to ask for office hour appointments and/or any question, comment, or request.
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence. Therefore, students are expected to check
their email inbox often and on a daily basis. Class announcements, readings, assignment descriptions, and other
information will be sent by the instructor to students via email.
The class will also have a UT Canvas site and will also use the cloud to share data and assignments.
Readings and References:
Sections or chapters from these books and additional articles will be uploaded to the course Canvas website or
sent by email. PLEASE NOTE: This list will be updated during the semester.
Main Book Sources:
     • Pre-European, Colonial, and Independent LALA:
              o Wagner et al. 2013. “Ancient Origins of the Mexican Plaza”. University of Texas Press. Austin, TX.
              o Crouch et al. 1982. “Spanish City Planning in North America”. The MIT Press. Cambridge, MA.
              o Mundy, Barbara E. 1996. “The Mapping of the New Spain: Indigenous Cartography and the Maps
                   of the Relaciones Geograficas”. The University of Chicago Press. Chicago, USA.
              o Kinsbruner, Jay. 2005. “The Colonial Spanish-American City”. The University of Texas Press.
                   Austin, Texas, USA.
              o Conan, Michael and Quilter, Jeffrey. 2007. “Gardens and Cultural Change: A Pan-American
                   Perspective”. Dumbarton Oaks.
     • Modern Latin American Landscapes:
              o 2003. “Cruelty and Utopia: Cities and Landscapes of Latin America”. Princeton Architectural
                   Press. New York.
              o Zanco, Federica (editor). 2001. “Luis Barragan: The Quiet Revolution”. Skyra. Italy.
              o Eggener, Keith L. 2001. “Luis Barragan’s Gardens of el Pedregal”. Princeton Architectural Press.
              o Cavalcanti, Lauro; El-Dahdah, Fares; and Rambert, Francis. 2011. “Roberto Burle Marx: The
                   Modernity of Landscape”. Cite de l’architecture & du patrimonie / Institut francais d’architecture
                   and Actar.
              o Hoffman, Jens and Nahson, Claudia. 2016. “Roberto Burle Marx, Brazilian Modernist”. Jewish
                   Museum. New York, USA.
     • Contemporary Latin American Landscapes:
              o Arreola, Daniel D. Curtis, James R. 1993. “The Mexican Border Cities: Landscape Anatomy and
                   Place Personality”. University of Arizona Press.
              o Correa, Felipe (Editor). 2012. “A Line in the Andes”. Harvard University Graduate School of
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


              Design.
          o   Mcguirk, Justin. 2014. “Radical Cities: Across Latin America in Search of a New Architecture”.
              Verso.
          o Lerner, Jaime. 2014. “Urban Acupuncture”. Island Press.
          o Martignoni, Jimena. 2008. “Latinscapes: Landscape as raw material”. Editorial Gustavo Gili.
              Barcelona.
          o Adria, Miquel. 2009. “New Latin American Landscape Architecture”. 2G Dossier. Editorial
              Gustavo Gili. Barcelona.
          o Martignoni, Jimena and Segre, Roberto. 2012. “Mario Schjetnan: Urban Environment and
              Landscape”. Arquine. Mexico City.
          o Correa, Felipe and Garciavelez Alfaro, Carlos. 2015. “Mexico City: Between Geometry and
              Geography”. Applied Research and Design Publishing.
          o Moore, Steven. 2007. “Alternative Routes to the Sustainable City: Austin, Curitiba, and Frankfurt”.
              Lexington Books.
   •  Journals, Magazines, and other Sources:
          o Places Journal. From the USA.
                   https://placesjournal.org/
                   https://placesjournal.org/print-archive/
                   https://placesjournal.org/print-archive/plaza-parque-calle/
          o Arquine Magazine. From Mexico.
                   http://www.arquine.com/
          o Architectural Design (AD) “Latin America at the Crossroads” Issue from May/June2011. Edited
              by Mariana Leguia. Wiley. London. http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-
              0470664924.html
          o Harvard Design Magazine “Architectures of Latin America” Issue number 34 from 2011.
              Cambridge, MA. http://www.harvarddesignmagazine.org/issues/34
          o UNESCO Modern World Heritage Site declaration for the National University of Mexico Main
              Campus in Mexico City: http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1250/documents/
   •  Films and documentaries:
                      Note on these: while we might not have time to watch all of these during class, it is strongly
                       recommended that you see these and other Latin American films and documentaries.
          o   “Apocalypto”. 2006. USA. By Mel Gibson.
          o   La otra conquista or “The Other Conquest”. 1998. By Salvador Carrasco.
          o   “The Mission”. 1986. By Roland Joffe.
          o   Los Olvidados or “The Young and the Damned”. 1950. Mexico. By Luis Bunuel.
          o   Cidade de Deus or “City of God”. 2002. Brazil. By Fernando Meirelles.
          o   Maria llena eres de gracia or “Maria Full of Grace”. 2004. Colombia. By Joshua Marston.
          o   Medianeras or “Sidewalls”. 2011. Argentina. By Gustavo Taretto.
          o   Historias Minimas or “Intimate Stories”. 2002. Argentina. By Carlos Sorin.
          o   “A Song of the City” TED Talk by Jaime Lerner.
              https://www.ted.com/talks/jaime_lerner_sings_of_the_city?language=en
          o   “Why Buses Represent Democracy in Action” TED Talk by Enrique Peñalosa.
              https://www.ted.com/talks/enrique_penalosa_why_buses_represent_democracy_in_action
          o   “The Four Commandments of Cities” TED Talk by Eduardo Paes.
              https://www.ted.com/talks/eduardo_paes_the_4_commandments_of_cities
          o   “Bogota: Building a Sustainable City”. From the e2 series by PBS.
              http://www.pbs.org/e2/episodes/209_bogota_building_sustainable_city_trailer.htm
Course Schedule:
  LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019


Note: This schedule may be modified by the instructor during the summer. You will be notified in advance of any changes to this tentative
schedule. Refer to the official University calendar for information regarding drop/add dates, payment schedules, and recognized holidays:
https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/19summer
  Wee      Sessio      Da     Mont
   k         n          y     h
                                         Date              Topic & assignments                                Format
                                                  Introductory Readings & Pre-                         Lecture by instructor
              1         M                 10                                                           & discussion
                                                  European LALA
                                                                                                       Lecture by instructor
              2         T                 11      Colonial era LALA                                    & discussion
   1                                              XIX Century LALA: New republics,                     Lecture by instructor
              3         W                 12                                                           & discussion
                                                  cities, and parks
                                                  Email research abstract to professor for
                                                                                                       Email from students
                       TH                 13      assignment 1 (send by noon to receive
                                                                                                       to instructor
                                                  feedback this day)
                                                  Student presentations and                            Student
              4         M                 17      discussions for assignment 1                         presentations and
                                                  (email to instructor by 12 pm)                       discussion
                                JUNE
   2                                              Modern LALA: Modern City,                            Lecture by instructor
              5         T                 18                                                           & discussion
                                                  Modern University
                                                  Modern LALA: Regional                                Lecture by instructor
              6         W                 19                                                           & discussion
                                                  Modernisms
                                                  Modern LALA: Roberto Burle Marx                      Lecture by instructor
              7         M                 24                                                           & discussion
                                                  (Brazil)
                                                  Modern LALA: Luis Barragan and                       Lecture by instructor
              8         T                 25                                                           & discussion
                                                  Mexico
   3                                              Contemporary LALA: Cities &                          Lecture by instructor
              9         W                 26                                                           & discussion
                                                  Politics
                                                  Email research abstract to professor for
                                                                                                       Email from students
                       TH                 27      assignment 2 (send by noon to receive
                                                                                                       to instructor
                                                  feedback this day)
                                                  Student presentations and                            Student
             10         M                  1      discussions for assignment 2                         presentations and
                                                  (email to instructor by 12 pm)                       discussion
                                                                                                       Lecture by instructor
             11         T                  2      Contemporary LALA: Formal                            & discussion
   4
                                                                                                       Lecture by instructor
             12         W                  3      Contemporary LALA: Informal                          & discussion
                                JULY
                                                   Email research abstract to professor for
                                                                                                       Email from students
                        F                         assignment 3 (send by end of day,
                                                                                                       to instructor
                                           5      feedback will be sent on July 5th)
                                                  Contemporary LALA: Education &                       Lecture by instructor
             13         M                  8                                                           & discussion
                                                  Research
   5         14         T                  9      Student presentations and                            Student
                                                  discussions for assignment 3 /                       presentations and
                                                  Wrap-up discussion                                   discussion
             15         W                 10
    LATIN AMERICAN LANDSCAPES (LALA) Summer 2019
