                           MAS 319-40545AMS 315-31105 LAS 310-39685
                                  Drug History in the Americas
              Department of Mexican American + Latina/o Studies | University of Texas at Austin
                                         Fall Semester 2018 ǀ 3 Credit Hours
                                 TTH ǀ 3:30-5:00pm ǀ WAG, Room 201
INSTRUCTOR INFORMATION
Instructor ǀ Antonio Vásquez, Ph.D.
Email | antonio.vasquez@utexas.edu                                 Office | GWB 2.334
Telephone | 512-471-4557 (MALS office)                             Hours | Mondays, 9-11am + 3-6pm
Fax | 512-471-9639 (MALS office)                                             + by appointment
Teaching Assistant ǀ                                               Teaching Assistant |
Email |                                                            Email |
Telephone |                                                        Telephone |
Fax |                                                              Fax |
Office |                                                           Office |
Hours |                                                            Hours |
         + by appointment
COURSE INFORMATION
DESCRIPTION + FORMAT
Welcome to “Drug History in the Americas!” The study of drugs as a global phenomenon is loaded
with important implications for public health, politics, and democracy. At the same time, this topic is
freighted with misunderstanding, prejudice, and questionable data. Our primary goal in this undergraduate
course is to critically examine pertinent themes related to this topic from varied historical/contemporary,
national/transnational, and interdisciplinary perspectives, with particular attention to the United States and
Mexico. Secondarily, we seek to strengthen your critical thinking skills in research, reading, writing,
listening, and speaking. To accomplish these tasks, the bulk of our time together will consist of in-class
lectures, presentations, film, and small-large group discussion. You will also be asked to complete online
examinations, discussion exercises, and critical essays to demonstrate your knowledge of the course
material. To be successful in this class, do your absolute best to be present and be prepared for every
scheduled class. Feel free to also contact and visit with your TA and/or your instructor should you have any
questions related to the course. You can communicate with us directly through Canvas email first or contact
information provided.
Please note that all submissions for this class will be made through Canvas, which is available at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Your work submitted for this class will also be screened for academic
misconduct.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent
underrepresentation. In addition, this course carries the flag for Global Cultures. Global Cultures courses
are designed to increase familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore


expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
This course is being offered through the UT Austin Department of Mexican
American and Latina/o Studies. The Department strives “to create a new
generation of scholars, practitioners, and activists to research and analyze the life,
history, and culture of Mexican-origin and Latina/o (Central, Caribbean, and
South American) populations within the state of Texas, the United States, and
their diasporas. Our academic program centralizes the interdisciplinary study of
peoples’ movement along the Mesoamerican migration corridor that runs from
the tip of the Southern Cone, through Texas, and into Canada. In addition, the
field of Mexican American and Latina/o Studies historicizes the significance of centuries-old Indigenous and
African migrations to the Americas.” For more information, visit https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/mals/.
Again, welcome to the class!
OBJECTIVES ǀ MAS 319 DRUG HISTORY IN THE AMERICAS
     ▪   DRUGS IN THE AMERICAS: Developed comparative understanding of varied social/cultural,
         economic, and political effects of drugs, with particular attention to the United States and Mexico
     ▪   MEXICAN AMERICAN + LATINA/O STUDIES: Increased interdisciplinary knowledge and analyses of
         subject matter in relation to Mexican American and Latina/o Studies
     ▪   CRITICAL ANALYSIS: Enhanced critical thinking skills in reading, writing, listening, and speaking in
         relation to course content
     ▪   RESEARCH: Strengthened skills in conducting research in relation to the course content
TEXTBOOKS + SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
TEXTBOOKS
The following three books are REQUIRED for this course. They are available for purchase at the University
Co-op Bookstore. When available, the books can also be accessed electronically or in Course Reserves at the
Nettie Lee Benson Latin American Collection.
     ▪   Boullosa, Carmen, and Mike Wallace. A Narco History: How the United States and Mexico Jointly
         Created the “Mexican Drug War.” OR Books, 2016 (available in Course Reserves at Nettie Lee Benson
         Latin American Collection)
     ▪   Durán-Martínez, Angelica. The Politics of Drug Violence: Criminals, Cops and Politicians in Colombia
         and Mexico. Oxford University Press, 2017
     ▪   Paley, Dawn. Drug War Capitalism. AK Press, 2014 (electronic version available via UT Libraries)
In addition, supplementary course material, grades, and announcements will be available through our
course Canvas site at https://utexas.instructure.com.
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
     ▪   To view class information, you will need internet access to log-on to Canvas.
                                                                      MAS 319 + AMS 315 + LAS 310 | Vásquez | Fall 2018


GRADING + ASSESSMENT
GRADING COMPONENTS + SCALE                                            Grade Percentage
                                                                        A       94-100%+
                                                                        A-       90-93%
         I. Attendance + Participation         10%                      B+       87-89%
                                                                        B        84-86%
         II. Discussion (4)                    10%                      B-       80-83%
                                                                        C+       77-79%
         III. Critical Essays (2)              40%                      C        74-76%
                                                                        C-       70-73%
         IV. Examinations (2)                  40%                      D+       67-69%
                                       Total 100%                       D        64-66%
                                                                        D-       60-63%
                                                                        F         0-59%
GRADING DESCRIPTIONS
I. Attendance + Participation (10%)
Attendance and participation count for 10% of your total grade. Do your best to come to every scheduled
class prepared. Please note that more than two (2) unexcused absences can serve as grounding for losing
your points and excessive absences will result in a failing grade for the course. Do not let this happen to you.
II. Discussion (10%)
To further demonstrate knowledge of course content, you will be asked to engage in four (4) online
discussion exercises scheduled throughout the semester, worth a total of 10% of your total grade or 2.5%
each. Discussion 1 will be due on September 7, Discussion 2 will be due on September 21, Discussion 3 will
be due on October 26, and Discussion 4 will be due on November 9. All four assignments will each be
accessible through our course Canvas site (https://utexas.instructure.com) for a period a one-week only,
and more information will also be shared in-class.
III. Critical Essays (40%)
You will write and submit two (2) critical essays for this class, each worth 20% of your total grade. More
information will be discussed in-class. The first essay will be due on September 28 and your second essay
will be due on November 16.
IV. Examinations (40%)
There will be two (2) examinations for this semester, worth approximately 40% of your total grade, or 20%
each. The first examination will take place during Week 07 (October 8-12) and your second examination
will take place during Week 16 (December 10-14). Please note that both will be conducted online through
our course Canvas site at https://utexas.instructure.com. In other words, you will need access to the
internet and Canvas to complete both examinations successfully. We will not be meeting in-class. More
information will be shared in-class but be sure to plan accordingly.
                             Material submitted for this class is subject
                               for screening for academic misconduct.
Extra Credit? When possible, extra credit assignments will be offered during the semester. Come to class
every day to stay informed on possible extra credit opportunities.
                                                                     MAS 319 + AMS 315 + LAS 310 | Vásquez | Fall 2018


IMPORTANT DUE DATES
September 7               Discussion #1 Due                     October 26             Discussion #3 Due
September 21              Discussion #2 Due                     November 9             Discussion #4 Due
September 28              Critical Essay #1 Due                 November 16            Critical Essay #2 Due
October 8-12              Examination #1 Due                    December 10-14         Examination # 2 Due
GUIDELINES + EXPECTATIONS
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
or your TA know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT.
Several are listed in this syllabus, and I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact UT Services for Students with
Disabilities (http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability) at (512) 471-6259 (voice), 1 (800) 329-3986 (video
phone), or email at sssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Title IX
Title IX, a segment of the Education Amendments of 1972, protects against sex and gender-based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking
at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community,
the University can:
1.Intevene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating;
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
involved in a Title IX investigation;
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the University’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title
IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you or someone you know
has been harassed or assaulted, you can find the appropriate resources at https://www.utexas.edu/student-
affairs/policies/title-ix
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12 th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six
Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                                       MAS 319 + AMS 315 + LAS 310 | Vásquez | Fall 2018


Absences
Just to be clear, it is expected that you are present and prepared for every class during the semester. More
than two unexcused absences will lower your grade and excessive absences will result in a failing grade. Do
not let this happen to you. If you are absent, you are responsible for any work missed if applicable. It is also
expected that you communicate with me and/or your TA in writing prior to the class.
The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays, University commitments, or
extenuating emergency circumstances. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday or
University commitment, please let your TA and/or instructor know in advance. If you miss due to an
emergency, be prepared to provide formal documentation. You will not be penalized for excused absences,
although you will still be responsible for any work missed on that day if applicable.
In the event that class may need to be cancelled for any unexpected emergency, we will do our absolute best
to let you know as soon as possible.
Grading
It is expected that all assignments will be completed on-time. Grades and individual feedback, if any, should
be posted no later than two (2) weeks after each assignment deadline. Should you any follow-up questions
regarding a specific assignment grade, you should contact your TA and/or instructor directly within two-
weeks after being posted in Canvas for full consideration. Do not wait until the end of the semester.
Email Communication
When sending an email to your TA and/or instructor, always include a subject line and state your full name
and course in your message. In this way, we can best respond and address your inquiry. Remember as well
that any email related to this class should be considered formal communication. Your email is not a text. Be
considerate when sending an email.
It is expected that your TA and/or instructor will respond to any email requests once received. If you do not
receive an email response after two-weeks, send another follow-up email and let us know in-person.
Discussion Communication
You will be asked to share your own thoughts and/or respond to other posts in Canvas Discussion. Kindly
remember that we should always be respectful of other’s ideas. Do not make insulting, derogatory, or
inflammatory statements to other members of the discussion group. Do your best to be thoughtful, positive,
and constructive in your posts, comments, and/or suggestions.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing
with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc.). Please advise our TA and/or your instructor of this
preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the teaching team of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                                       MAS 319 + AMS 315 + LAS 310 | Vásquez | Fall 2018


Academic Integrity
This course adheres with all expectations regarding academic integrity, including the principles of honesty,
trust, fairness, respect, and responsibility. The University of Texas Honor Code states: “As a student of The
University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity. Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that aren’t your
own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Students who violate University
rules on scholastic dishonesty (including cheating on tests, plagiarism on written assignments, etc.) are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course. It is each and every
student’s responsibility to be familiar with UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which
can be found at the following: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php.
The University of Texas Honor Code reads as follows: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Long live Longhorn nation!
R-E-S-P-E-C-T
It is expected that mutual respect is put into practice in everything that we do in this course. This means
that we avoid behavior that could disrupt our learning environment. For this class, please know that there
will be no calling, texting, smoking, yelling, or any other inappropriate action that can disturb the class
learning environment. Be sure to turn off or put on vibrate mode your cell phone before the class begins.
Use of laptops are acceptable when taking notes during lectures only and should be put away during other
class activities. In addition, you are not allowed to use any video or audio recording devices for any
circumstances during class or points will be deducted from your grade.
In other words, respect is respect, is respect.
STUDENT RESOURCES
University Writing Center
The University Writing Center provides a relaxed, yet professional atmosphere in which writers from
across the curriculum can become more comfortable with processes of writing at all levels. Appointments
are available for all UT students at uwc.utexas.edu/appointments or by calling the UWC Front Desk at 512-
471-6222.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. Services are available here at UT, and treatment
does work. The UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (http://chmc.utexas.edu/) provides counseling,
psychiatric, consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and
enhance their personal growth and well-being. The CMHC crisis line is available 24/7/365 at 512-471-2255.
                                                                       MAS 319 + AMS 315 + LAS 310 | Vásquez | Fall 2018


Copyright Information
More information about copyright law can be accessed at The TEACH Act or directly at
https://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/teachact.html.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center
each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call (512) 471-3614 (JES A332).
Libraries
For more information about The University of Texas Libraries, visit http://lib.utexas.edu or call 512-495-
4250.
IT Services
Walk-up services for any computer and IT help is available on the first-floor lobby of the Flawn Academic
Center (FAC), open Monday through Friday except during University Holidays. You can also contact IT
Services at http://it.utexas.edu or call 512-475-9400. For particular questions about Canvas, technical
support is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the semester at 855-308-2494.
BeVocal Syllabus Statement
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce
harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, please visit
wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
Emergency Evacuation
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
        that the nearest exit door may be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
        week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
        building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
        at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
        found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
For more information regarding emergency evacuation, contact the Office of Campus Safety and Security at
512-471-5767 or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/.
COURSE CHANGES
The professor reserves the right to change and/or alter any component of this
course, with notice to students.
                                                                    MAS 319 + AMS 315 + LAS 310 | Vásquez | Fall 2018
