                                                                                                                    1
                         CSD 378D: Leadership in Communication Sciences and Disorders
Summer 2020                                    Instructor: Courtney T. Byrd, Ph.D., CCC-SLP
Online learning platform
Time: Online lectures the week of 6/8-6/12 and 6/22-6/26, M-F 9-10
Additional video recorded lectures will be assigned throughout course and experiential learning opportunities as
assigned
Week of 6/15-6/19 required times include 8:30-3:00 and 6/19 5-7:00 pm
Office hours: Fridays 2 to 4, and by appointment
Phone Number: 512-731-9416                     Email: courtney.byrd@austin.utexas.edu
TA: No TA
Clinical Supervisors and Clinical Fellows
Elizabeth Hampton, MA, CCC-SLP
elizabeth.hampton@austin.utexas.edu
512-475-6194 or cell 512-470-4800
Office hours: Mondays, 1-3 and by appointment
Lauren Henchey, MA, CFY-SLP – lauren.henchey@austin.utexas.edu
Danielle Werle, MA, CCC-SLP – danielle.werle@gmail.com
Katie Winters, MA, CCC-SLP – katiewinters@utexas.edu
Robyn Croft, MS, CFY-SLP – robyncroft@utexas.edu
Megan Young, MA, CCC-SLP – megan.young@utexas.edu
Zeb White, MA, CFY-SLP – z.white@utexas.edu
I.       Main Objectives of Course
          a.   To learn the scope of practice for speech-language pathology
          b.   To learn the nature and causes of speech and language disorders in children
          c.   To learn how to differentiate normal and disordered speech and language systems in children
          d.   To learn how to ask and investigate empirical questions and think critically in their related
               interpretations and application to evidence based practice
          e.   To learn multicultural perspectives regarding speech and language disorders, including
               differentiation of language differences from language disorders
          f.   To develop a greater empathy and understanding of persons with communication deficits and their
               loved ones
          g.   To learn how to identify the strengths and weaknesses of formal and informal tests for speech and
               language disorders
          h.   To learn the components of an effective assessment both in general and specific to various
               speech and language disorders
          i.   To learn the components of effective treatment both in general and specific to various
               speech and language disorders with particular emphasis on evidence-based practice
          j.   To learn the fundamental principles of effective counseling
          k.   To learn the fundamental principles of professional report writing
          l.   To inspire you to pursue meaningful contributions to our field
II.       General Overview of Course
          This course provides experiential learning opportunities for students to further their understanding of
          stuttering, their experience with collecting and analyzing research data, and providing best treatment
          practices for persons who stutter. Within the course, the Lang Stuttering Institute will be offering its
          intensive treatment program for children who stutter, Camp Dream. Speak. Live. to participants virtually,


                                                                                                                                    2
                     and students will be involved in observation of the participants in the programming and ongoing
                     collection of data and analysis of the information gathered.
            Please also note the following abbreviations: CTE= Critical Thinking Exercise, CTA = Clinical Training Activity; ELA
            =Experiential Learning Activity; CAD = Clinical Analyses and Documentation.
            These topics will be covered over the course of the summer term. Dates are listed for some assignments, but for
            much of the experiential learning opportunities, dates are flexible given the needs of the participants within the
            intensive treatment program. The only firm dates for topic/activity are the dates for the intensive therapy program
            for which all students will participate as part of the experiential learning that is core this course. The dates for the
            intensive treatment program are from June 15th through June 19th from 8:30-1:00 pm and Friday, June 19th fro5-7
            pm.
Dates/Tx Theme           Topic                                                       Assignments Due
Week of 6/4 & 6/5        Introduction to the Intensive Treatment Program:            CTE:
Class will not meet      Camp Dream. Speak. Live. – self-directed study              Human Participant Training
online; student                                                                      Child Protection Power Point Review
reviews own.                                                                         FCOI/FID Training
                                                                                     Background Check
                                                                                     Liability insurance submission
                                                                                     Article Review: 3 articles related to summer
                                                                                     programs for children who stutter. – Links provided
                                                                                          • Byrd, et al (2016). Participation in Camp
                                                                                                Byrd, et al (2018). Exploring the
                                                                                                effectiveness of intensive treatment
                                                                                                program for children who stutter: A follow-
                                                                                                up study. Seminars in Speech and Language.
                                                                                          • Byrd, et al (2016). Participation in Camp
                                                                                                Dream. Speak. Live.: Affective and cognitive
                                                                                                and outcomes for children who stutter. JSPT.
                                                                                          • Byrd, et al (2016). An introduction to camps
                                                                                                for children who stutter: What they are and
                                                                                                how they can help. Perspectives of the ASHA
                                                                                                Special Interests Group. SIG 4.
Week of 6/8-6/12         Monday – Friday                                             CTA: pre and post measure analysis measure
                         Introduction to Stuttering;                                 trainings
                         Treatment Goals;                                            CAD: prep materials for pre-tx data collection
                         Assessment Measures;                                        (assignments will be given in Monday’s class)
                         Desensitization (self-disclosure; voluntary stuttering      ELA:
                         intro; etc.)                                                Contact participants via email and phone to
                         Disfluency Count Training                                   introduce yourself and schedule pre-treatment data
                         Communication Competencies                                  collection
                         Pre-treatment data collection                               ELA: conduct pre-treatment data collection with each
                                                                                     participant.
                                                                                     CAD: analyze pre-treatment data and enter into
                                                                                     Qualtrics.


                                                                                                                                    3
Week of 6/15-6/19       Monday – Friday:                                              ELA: Attend daily intensive treatment program;
Intensive Treatment     Experiential Learning - Camp Dream. Speak. Live.              interact with all participants supporting their
Program                 8:30 – 3:00 pm                                                communication learning intentions.
                        Friday, 6/19 final treatment session                          CAD: Score pre-tx data and enter into Qualtrics form
                        5-7 pm                                                        CTE: Articles as assigned
Week of 6/22-6/26       Monday – Friday:                                              ELA: Complete post-treatment sessions and enter
Post-treatment Data     online lecture 9-10                                           into Qualtrics form
Collection              Tx questions                                                  CAD: Score post-tx data and enter into Qualtrics
                        Mindfulness and Stuttering                                    form.
                        Voluntary Stuttering                                          CTA: Disfluency Counts due Wed 6/24
                        Post-treatment sessions conducted with participants           Submit via canvas
Week of 6/29            Complete post-treatment sessions as needed and                ELA: Review and submit all pre and post treatment
                        analyze all data for review.                                  paperwork with clinical supervisors
                                                                                      CTE: Clinician self-reflection paper to be submitted
                                                                                      via canvas
Week of 7/1             Participant data review and clinical check-out                CTA: Complete Voluntary Stuttering Assignment
                                                                                      CAD: Review pre and post analyses of participants for
                                                                                      documentation check-out; Individual Meetings
                                                                                      CTE: Articles as assigned
           VI.       Point Allocation and Grading Scale
           Experiential Learning Activities (ELA): 400 points
           This relates to your participation in clinical/research assignments including:
                1. Participant Contact
                2. Conducting and pre and post treatment sessions with all participants
                3. Attending Camp Dream. Speak. Live. and participating and supporting implementation of learning for
                     participants.
                4. Clinical, research and professional interactions
                5. Clinical collaboration with peers throughout the experience
           Clinical Analyses and Documentation (CAD): 100 points
           In this course you will learn tenets of clinical writing, and it is expected that individual feedback be incorporated
           into all subsequent submissions. All clinical writing assignments will be evaluated for timeliness of completion (i.e.
           adhering to weekly/by-task due dates), and incorporation of supervisor feedback.
                1. Pre/Post collection and analyses
                2. Submission of clinical documentation for each participant
                3. Clinical paperwork in order at checkout
           Critical Thinking Exercises (CTE): 50 points
                     1. Human Participant Training
                     2. Child Protection Power Point review
                     3. Relevant Article Review as assigned and discussed in class
                     4. Clinician self-reflection
           Clinical Training Activities (CTA): 50 points
           Additional instructions and details for each CTA will be provided in class.
                1. Pre and post measure video module trainings
                2. Disfluency Counts
                3. Voluntary Stuttering assignment


                                                                                                                    4
Grading Scale
555-600         A
554-537         A-
536-495         B
494-477         B-
477-435         C
434-417         C-
416-375         D
374-357         D-
357-below       F
Please make an appointment with me as soon as possible if you need course adaptations or accommodations
because of a disability
VII.      Students with Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-related
need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office in order that the most
appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through Services
for Students with Disabilities. For more information go to:
https://diversity.utexas.edu
VII.    Religious Holy Days Observance Policy
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including
travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be
made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. For more information on this policy
go to:
https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/
VIII.   Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying
academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic


                                                                                                                       5
dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement
or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for
two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these
guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. For information regarding this policy go to:
https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
IX.    Students Privacy and Web-based Class Sites
Web-based, password-protected class sites are available for all accredited courses taught at The University.
Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available within these
sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files.
In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main
Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information got to:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00- 01/app/appc09.html
