ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                          2019
        ADV 373/PR 377K INTEGRATED COMMUNICATIONS
                                           CAMPAIGNS
                                  (Unique #06490 and #06955)
Time/Location:
Monday and Wednesday, 2:00-3:30 in CMA 3.116 + required weekly team meetings at time of
team’s choice
Professor: Dr. Angeline Close Scheinbaum
Email: angeline@austin.utexas.edu (for course content)
Office Hours: Monday 3:30-4:30
Phone: (512) 788-2480
Course Objectives:
     1. To demonstrate that you are a solid contributor to a campaigns team and enhance your
         teamwork skills.
     2. To evaluate and design effective an integrated brand promotion (IBP) based campaign.
     3. To understand the strategic premise in order to ensure a modern, fully integrated
         experiential brand message.
     4. To improve your understanding of and respect for account planning and related research
         and analytic techniques as part of a legitimate and well established process of observation
         and analysis that helps produce effective IBP campaigns.
     5. To create awareness that ethical considerations are integral to the thought processes of all
         involved in the creation, execution and delivery of advertising, PR – and integrated brand
         promotion campaigns.
     6. To illustrate that teams function best horizontally and when they are fully interactive,
         listening well and working with others.
     7. To develop the realization that both advertising and public relations, as professions with
         established practice disciplines, are in the midst of an immense transformation.
     8. To give you experience doing a campaign pitch.
Required texts: Perfect Pitch, Jon Steel ISBN 0471789763
https://www.amazon.com/Perfect-Pitch-Selling-Winning-Business/dp/0471789763
This is to help your team with tips about how to do a campaign pitch but it does not have content
about integrated branding. There is an audio book version as well.
Advertising & Integrated Brand Promotion 8e O’Guinn, Allen, Close Scheinbaum & Semenik
 ISBN 9781337110211
This is our capstone course, and this broad book from your intro course will help remind you of
all the key aspects of advertising and integrating brands for a campaign. You may have this
already from your intro course so if you saved it you already have it. You will rely on this book
for content for your group meetings and main project. Note, the other book- Perfect Pitch does
not have content about how to integrate branding for a campaign, and this book does. The Perfect
Pitch book is just general tips on giving a campaign pitch, and it does not have any subject
matter content that you will need for this class.
Course Websites/Technology:
                                                                                                   1


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                          2019
     •  Canvas
        In this class, Canvas will be used primarily for posting meeting-related assignment
        worksheets and grading. Be sure you have a valid email address connected with Canvas
        to ensure receipt of communication concerning the course. It is your responsibility to
        check Canvas regularly. http://canvas.utexas.edu. The following schedule is on canvas
        and it is important to check Canvas regularly for the modules and other required video
        content.
Schedule (See Canvas for modules/any video content)
We are entering an international contest:
- 2019 Effie Collegiate Brand Challenge presented by Subaru of America, Inc.
-For this year’s competition, Subaru has tasked students with developing an
integrated marketing campaign that reinvents the experience of purchasing a new
car to meet the expectations of Millennials/Gen-Z.
-The competition is open to students who are currently enrolled full/part-time at
accredited educational institutions, including: undergraduate students
graduate students, students enrolled in portfolio programs, students enrolled in
online programs.
-Entries will be judged by marketers with diverse experience across client, agency,
and media companies.
-Selected finalists will have the opportunity to present their work to the Subaru
brand team at their headquarters in Camden, New Jersey, and monetary prizes will
be awarded to the winning teams.
 -The entry deadline is April 3, 2019. We, as a class, will be entering 9 teams of
4. The client limits us to 4 per group, and these teams have been set and are
available from day 1 on your groups tab under people in Canvas.
*As this is primarily a team project course, a weekly team meeting outside of class time is
required in order to get this project done well. These meetings will be at a time set by each team
at the beginning of the semester. There will be some time to meet with groups in class on most
Wednesdays, but this is not enough- trust me on this as I have many years of experience teaching
this course and being on project teams.
**You are also required to do a dress rehearsal “practice pitch” at your team meeting on week
13.
** Generally, I give guidance and teach on Mondays, and often on Wednesdays we break out
into team meetings on Wednesday.
     1. Week 1, 1-28 (Introductions and Developing the Perfect Pitch)
     -  Introductions, meet your team (go to canvas, select people, select groups)
    -   Watch intro videos posted by your Instructor & TA
                                                                                                  2


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                         2019
   -    Review syllabus and Canvas modules for assignments & due dates
   -    Set up group meeting times via a Doodle poll for each team
Someone on the team will send a Doodle poll to every team member within 2 days. Your client
work is due April 3- that comes FAST. Every team member must select all possible hour long
time slots (not just convenient times) available and respond to the Doodle Poll asap. Options for
meetings begin at 8:00am Central Time and options for meetings can go as late as 8:00pm
Central time.
   2. Week 2, 1-28 and 1-30 (Introductions and Developing the Perfect Pitch, cont.)
   -    Introductions, meet your team
   -    See Canvas for content: 12 Tips for Fostering Teamwork, How to Convey and Idea, and
        Creating Killer Presentations
   -    Review syllabus and Canvas modules for assignments & due dates
   -    Release and Waiver Form due- mandatory
   -    Worksheet A “scheduling and conducting agency meetings” due on Canvas by 9:00 pm
        Wed
   3. Week 3, 2-4 and 1-30 (Research and Insights)
   -    Do secondary research as a team and as a team create the survey
   -    Do not delegate this to just one or a few team members- everyone must be involved in the
        research process at is crucial
   -    Read the Brand Challenge on Canvas if you have not yet
   -    Do NOT start on any campaign ideas without research in hand; that is the classic fatal
        mistake in campaigns when the campaign does not stem from your primary (survey)
        research findings.
   4. Week 4, 2-11 and 2-13 (Research and Insights, cont.)
   -    See Canvas for content- go through the qualtrics powerpoint and Which Chart to Use
   -    See Canvas for content- go through the secondary research powerpoint
   5. Week 5, 2-18 and 2-20 (Research and Insights, cont.)
   -    See the Status Report Example update doc
   -    Go through the Mturk powerpoint (this is how you get data; you can purchase
        respondants to do your survey via M-Turk for very little, about 20 cents. I suggest each
        team member contribute 5-10$ to purchase a sample from Amazon M-Turk). Each team
        should aim for 75-100 responses. You may supplement from other sources but it is
        crucial to have quality data to inform your campaign. This is very important.
   -    Make sure your survey is about ready.
                                                                                                 3


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                        2019
  6. Week 6, 2-25 and 2-27 (Budgeting, Segmentation & Positioning)
  -   I highly suggest your survey is done and data collection is underway (e.g., on Amazon M
      Turk by now). It will take weeks to collect data and run analyses. You can’t start on ideas
      for the campaign until your data comes back and analyses (crosstabs as well) are run.
  -   Read Canvas content- Campaign planning steps and customer journey maps
  7. Week 7, 3-4 and 3-6 (Budgeting, Segmentation & Positioning, cont.)
  - See canvas content
  - REMINDER: CLIENT DELIVERABLES DUE
      APRIL 3. It is the contest deadline; NO
      EXCEPTIONS
  8. Week 8, 3-11 and 3-13 ((Budgeting, Segmentation & Positioning, cont.)
  -   See canvas content
      Spring Break, 3-18-3-22
  9. Week 9, 3-25 and 3-27 (Creative & Media Strategies)
  -   Read or watch on canvas: developing the big idea
  -   Review syllabus and Canvas modules for assignments & due dates
  10. Week 10, 4-1 and 4-3 (Creative & Media Strategies, cont.)
  -   Read or watch on canvas: Creative Brief
  -   Review syllabus and Canvas modules for assignments & due dates
  -   Read or watch on canvas: Ad Week Media Awards
  -   Read or watch on canvas: 8 Earned Media Tips
  -   Review syllabus and Canvas modules for assignments & due dates
  - CLIENT DELIVERABLES DUE APRIL 3. It is the
      contest deadline; NO EXCEPTIONS
  11. Week 11, 4-8 and 4-10 (Campaign Pitches: Team 1 and Team 2)
  12. Week 12, 4-15 and 4-17 (Campaign Pitches: Team 3 and Team 4)
                                                                                                4


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                           2019
    13. Week 13, 4-22 and 4-24 (Campaign Pitches: Team 5 and Team 6)
    -   Read on Canvas- plansbook and presentation instructions, compelling presentations, see
        example of a good campaigns book called JCP final plans book
    -   Review the score sheet/rubric that we will grade by
    -   See the IBP plans book outline
    -   Books and slides due soon. No last minute printing. Do NOT wait until the last day to
        have your 2 campaign books professionally printed and bound. Often, it takes 24 hours
        to order.
    14. Week 14, 4-29 and 5-1 (Campaign Pitches: Team 7 and Team 8)
    -   Pitches begin in class this week: Teams 1 and 2 (Richards Group on Monday 4-29 and
        BBDO on Wed. 5-1)
    -   All presentation books and slides are due on Canvas for all groups, no matter if you
        are presenting this week or next
    -   Attendance is especially required from all students these two classes; as if you are not
        presenting you are expected to participate fully in Q&A. Skipping this class (even if you
        are not scheduled to pitch is minus 10 points for your presentation as it is this important
        that the presenters get a good audience and variety feedback)
    15. Week 15, 5-6 and 5-8 (Campaign Pitches: Team 9 and course recap)
*Weekly Status Report #1 of 4 (with goals met, with tasks to accomplish, responsible team
member, deadline and next meeting’s goals) due on Canvas by end of week 2
*Status Report #2 of 4 (with goals met, with tasks to accomplish, responsible team member,
deadline and next meeting’s goals) due on Canvas by end of week 3
* Status Report #3 of 4 (with goals met, with tasks to accomplish, responsible team member,
deadline and next meeting’s goals) due on Canvas by end of week 4
*Report #4 of 4 (with goals met, with tasks to accomplish, responsible team member, deadline
and next meeting’s goals) due on Canvas by end of week 5
Final PitchBook PDFs and PPT deck due April 3 to Both the client and upload to me on
Canvas.
                                                                                                    5


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                            2019
*Mail or email all required files to the contact for the contest by the deadline April 3. Follow
all instructions in the client brief.
I WILL SEND OUT AN ONLINE EVALUATION FORM. If you don’t evaluate your peers
then you are docked an overall letter grade on your final grade. All peer evaluations due
online to Canvas by last week of class.
Course Requirements and Assessment
Grade System
Assignments:
Final campaign plan book:                  40% (team grade- all team members same grade*)
Final campaign presentation:               40% (team grade- all team members same grade*)
Class Participation &
Individual Contribution:
(from Professor & Peer Assessment)        20% (individual grade based on team-level reports**)
ALL MEMBERS OF TEAM MUST HAVE A SPEAKING ROLE IN THE PITCH TO
RECEIVE A GRADE FOR THE PRESENTATION)
* Non-contributor policy: If you don’t contribute, you earn a 0% on the campaign and thus will
fail the course. To report a non-contributor, the majority of your group email me in writing that a
teammate DID NOT MAKE AN INTELLECTUAL CONTRIBUTION to the campaign book
and or presentation. It does NOT mean you don’t agree with their idea, they were late a couple
times, or they did less than you. I understand some teammates will simply contribute a bit more
and some a bit less. That is the real world. But a chronic non-contributor is different and will be
removed from the account at best in the real world. For some peace of mind, know this is very
rare. I have a successful track record of helping mediate well before it gets to this situation and
that is one of the points of me having teams do so many worksheets and virtual meeting
attendance documentations.
**How you perform with your teammates will significantly weight your grade in this course. It is
important to impress your team with your work and to be at the virtual meetings regularly and
prepared to do your part. Your peers do not “set” your grade on this; the information in their
assessments are used for the TA and I in our collaborative decision of your grade. This is
somewhat subjective, but we will be fair.
** Skipping a class during pitch week is minus 10 off of the presentation grade for that student.
This is to make sure the presenting teams have an audience and that you can provide feedback.
Final grades will be determined based on the following scale; No grades are rounded.
                        A 93.5 to 100          A- 89.5 to 93.4
B+ 86.5 to 89.4         B 83.5 to 86.4         B- 79.5 to 83.4
C+ 76.5 to 79.4         C 73.5 to 76.4         C- 69.5 to 73.4
D+ 66.5 to 69.4         D 63.5 to 66.4         D- 59.5 to 63.4
F 59.4 or below
                                                                                                    6


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                          2019
Student Responsibilities
Key to this course is the concept of “team”. You do not pick your teams in the real world, and
you often don’t get to pick which accounts you are assigned to. Although some team members
may wish to specialize on a particular function (e.g., media planning) each team member will be
graded on their contribution to all aspects of the campaign plan. There is no “boss” – unless the
team so selects – organization is horizontal -- ideally functioning as a working advertising
agency intent on developing a professional quality, comprehensive campaign plan and
presentation. The team “representative” is just the one the TA and I will reach out to with any
questions etc. as the go between. It is picked by Canvas by random.
Team Meeting Attendance:
Make sure to attend team meetings. Teamwork and peer evaluations are a large part of this
course.
Assignments:
A weekly update of the meeting’s accomplishment, status report, and next steps/to dos by which
team member and when are due each week at the specified time (to Canvas). All assignments are
due online at the indicated time CST the day they are due, per the hand-in instructions of the
assignment. The digital time stamp when you post the work will be considered the time you
handed it in. Errors in uploading, corrupted files, or missing emails are not excused. Assignments
turned in late, up to 5 minutes late, will receive an automatic 50%. Assignments turned in after 5
minutes late will receive a zero. The work cannot be made up.
Campaign Presentation and Book:
Information on these are in separate rubrics (see Canvas) and documents. I expect your work to
be of the highest professional grade. This includes your writing style, your presentation skills,
and your ability to put a beautiful campaign pitch book together. I EXPECT INTEGRATED
BRAND PROMOTION AND AT LEAST A MINOR PRO-SOCIAL OF CSR ASPECT OF
YOUR CAMPAIGN.
Check Canvas frequently, and make sure your e-mail address is current with the University so
that you can receive emails sent through Canvas. Any questions about grades must be submitted
in writing to the TA and CC the Professor within 3 days of when the grade is posted.
UT Class Related Policies
More information can be found at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/index.html
    • Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
                                                                                                   7


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                            2019
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
    • Religious Holy Days Observance Policy:
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in
advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
    • Documented Disability Statement:
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official
accommodation letter from SSD. Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being
presented in class is not accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are
not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).Please notify me as early in the semester
as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice
will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
accessibility, etc.).Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-
329-3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
    • Q drop Policy:
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
    • Emergency Evacuation:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Additional information
regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
    • Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
A service that provides faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their concerns about
another individual’s behavior. This is a partnership among the Dean of Students, Counseling and
                                                                                                     8


ADV 373/PR377K Spring                                                                  2019
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). 512-232-5050 or report their concerns using the online
submission form available at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
                                                                                          9
