Summer 2019
Instructor: Martha Sue Karnes
Unique Number: 83410
Class Time and Place: MTWTHF 10-11:15 SAC 5.102
Email: marthasue@utexas.edu
Course Website: Canvas - http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Office: TBA
Office Hours: T: 11:30-1, W 11:30-1, & by appointment
Required Texts:
     • Lunsford, Andrea A., John J. Ruszkiewicz, and Keith Walters. Everything’s an
         Argument, 8th ed., Bedford/St. Martin’s, 2018. ISBN: 1319056261
     • The Purdue OWL MLA style guide
     • Other readings to available on Canvas
Description:
“There’s something interestingly weird about hip-hop’s contradictory complexity that
makes one want to get to the bottom of it.” - Geoffrey Sirc in Proust, Hip-Hop, and
Death in First-Year Composition
In 2017, Nielson reported that rap & hip-hop music had surpassed rock music to
become the most consumed genre. Artists like Drake and Future were streamed over 4
billion times in 2017. Rap music is more than just making it rain and dabbing; there is
serious attention to history, culture, style, delivery, and performance. Rap, at its most
basic level, is rhetorical.
This course will challenge students to think critically about the rhetoric of and
surrounding rap music. We will investigate how rap music and performances work
rhetorically and intertextually, making use of music videos, live performances, lyrics and
lyrical interpretations, and interviews with artists. This will also require us to enter
conversations about rap music, culture, and history, and ask questions such as: How
does rap make arguments about oppression, privilege, and relationships to the
community? What role do rappers play as storytellers in a community? What role should
rap play in politics or social justice movements? Is rap music misogynistic, and what
does it mean to be a female rapper? All semester, then, we will investigate the
“contradictory complexity” of rap and hip-hop music and attempt to “get to the bottom of
it” and think about writing in new ways, as we discuss how rappers use various
strategies and media to (re)invent and (re)mix.


Course Goals:
    •  Think critically and independently about popular media
    •  Conduct thoughtful, responsible, and specific research using a variety of
       resources available through UT, including databases, web resources, and topic-
       specific resources
    •  Identify and analyze texts across a variety of genres, paying special attention to
       the relationship between purpose, audience, medium, context, and credibility
    •  Compose lengthy, college-level papers and multimodal assignments that convey
       original arguments and analysis
    •  Revise ideas and compositions in response to constructive feedback from the
       instructor and peers
    •  Demonstrate effective written, oral, and visual communication practices
Assessment:
You will be graded on the following Assignments:
    • Rap Genius Essay: 10%
    • Rap Genius Essay Revision: 10%
    • Rhetorical Analysis Essay: 15%
    • Rhetorical Analysis Essay Revision: 15%
    • Final Creative Project: 20%
    • Short Writing Assignments: 20%
    • Participation: 10%
Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness,
all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For
example, a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University
does not recognize the grade of A+.
 A= 94-100          B+=87-89           C+=77-79          D+=67-69        F=0-59
 A-= 90-93          B=84-86            C=74-76           D=64-66
                    B-=80-83           C-=70-73          D-=60-63
Major Assignments:
Major assignments include: rap genius essay, rhetorical analysis essay, and the final
multimodal project. The first two projects will be revised based on feedback from your
instructor and peers.
In order to receive a passing mark for the course, regardless of your performance on
other assignments or total average of all your grades, all major assignments must be
completed to my satisfaction.


Short Writing Assignments:
There will be six short writing assignments. These assignments will be completed in
and out of class, and will count for 20% of your final grade.
Participation:
Participation in this class is invaluable. You will be expected to come to class prepared
to participate in course discussions and in class assignments. Participation will be
measured through out of class discussion posts and in class writing assignments.
Course Dictionary:
As part of participation, each student will submit two definitions to our course dictionary.
Students will research a word/term/phrase associated with rap music or culture and
provide a short write up that includes a definition of the word. Definitions can include a
brief background how it has been used, why it’s important to rap, and examples of how
it’s used. Words can be related to the production of rap and hip-hop music as well as
words commonly used in songs (whether it be past use or current use). I will provide a
list of words, but students are also free to find one outside of the list. The course
dictionary will be complied and made available to the entire course.
Late Work:
The summer semester will fly by, and because of this, turning in work past the deadline
can seriously put you behind. All late assignments will be penalized the equivalent of
one letter grade for every day they are turned in late. For example, if you turn in an “A”
paper one day late, it will become a “B,” two days late, a “C,” and so on.
Because of the fast-paced nature of the summer semester, extensions will only be
granted in an emergency. If you think you will have difficulty completing an assignment,
you must let me know as soon as possible.
Tardiness:
Be on time. Come to class. If you have other obligations that may make you arrive late
to class, let me know on the first day of class. If tardiness becomes an issue, we will
address it.
Technology Policy:
Use of laptops and tablets are permitted in class and will likely be necessary for many
in class assignments. You may want to use Google Drive or Box to store documents for
class.
Although laptops and tablets may be necessary for in class work, we will also be
listening (to music and each other) and discussing. In class participation is invaluable,
and electronics should not detract from this. Cell phones are to be silenced during class.
Cell phone usage during lectures, class presentations, class discussions, or group work
is disrespectful to your instructor and fellow peers. If cell phone usage becomes a
distraction during class, you may be marked absent for the day.


Respect:
In this class, we may be dealing with sensitive material relating to violence, race, sex,
gender, and crime. While we’re critically engaging with this material, you will be
respectful. We may be discussing things that may make you uncomfortable, so please
be aware you may step out of the room if you feel the need. I will provide content
warnings as often as I can. This is a discussion-based class, which only works if you
feel comfortable enough to speak your mind. Please use compassion and
understanding when broaching these topics. There is zero tolerance for slurs or
derogatory language. In general, any discrimination based on race, gender
presentation, marital status, religion, disability, age, or sexual orientation will not be
tolerated.
It is never okay to laugh at, belittle, or harass your peers because of their opinion. This
does not mean that our ideas and beliefs will go unchallenged. In this class, we may
discuss things we all disagree about. That’s great! Just be respectful about it. If you’re
being disrespectful, you may be asked to leave and be marked absent for the day.
Attendance:
Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses. Any
questions or appeals concerning this policy must be made directly to the department
Associate Chair. You are expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared
assigned reading and writing, and to participate in all in-class editing, revising, and
discussion sessions. The RHE summer absence policy is as follows: 6 absences =
an F for the course. If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from
attending class, you should contact your instructor as soon as possible, preferably
ahead of time, to let him or her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor, in writing, at least one week before the
absence, so that alternative arrangements can be made to complete work. If you know
you will have to miss class(es) for this reason, provide your instructor with the date(s) as
early as possible. Please note that the University specifies very few other excused
absences (e.g., jury duty).
When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments
from a classmate.


Writing Flag:
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and
discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
Board.
Scholastic Honesty:
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will
result in a major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to
all drafts and assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of
the Dean of Students and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain
circumstances, the Dean of Students will initiate proceedings to expel you from the
University.
So, take care to read and understand the Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which
can be found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php If you
have any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing
in the assignment.
Students with Disabilities:
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or
512-410-6644 (video phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. More information is available online at
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/instructional-tips-for-working-with-students-with-
disabilities/.
And in general, please let me know if there is anything I can do to help you learn.
Email Accounts:
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and I will use this medium to
communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email
account and to check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by
going to the IT Services website at https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/.


Emergency Information:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found on the UT emergency page at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050
Questions about these policies should be addressed to:
                              Department of Rhetoric & Writing
                              The University of Texas at Austin
                                     Parlin Hall, Room 3
                                 rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu
                                       (512) 471-6109


*This schedule may be altered to meet the needs of our class. I will alert you via email
and update the schedule on Canvas, but you are responsible for noting any changes.
EAA: Everything’s an Argument
Major Due Dates:
   •   Short Assignment 1 due 7/18 (midnight)
   •   Short Assignment 2 due 7/19 (midnight)
   •   Rap Genius Essay due 7/22 (class time)
   •   Rap Genius Revision due 7/26 (midnight)
   •   DJ Assignment 7/31-8/1
   •   Rhetorical Analysis Essay Due 8/1 (class time)
   •   Rhetorical Analysis Revision Due 8/9 (midnight)
   •   Final Project due 8/16
 Date Topic                                Reading               Assignments Due
                                      Week One
        Just get ready for work, work,
        work, work, work, work: Course
 7/15   Overview and Introductions
        My Name Is…: Introduction to       “How Rap Became       Discussion Post:
        Unit 1 & What is Rap?              the Sound of the      What is Rap?
 7/16                                      Mainstreem” on
                                           Time & PDF on
                                           Canvas
        Let it be said a bit with the      EAA Ch. 1 &
        excellent rhetoric: What is        EAA Ch. 13
 7/17   rhetoric?                          “Tropes”


     if you’re reading this it’s too       Rap Genius by       Short Assignment
     late…: Thinking About Lyrics and      Lauron Kehrer       One Due (Rap
7/18 Introduction to Rap Genius                                Genius Annotation
                                           (bring              #1) by midnight
                                           headphones)
     I just wanna party:                                       Short Assignment
     Interpretations, Changing Times                           One Due (Rap
7/19                                                           Genius Annotation
                                                               #2) by midnight
                                                               Course definition
                                                               due by today
                                     Week Two
Date Topic                                 Reading             Assignments Due
     talk about other careers, judgin'                         Rap Genius Essay
7/22 their peers: Peer Review Rap                              Due by class time
     Genius Essay
     Baby, do you mind if I revise
     what's in your mind?: Revision,
7/23 Grammar, and Style
     The Blacker the Berry:                EAA Ch. 6
     Introduction to Unit 2                Rhetorical Analysis
7/24
     If Young Metro Don’t Trust            EAA Ch. 3, Ethos    Discussion Post:
     You…: Ethos, Kanye West, and                              Ethos
7/25 Cardi B
     I’m sad and low: Pathos and the       EAA. Ch. 2,         Rap Genius Essay
     mysterious case of emo rap            Pathos              Revision Due by
7/26                                                           midnight
                                           “Lil Xan and the
                                           Year in Sad Rap”
                                     Week Three
Date Topic                                 Reading             Assignments Due


     I Don’t Rap, I Illustrate: Visual
     Rhetoric
7/29
     we ain't picture perfect but we      Rhythm Science Discussion Post:
     worth the picture still lyrics:      by DJ Spooky   Visuals
7/30 Visual Rhetoric Part. 2
     Intertextuality + Audience
7/31
     DJ Assignment Presentations                         DJ Assignment
8/1
     I was doin' this shit just for my                   Rhetorical Analysis
     peers: Peer Review Rhetorical                       Essay Due by
8/2  Analysis Essay                                      class time
                                                         Course Definition
                                                         Due by Today
                                     Week Four
Date Topic                                Reading        Assignments Due
     For The Culture: Intro to Unit 3s
8/5
     The Past
8/6


     SoundCloud/Streaming
8/7  https://pitchfork.com/levels/how-raps-
     soundcloud-generation-changed-the-
     music-business-forever/
     Social Media
8/8
                                                    Rhetorical Analysis
                                                    Revision Due by
8/9                                                 midnight
                                      Week Five
Date Topic                                  Reading Assignments Due
                                                    Blog Post
8/12
8/13
8/14
8/15
     Curtain Call: Final Project                    Final Project
     Presentations + Course
8/16 Evaluations
