8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
                     The University of Texas at Austin                    Department of Middle Eastern Studies
                         ARA 601C Intensive Arabic I‫اﻟﺴﻨﺔ اﻷوﻟﻰ‬/ ‫اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬
                                                          !‫أھﻼ وﺳﮭﻼ ﺑﻜﻢ‬
                 For instructor and TA names, of ice location, of ice hours, and email please see Canvas.
                      ●    This document contains important information and represents an agreement
                           between the instructor and the students.
                      ●    You are responsible for knowing all the information contained in this document.
                      ●    You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
     IMPORTANT INFORMATION FOR THIS CLASS:
          ●    CELL PHONES, TABLETS AND COMPUTERS OFF EXCEPT WHEN PERMITTED BY INSTRUCTOR.
          ●    LATENESS AND USING ENGLISH WITHOUT PERMISSION WILL AFFECT YOUR PERFORMANCE AND
               YOUR GRADE.
          ●    ALL WRITTEN AND TYPED ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE DOUBLE-SPACED AND LEGIBLE.
          ●    WE EXPECT TO BE INFORMED OF ABSENCES BEFORE CLASS BEGINS. NO GUM PLEASE.
          ●    Beverages are permitted. In Arab culture, if you bring food, you must offer to share it. ☺
     Course Materials:
          1. Alif Baa, Introduction to Arabic Letters and Sounds (Third Edition) by Brustad, Al-Batal & Al-Tonsi. This book
               comes with a CD (the contents therein are downloadable to your iPod for review while
               running/exercising/driving) and a companion website (for doing homework), and we will be using all three
               every night. We will be using this text for the ﬁrst month of class. The book is available at the UT COOP on
               Guadalupe Street.
          2. In addi on to purchasing the Alif Baa book, you must enroll in your instructor's course at the companion
               website for an addi onal charge of $24.95. Please refer to the class Canvas site for detailed instruc ons on
               how to do this.
          3. Al-Kitaab fii Tacallum al- cArabiyya, Part 1 (Third Edition) by Brustad, Al-Batal & Al-Tonsi. This textbook is also
               available at the UT COOP. We will switch to this textbook a er ﬁnishing Alif Baa and will use it for 2 semesters
               and for part of 2nd year Arabic.
          4. For Al-Kitaab, Part 1, you must also enroll in your instructor's course at the companion website for an
               addi onal charge of $24.95.
          5. Canvas:: In this class, we will use Canvas—a web-based course management system at
               h p://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, communicate online, and post assignments and
               grades. You will receive emails with important course informa on from your instructor via Canvas’s email
               tool, so be sure to check your email frequently.
     Course Objectives:
                                                                                                                               1
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                       1/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
               By the end of Arabic 601C you will, in-shaa'a-llaah:
               1. have mastered the Arabic alphabet and sound system, be able to recognize all Arabic sounds and have
               made substan al progress in pronouncing them properly, and write accurately from dicta on;
               2. be able to ini ate basic social interac ons, exchange basic informa on, take leave, and be aware of
               essen al cultural aspects of social interac on in the Arab world;
               3. be able to talk (in simple or occasionally conjoined sentences) about yourself, your educa on, your family,
               your city, and your likes and dislikes with na ve speakers of Arabic accustomed to interac ng with learners;
               4. comprehend simple print texts on familiar topics (e.g., basic biographical informa on, signs and
               announcements, lists and schedules, menus, etc.);
               5. comprehend simple audio/video texts of up to two minutes on familiar topics (basic biographical
               informa on, family, educa on, weather, etc.);
               6. be able to compose simple paragraphs in colloquial and standard Arabic about yourself and your family
               and friends;
               7. be able to use the computer to type in Arabic
               8. be able to diﬀeren ate between formal and spoken Arabic, recognize both registers, and use basic
               expressions in at least one variety of spoken Arabic;
               9. have an ac ve vocabulary of about 300 Arabic words in colloquial and standard Arabic, covering a range of
               topics including family, educa on, and travel, as well as func on words expressing concepts such as nega on,
               desire, and possibility;
               10. use some of the cultural expressions used in gree ngs and leave-taking and be aware of the importance
               of such expressions in interac on; and
               11. be aware of most the countries that cons tute the Arab world and some important ci es.
     This course will introduce you simultaneously to FuSHaa “formal Arabic” along with one variety of spoken Arabic
     (either MaSri “Egyp an”, Shaami “the Arabic variety spoken in Syria, Jordan, Lebanon, & Pales ne”) depending on
     your instructor’s choice. Our aim here is to prepare you to func on in a range of situa ons and expose you to the
     varie es of Arabic and the many ways in which these varie es interact in real-life communica on. In so doing, we
     embrace a dynamic view of Arabic reﬂec ng authen c communica on with and among na ve speakers across various
     contexts and geographical areas in the Arab world. While it is impossible to capture all the nuances of spoken Arabic
     in a single course, you will be introduced to tools that will enable you to func on successfully within this exci ng
     sociolinguis c environment.
     Grade Distribution:
     Class Participation               15%                                       Skit                  5%
     Homework                          15%                                       Culture Portfolio     5%
     Homework Correction               5% (when we start using Al-Kitaab)        Oral Interview        5%
     Online Quizzes                    10%                                       Final Exam            15%
     Tests                             25%
     Below you will ﬁnd more detail on each of the above components of your class grade, as well as a sec on on ﬁnal
     grade calcula on and grade policies. Addi onally, you will ﬁnd a sec on on how to do well in this class, which includes
     a sec on on principles for eﬀec ve group work and ﬁnally, a sec on on UT and department policies applicable in the
     class.
     Grade Distribution/Course Requirements in Detail:
                                                                                                                            2
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                    2/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     Class Participation                           (15%):
     Class me will be devoted to activating the vocabulary and structures that you have prepared at home through your
     homework. At least 75% of class me will be spent doing ac vi es in pairs and small groups. Thus, ac ve par cipa on
     in class is paramount for signiﬁcant language proﬁciency gains and good in-class performance. This part of your grade
     will be based on a daily “class par cipa on” ra ng assigned by your instructor and TA according to the following
     criteria:
         5- You are actively engaged in developing your Arabic proﬁciency and communica ng in Arabic as much as possible
            with your partner/classmates/teachers from the moment you walk into the class un l you leave it. You cannot
            expect to earn a 5 automatically. You have to earn a 5. Full credit will be given when you:
             a- are ready to begin class on me,
             b- are well prepared for the class. This means that you have listened to recorded materials on the companion
                web site/CD, learned the new vocabulary well enough to be ready to ac vate it in class without referring to
                your book, read the grammar explana ons carefully and done the homework drills based on these
     explana ons before coming to class,
             c- are alert,
             d-par cipate ac vely when we are working together as a class,
             e- make maximum use of pair/group work me by
                              ▪ understanding the learning objec ves of tasks assigned,
                              ▪ staying focused on those objec ves,
                              ▪ con nuing to work with your partner on the task objec ves even if you “ﬁnish” an assigned
                                    task before the allo ed me is up (Ask your TA or instructor for addi onal instruc onsg if
                                    you aren’t sure what to do next), and
            f- maintain the “Arabic as much as possible” policy.
            g- contribute to and maintain a suppor ve, friendly, posi ve understanding and accep ng environment in class.
                Learning another language presents challenges to everyone and we should not contribute to a discouraging
                environment with discourteous and disrespec ul behavior. An example of this would be laughing at another
                student when he or she makes a mistake.
         4- You are present but lacking in one of the above criteria for full credit in par cipa on.
         3- You are present but lacking in two of the criteria.
         2- You are present but lacking in three of the above criteria.
         1- You are present but lacking in more than three of the above criteria. For instance, you come late to class, submit
            incomplete homework, use English to say something that you could say in Arabic and are not focused on the
            assigned task during group work.
         0- You are absent or more than 20 minutes late
     Principles for Group Activities
           ●    Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them; each of you can learn with and from
                everyone else.
           ●    Work with diﬀerent people on a regular basis.
                                                                                                                            3
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                     3/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
           ●    Come prepared. Do not be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to fully par cipate in the
               work. If you are not prepared for class let your instructor know beforehand and s/he will arrange for you to
               learn by listening on that day.
           ●    Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to ﬁnish. Most ac vi es are designed to elicit crea ve play
               with vocabulary and structures on which we are working. If you do the minimum, you will get only minimum
               beneﬁt. Take advantage of class me by pushing yourself to be crea ve and say and write as much as you
               can.
           ●   Speak in Arabic while you are engaged in the ac vity. If you feel frustrated, raise your hand and ask for help.
           ●   When your group ﬁnishes the task, raise your hand to let the instructor know.
           ●   The instructor may call me before everyone is ﬁnished. If your group does not ﬁnish, you may want to take a
               few minutes a er class to study the rest of the exercise.
          Attendance Policies:
             ●   If you are absent from class you will receive a “0” for that day’s par cipa on. Your lowest 3 grades for
                 participation will be dropped when calculating your final grade at the end of the semester.
             ●   More than ten absences—whatever the reason—will result in an "F" for the course.
             ●   Please inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as possible before—not after—the class you will
                 miss. The absence will not be excused but informing your instructor of an absence helps considerably in
                 planning for daily class ac vi es.
          Tardiness Policy
          Arriving late to class is disrup ve, so please make every eﬀort to be in class and ready to start working when class
          begins. Par cipa on points will be deducted for tardiness. If you arrive more than 20 mins. late for class you will
          receive a “0” for that day’s class participation and it will count as an absence in applying the absence policy. For
          each 5 minutes that you are late, 1 point will be deducted from your participation grade.
          Classroom Conduct Policies:
                        ●   Use of cell phones is not permi ed. Turn your cellphone off completely when in class.
                        ●   Please do not chew gum in class.
                        ●   Food is not permi ed in the classroom. Drinks in spill-proof mugs and bo les with tops are
                            allowed.
     Homework           (15%)
     Expect to spend about two (2) hours on homework for every class session. To prepare for the learning that takes
     place through prac ce in class, you will listen to, read and study new material at home. This material will not be
     presented in class. To help you process this material, you will have daily wri en assignments due at the beginning of
     class on the day designated in the schedule. The amount of eﬀort you put into your at-home prepara on and your
     homework is an important part of your homework grade. Pay close a en on to your instructor and/or TA’s comments
     on your assignments and follow up promptly in oﬃce hours or a er class if you have ques ons about your homework
     grade.
     Homework assignments will be rated on a scale of 1 to 5 (5 = excellent; 4 = good but not your best effort; 3 =
     mediocre; 2 = poor; 1 = very poor). You will be rated on the overall quality of your work, not merely on the number of
     correct or incorrect answers. Note that you do not need to have everything 100% correct on your homework in order
                                                                                                                               4
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                       4/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     to get a “5” ra ng as long as you have made your best eﬀort. Your lowest three (3) homework ratings will be
     dropped when calculating your final grade. Please also note that you will not automatically get a 5 just for doing
     the HW. You need to earn higher scores and demonstrate that you’ve worked adequately to deserve them.
     On each homework assignment,
     1.      write your name in Arabic as soon as you are able to do so,
     2.      write the homework number (from the assignment schedule),
     3.      staple pages together in the upper right hand corner of the page , and
     4.     leave room for feedback from your instructors on the homework. Write on every other line.
           Failure to do any of the above will lower your homework grade by at least ½ point.
          ▪    We expect you to write out your homework assignment in full sentences. You will not receive full credit for
               submi ng only the words from a ﬁll-in-the-blank exercise or submi ng a Xeroxed copy of the exercise from
               the book. The aim of the homework exercises is not only to build your vocabulary, but also to recycle and
               reinforce the vocabulary and gramma cal structures that you already know. By wri ng out the exercise in full,
               you will no ce details of the language (such as spelling and gramma cal details) that you may have missed
               the ﬁrst me around. Furthermore, you incorporate your new vocabulary in context rather than producing a
               simple list, and you increase your wri ng speed. Because a simple list only meets one aim of the exercise, we
               consider it incomplete, and you may lose points on your homework grade for this reason.
          ▪    We encourage you to study and brainstorm together while doing homework assignments, but par cipa on
               must be equal, and each student must hand in her/his own paper. Copying homework someone else did is a
               violation of the Honor Code.
          ▪    Generally, late homework will not be accepted. However, if there are excep onal extenua ng circumstances
               that will prevent you from turning in homework on me, contact your instructor to discuss the possibility of
               ge ng advance permission to submit late homework.
          ▪    Note that the assigned homework at the companion website is required homework. Failure to complete the
               online por on(s) of the homework will result in points being deducted from your homework grade.
     A note about http://www.georgetownuniversitypresstextbooks.com/ companion website:
     Put your best eﬀort into the work you do on the website and do not take short cuts. Your instructors can monitor how
     you perform on each assigned exercise on the website. Last year, we discovered that some students were simply
     clicking the “submit” bu on before actually a emp ng to answer any of the ques ons in the online drill. Presumably,
     they did this in order to get to the right answers before a emp ng to answer the ques ons. You will NOT learn this
     way.
     To beneﬁt from the web site to the utmost extent you need ﬁrst to read the explana ons and examples of the
     vocabulary and grammar in the book. Then you can complete the drills on the website based on what you have
     understood. When you have completed the drill, you can submit your answers so that you can get feedback on your
     performance on this drill. If you do not a empt, but simply copy the answers given on the web site, you are not
     developing that understanding, and hence not learning!
     Please note that your teachers will be monitoring your use of the web site. Students who do not complete the drills
     thoroughly but try to take short cuts will not receive credit for it. We are implemen ng this policy in order to give you
     an incen ve to do what is best for your learning.
                                                                                                                             5
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                     5/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     Also, please note that, when doing the drills on Al-Kitaab companion website, you are free to redo any drill as many
       mes as you wish to help you improve your percentage of correct answers. Therefore, take advantage of the fact that
     you can re-a empt any drill many mes before you decide to move on to the next drill.
     The ﬁrst month of class requires an extra me investment on your part while we are doing the sounds and le ers
     ac vi es. Expect to spend up to an extra hour per day on homework during this month. This investment will pay oﬀ
     later; learning to connect the sounds and le ers well helps you memorize vocabulary be er, avoid spelling problems,
     and communicate eﬀec vely with na ve speakers with clear pronuncia on.
     IMPORTANT: Using the answer key of Alif Baa or Al-Kitaab in doing homework assignments is a violation of the UT
     Honor Code and will be treated accordingly.
     Homework Correction                  (5%)
     In the second part of the semester, when we begin the Al-Kitaab textbook, you will be asked to make correc ons on
     your wri en homework. Mistakes on homework are a natural part of the learning process. However, for you to fully
     beneﬁt from your mistakes, you need to go back and correct them. The homework ra ng system in the class is
     designed to reward you for doing just that. When you submit your homework the ﬁrst me, your instructor or TA will
     underline or circle mistakes to be corrected and label them with correc on symbols using the correc on code (posted
     on Canvas). When you get your homework back you are expected to go over it and correct the mistakes (using a
     different color ink or pencil) on the original homework paper and next to what you wrote originally, and then
     resubmit it according to the daily assignment schedule.
     To get full credit for your homework correc ons you must attempt to correct every mistake pointed out to you. If you
     don’t understand why something is wrong, write a note to your TA/teacher on your homework asking for more help.
     Homework correc ons will receive a ( √) and credit for complete and sa sfactory correc ons or ( √) and no credit for
     incomplete correc ons. Please make sure to use a diﬀerent color of ink on correc ons.
     Late corrected homework will not be accepted. Your lowest two (2) grades for homework correction will be dropped
     when calcula ng your ﬁnal grade.
     Tests              (25%)
     There will be four (4) tests over the course of the semester, worth a total of 25% of your ﬁnal grade. If you will
     miss/have missed a test, contact your instructor as soon as you know that you will be missing/have missed it.
     Requests for make-ups will be considered on a case-by-case basis. If you have not contacted your instructor within 24
     hours a er the test has been given to discuss the possibility of a make-up, you will receive a “0.” The tenta ve dates
     for the tests are September 21, October 10, October 25, and November 16.
      Skit              (5 %)
     You will be asked to prepare one skit with a partner (6 minutes) towards the end of the semester. Skits provide you
     with the opportunity to show what you have learned and what you can create with the language. Further
     information about the skit's format and evaluation will be provided at least one week before the skit is due.
     Culture Portfolio            (5%)
                                                                                                                          6
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                  6/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     In addi on to your language work, you will create an electronic Culture Por olio with four entries all wri en in
     English. The culture por olio is your opportunity to engage with Arab culture outside the classroom in order to
     explore and improve your knowledge of the cultural and social contexts in which Arabic is spoken.
     You are required to post your culture portfolio entry (300 words in English per entry) on Canvas. We hope that you
     will enjoy reading the por olio entries of your classmates in addi on to wri ng your own. More details of this
     component of the course are posted on Canvas, and the due dates for each entry will be provided on the weekly
     schedule. (The tenta ve due dates are September 14, October 2, October 26, and November 6.)
      Oral Interview             (5%)
     Towards the end of the semester you will have an oral interview of about 20 minutes with a partner from class. This
     assessment will consist of a pre-ac vity (which will help you prepare), the conversa on itself, and an in-depth
     follow-up ac vity, in which you will comment on the content of your conversa on, as well as observa ons you have
     made about your language skills.
     Online Quizzes              (10%)
     You are required to have a computer/tablet with you every day, and you will be taking quizzes on Canvas that will test
     your knowledge of vocabulary and/or grammar that you are supposed to prepare for. There is no make up for these
     Quizzes and they may/may not be announced in advance. You should be ready to take a quiz at any point.
     Final Examination           (15%)
     The ﬁnal examina on will be comprehensive and will test reading, wri ng, and listening in addi on to vocabulary and
     grammar. The ﬁnal exam will be given as a uniform exam for all sec ons of ARA 601C. The Registrar’s Oﬃce has not
     yet set dates for the exam and the make-up exam. We will inform you of the dates as soon as they become available
     to us. You are expected to take the ﬁnal during the uniform scheduled me.
     The listening comprehension sec on of the exam will be given on the last day of classes. The wri en sec on of the
     exam will be during the ﬁnal examina on period. The Registrar’s Oﬃce will publish the Final Exam Schedule
     approximately three weeks prior to the end of the semester. DO NOT PLAN TO LEAVE TOWN UNTIL AFTER THE LAST
     DAY OF THE FINAL EXAMPERIOD.
     Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies:
     Number/Le er grade equivalents are:
     94-100        A        87-89.9           B+       77-79.9       C+       67-69.9          D+      Below 60 F
     90-93.9 A-             84-86.9           B        74-76.9       C        64-66.9          D
                            80-83.9           B-       70-73.9       C-       60-63.9          D-
          ●    Grades on the border between two le er grades (89.9 for instance) may or may not be rounded up to the
               next higher le er grade, at the instructor’s discre on.
          ●    Your ﬁnal class grade will be based on your ﬁnal weighted average in the class (including the ﬁnal exam
               grade).
          ●    In order to con nue to the next level of Arabic, you must have a grade of C or be er. A grade of C- is not
               suﬃcient to pass to the next level.
          ●    If you take the course Pass/Fail, you may not register for the next level of Arabic.
          ●    No Incompletes will be given for this course.
                                                                                                                          7
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                  7/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
          ●    Audi ng is not permi ed.
                                                How to Do Well in this Class
                                                 Prepared by Dr. Kristen Brustad
     This class is a group effort! We can make much more progress as a class than as individuals by crea ng an
     Arabic-speaking community, of which you will be a fully par cipa ng member. The following sugges ons will help
     you get the most out of the course:
     1. Be an active learner. The approach we use here at UT depends on you learning new material at home, and
     encourages you to use analy cal and logical thinking to master grammar a li le bit at a me. You will learn be er and
     remember more when you are able to answer your own ques ons. Ac ve learners o en have ques ons that reﬂect
     their engagement with the material. Take ini a ve in class and on homework: this eﬀort will be rewarded both in
     your grade and in your language ability. Feel free to write us ques ons on speciﬁc language features in your daily
     homework—just remember to be speciﬁc.
     2. Put yourself out there. Language learning requires you to make mistakes, both in your assignments and in front of
     your peers. In this class, you will never be penalized for a mistake that you make when trying something new. You will
     be corrected in class. Feedback from your instructors is intended to support you as you develop your language
     proﬁciency, and not as cri cism.
     3. Personalize vocabulary. You will remember vocabulary when you “own” it. Make words relevant to your life by
     thinking of what you can say about yourself with them. Write extra sentences that are meaningful to you so that the
     vocabulary becomes “yours” and expresses something about your world.
     4. Prepare for active participation in class by anticipating what you will do. You should soon be able to predict what
     kinds of ac vi es will be performed and how. As you study new material and complete assignments before each
     class, think about how you will use the new material. This will help you to prepare for the ac vi es we’ll be doing in
     class.
     5. Develop your memorization skills. Experiment with diﬀerent techniques, combining listening, speaking and
     wri ng together as much as possible. Cross-train: Try the following and ﬁnd what combina on of techniques works
     best for you:
           ✔ listening to words and repea ng them aloud—not once but ten or twenty mes, un l the word is easy for
                you to pronounce
           ✔ using ﬂashcards—but without English deﬁni ons, and make yourself say the word aloud and use it in a
                phrase or sentence
           ✔ wri ng out vocabulary over and over—but remember to pronounce it out loud while you write!
           ✔ pu ng the words in sentences or a paragraph or story
           ✔ studying in groups and quizzing each other
           ✔ using word associa on techniques
           ✔ using an audio recorder to record your own dicta on of phrases and then review
                                                                                                                          8
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                  8/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     6. Study out loud, and repeat new words many times. The only way to train your brain and your mouth to speak
     this language is by doing it aloud. Certain muscles need to be strengthened before they will be able to produce some
     Arabic sounds correctly; studying aloud and exaggera ng these sounds will help your muscles develop! Pronounce
     new vocabulary words at least ﬁ een mes, un l you can say them easily and it feels natural.
     7. Guess. Think about how you acquired your na ve language: you did not use a dic onary. Rather, you learned new
     words by guessing their meaning from context, and you learned how to produce sentences by imita ng and using
     pa erns. As adult learners, we can take some shortcuts, but guessing skills remain central to language acquisi on.
     Do not leave blanks on the homework, but also do not allow yourself to become frustrated with the homework; give
     it your best shot, and move on. If you are not sure you have understood a sentence in the homework, you may write a
     transla on or a ques on on your homework for your instructor and/or TA to check or answer.
     8. Correct yourself. Good language learners learn from their own successes and mistakes as well as those of others.
     Correc ng mistakes is an essen al part of the learning process. In this class, you will never be penalized for a mistake
     that you make when trying something new. When your instructors and classmates are speaking, be an ac ve listener
     by listening both to what they are saying and how they are saying it. Correc ng the mistakes of others in your head or
     in your notebook is also good prac ce.
     9. Extend language learning beyond the classroom. Prac ce Arabic as much as possible. Study with classmates: ask
     each other ques ons, brainstorm about assignments, go over materials – and do this in Arabic as much as possible.
     Look out for ﬁlms and cultural ac vi es on campus and around town and go a end them. Talk to yourself in Arabic!
     UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
     The UT Honor code is in eﬀect in this class. Submi ng any assignment or exam that is not your own, or that
     you did not par cipate fully in doing, is a viola on of that code. For more informa on about the UT Honor
     Code, please refer to the site for Student Conduct and Academic Integrity found here:
     h p://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
     All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent, or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking
     country, or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to enrollment in
     this course must contact the Arabic Coordinator, Dr. Olla Al-Shalchi at olla@austin.utexas.edu
     immediately to determine whether they can be placed in this course. Failure to do so constitutes an act of
     academic dishonesty.
     Disabilities Students with disabili es who require special accommoda ons need to get a le er that
     documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabili es area of the Oﬃce of the Dean of
     Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This le er should be
     presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommoda ons needed
     should be discussed at that me. Five business days before an exam the student should remind the
     instructor of any tes ng accommoda ons that will be needed. See website below for more informa on:
     h ps://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/accommoda ons-and-services/.
     Use of Canvas This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a
     password-protected site is created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site
     regularly for class work and announcements. Canvas is available at h p://canvas.utexas.edu/ Support is
                                                                                                                            9
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                    9/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm. We strongly recommend
     that you subscribe to canvas notifications for announcements and messages as Canvas will be the
     primary method of communication between the instructor and students.
     Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students All students should become familiar with the
     University's oﬃcial e-mail student no ﬁca on policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University
     informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
     and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communica ons, recognizing that certain
     communica ons may be me-cri cal. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum,
     twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instruc ons for upda ng your e-mail address are
     available at h ps://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-no ﬁca on-policy.
     Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) If you are worried about someone who is ac ng diﬀerently, you may
     use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
     behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Oﬃce of the Dean of Students, the
     Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University
     of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit h p://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
     Emergency Evacuation
     The following are recommenda ons regarding emergency evacua on from the Oﬃce of Campus Safety and
       Security, 512-471-5767, h p://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
          ●    Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Aus n campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
               ﬁre alarm is ac vated. Alarm ac va on or announcement requires exi ng and assembling outside.
          ●    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
               nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
          ●    Students requiring assistance in evacua on shall inform their instructor in wri ng during the ﬁrst week of
               class.
          ●    In the event of an evacua on, follow the instruc on of faculty or class instructors.
          ●    Do not re-enter a building unless given instruc ons by the following: Aus n Fire Department, The University
               of Texas at Aus n Police Department, or Fire Preven on Services oﬃce.
          ●    Link to informa on regarding emergency evacua on routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
               www.utexas.edu/emergency
     Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault
     It is the policy of the University of Texas at Aus n to foster a campus environment that is free from
     in mida on and one in which students may be educated to their fullest poten al. Therefore, the University
     will not tolerate any forms of harassment, physical abuse, threats of violence, physical assault, or any form
     of sexual assault, including but not limited to acquaintance or date rape. Title IX makes it clear that violence
     and harassment based on sex and gender is a Civil Rights oﬀense subject to the same kinds of accountability
     and the same kinds of support applied to oﬀenses against other protected categories such as race, na onal
     origin, LGBTQ iden ty, etc. If you or someone you know has been harassed or assaulted in any way, you can
     ﬁnd the appropriate resources here: h ps:// tleix.utexas.edu/ﬁle-a-report.
     Voices Against Violence Program
     (512) 471-3515 for informa on, counseling and advocacy.
     UT Aus n Police:
     h p://www.utexas.edu/police/
                                                                                                                          10
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                  10/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     Dean of Students:
     h p://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
     Student Counseling & Health Services
     h p://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     Campus Carry
     1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do not
     a empt to ques on or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to handle this
     situa on.
     2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited, including some
     por ons of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible for knowing the loca ons that
     exclude concealed handguns and to plan their daily ac vi es carefully.
     3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all mes while on campus. "About"
     the person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or handbag, but
     the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially
     changing posi on. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the
     gun in place if jostled.
     4. All license holders must think through the ac vi es of their day. There may be mes when the
     consequence of your ac vi es may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are going to a Rec
     Sports area, have a class that requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact with other students, you
     might expose the handgun. Remember that there is no storage on campus except in a privately owned
     vehicle.
     5. Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand those passions.
     However, regardless of your opinion about the legisla on, you are required to follow the laws laid out by
     the State of Texas, and the policies of The University of Texas at Aus n. We also ask that everyone show
     respect toward other members of the university community who have diﬀerent views.
     Important Dates
     September 3rd is the last day of the oﬃcial add/drop period; a er this date, changes in registra on require the
     approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
     September 13th is the last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare and extenua ng
     circumstances. It is also the last day to drop a class for a possible refund and the last day a graduate student may, with
     the required approvals, add a class.
     October 31st is the last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval, withdraw from the University or
     drop a class except for urgent and substan ated, nonacademic reasons and 2) is the last day an undergraduate
     student may change registra on in a class to or from a pass/fail basis.
     November 25th is the last day a graduate student may change registra on in a class to or from a credit/no credit
     basis.
     Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
                                                                                                                            11
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                                     11/12


8/26/2019                                                Syllabus_601C_Fall2019 (3).docx - Google Docs
     The State of Texas enacted a law limi ng the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). Senate
     Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an ins tu on of higher educa on may not permit an
     undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
     dropped at another ins tu on of higher educa on, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
     than that number.”
                                               ‫!أھﻼً وﺳﮭﻼً ﻓﻲ ﺻﻒ اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬
                                             Ahlan wa sahlan to Arabic class!
                                                                                                              12
https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VHjFutdz_ua4rvA7SVgd01V7Uen-H4i3/edit#                                      12/12
