Syllabus: Fall 2019 - ENTREPRENEURIALISM IN
COMM ADV 332D (05960) & PR 332D (06490)
Day & Time: Mandatory meet-up dates below
Sept 12. 10-12 - initial meet up
October 24. 10-12 - practice run
Dec 5 (final pitches) 6-9PM
Classroom: BMC 5.102
Professor: Mark Bunting, MarkB@SkyTV.net
Teaching Assistant:
   •    Abby Hendricks
abbyhendricks@utexas.edu | (936) 645-6736
Enrollment: Course is designed as an open elective for students from any college.
Facebook: UTAdTech (https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech)
The Course: This independent study course is designed to help would-be entrepreneurs develop
a pitch deck for presentation to angel (other) investors. Small teams will be assembled (4 or 5 per
group). After initial approval of a concept there will be a mid-semester check-in culminating in a
final presentation to a group of angel investors at semesters end. The final product and
presentation will be graded by the Professor and panel and is the sole grade for the course.
This course requires a self-starter who is highly independent and works good with teams. The
professor will provide consultancy services throughout the process but will be looking for the
teams to do their own executive summary, initial financial projections, etc. Ultimately the course
is designed to allow student the opportunity to build and practice a presentation in front of a
group of real investors.
Grading Policy:
Final Pitch & Deck: 100% of Grade


The final presentation grade will be a score on the quality of the working pitch deck combined
with the team presentation (performance) score. Team members will also score each other for
their effort and contributions, and this will be weighted in the final grade.
 Course Procedures:
  •     Canvas: (http://courses.utexas.edu): Canvas and classroom announcements will serve as
        communication vehicles for this course. Please check Canvas or the Facebook page
        below for PowerPoint slides for a class session, as well as for other session-related
        materials. In order to ensure that you receive all information sent out through Canvas,
        please update your email address on UTDirect (http://utdirect.utexas.edu).
  •     Facebook: Please like the UT ADTECH Facebook Page: https://www.facebook.com/
        UtAdTech. This source will list additional information such as blog posts, articles and
        other content which may be relevant to in-class discussion. Video content from class
        lectures as well as PowerPoint slides will also be posted on this site.
  •     In Class Conduct: Use of laptop computers, cell phones, mobile tablets and other
        electronic devices during class session is prohibited. NOISE DURING LECTURES AND
        SPEAKERS IS HIGHLY DISRUPTIVE. Quiet is required!
  •     Academic Dishonesty: All students are expected to act within and uphold the UT
        Honor Code fully. You may access the General Information Catalog to review specific
        University policies on scholastic dishonesty or refer to the Student Judicial Services
        website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an
        external site.
 A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an
external site.
