                                            Sports and Social Media
                                   ADV 378s-11 (06140),PR 378s-11(06565)
                                                      Fall 2018
 Class Meets: MW 3-4:30 p.m.
 Instructor Steve Wille                                        Office: BMC 4.430
 Email: swille@austin.utexas.edu                               Office hours: W 11:15 to 12:15 p.m., and apt.
 TA: Kenzie Walker
                                                               Office: TBD
                                                               Office hours: TBD
 Email: kenziewalker@utexas.edu
                                             Course Description
University Catalog Course Description:
 What will I learn?
 Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
             •  Students will understand the nature and importance of the huge shift in communication that has
                occurred with the advent social media, enabling two-way communication, shifting media power
                toward individuals, enabling instantaneous dissemination, feedback, criticism.
             •  Students will be able to strategize a mix of topics, media, posting times, platforms, and other
                variable to optimize the contribution social media can make and the response it gets from
                audiences
 Learning Outcomes
     1. Students will be able to strategize a mix of topics, media, posting times, platforms, and other variable
        to optimize the contribution social media can make and the response it gets from audiences
     2. Differentiate between the strengths and limitations of social media platforms
     3. Students will understand the concept of engagement and be able to select from a variety possible factors that
        drive engagement and devise posts to optimize social media posts for given goals.
     4. Students will get experience working as a social media team, working with each other to post compelling
        content in an environment of irregular timing and unpredictable opportunities.
                                                              1


      5. Students will able to use basic social planning techniques including “tent-pole” planning, evergreen content,
           developing and using a content calendar, assessing engagement results to drive future action.
      6. Students will be able to use a basic set of visual design and production tools to create posts that follow best
           practices to tell the organizations story, increase avidity and drive engagement.
 How will I learn?
A combination of readings, discussions, lectures, assignments, projects and industry guests
will be used to combine theory and skill development in the social media space.
Pre-requisites for the course: Upper-division standing and a University grade point average of at least
2.25.
 How to succeed in this course:
 Bring your passion for sports storytelling and curiosity about how we judge what is the best content to post. Keep up
 with the readings, speak up in class and embrace the need to cultivate your inner graphic designer.
                                                Course Requirements
 Required Materials: Most readings will be provided by the instructor in Canvas or be available within the
 Hootsuite Academy Courseware
Required Publication:
 The “Why” of Sports Design by Steve Wilson
 Available inexpensively for Kindle and through Amazon
 ISBN-13 9781987402476
 Sign up to Hootsuite Academy (no charge)
 Instructions will be provided in the first two weeks of class.
 Required Devices
 Laptop and smartphone
 Classroom expectations
Class attendance
 Attendance is required for all class meetings and contributes a potential of 4 points to your final grade. In class assignments will get
 a score of zero in the case of unexcused absences. For each unexcused absence after the second instance, a student will lose one of
 the available 4 attendance points. An excused absence is defined as a documented illness, documented University-related absence
 (sports team travel) and religious holidays (prior notification required). Excused absence for illness requires health provider
 documentation. Attendance will be taken using Arkaive, an phone app. Instructions will be posted on Canvas
Class participation Class participation is essential and ranks at the top of factors students use to define a valuable course. Class
participation forms part of your grade in this class. Credit for the 6 participation points available will be based upon the student
turning in 3x5 index cards (which students should always carry a supply of) with their name, EID the topic they contributed to and a
description of the contribution. Two points will be awarded for each appropriately completed and accepted card.
Behavior expectations Be polite and civil, of course. Don’t’ distract. Excessive non-class conversations or device use
will be dealt with.
                                                                        2


     Assignments
     Class Prep Assignments will focus on readings with a quiz or discussion questions.
     They may also deal with creating certain kinds of posts or using particular tools.
     The Two Projects will focus on 1) Auditing a sports team social media account 2) Working within a social
     media team to strategize and create posts to meet given objectives.
     Hootsuite Academy
     We have been able to gain access to Hootsuite Academy courseware. Normally for a cost of
     $99, you can take their course and upon completion (a 75% passing grade on their test, you earn a
     Certification that is recognized in the industry and has been a solid job credential. We have managed to get it
     for free. To receive the 10 points of credit I am awarding. The Certification test must be passed by
     November 26. A number of our regular class readings are assigned from their course content.
     Grading for this Course
     The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to which
     you have done so.
      Graded Elements                                                   Points possible               Percent of Total Grade
      1. T w o P r o j e c t s                                      15 each                       30
      2. T e n c l a s s p r e p a s s i g n m e n t s              2 each                        20
1. 3. Two exams                                                     15 Each                       30
2. 4. Attendance                                                    4                             4
3. 5. Participation                                                 6                             6
4. 6. Hootsuite Completion                                          10                            10
5.                                                                                                100
     Course Outline
           All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
           https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
           Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
           note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
           much advanced notice as possible).
       Week         Date   Day
                                 Class Topic                         Out of class activities      Assignments due
       1       29 AUG w          Syllabus Review                 Fan Avidity Readings
                                 Fan Avidity - Introduction to                                    Complete Fan Avidity
       2       5 SEPT      w                                     Hootsuite Sign up
                                 Hootsuite Academy                                                Readings, Complete Bio
       3       17          m     The Social Media Audit          Project 1 Assigned               Complete Hootsuite sign up
                                                                    3


   19    w New models of communication       Project 1 work
                                             Project 1 Work, Engagement
4  24    m New models of communication
                                             Reading
           Engagement Theory and
   26    w                                   Project 1 work               Engagement Theory Reading
           Relationship marketing
           Who uses social media generally
5  1 OCT m                                   Hootsuite Platform Readings
           and for sports
                                                                          Complete Platform Profile
   3 OCT w Platform profiles
                                                                          Reading on Hootsuite
6  8     m Platform Profiles                 Wrap up project 1
   10    w Platform Profiles                 Project 1 Due
                                                                         Review PowerPoints and
7  15    m Exam Prep                         Study for Exam              Review outline to identify
                                                                         areas of need
   17    w Exam 1
           Intro to Project 2 Team Work      Project 2 Assigned, Content
8  22    m
           Session                           Planning Reading
           Content planning for Team                                      Content Planning Reading in
   24    w                                   Project 2 Initial Plan
           Marketing                                                      Hootsuite
           What drives engagement in Sports
9  29    m                                   Engagement Readings          Project 2 Initial Plan due
           Social?
                                                                          Complete Engagement
   31    w Blogging                          Storytelling Reading
                                                                          readings
10 5 NOV m Achieving a story telling mindset Graphic Design reading       Complete Storytelling Reading
           The least you need to know about                               Complete graphic design
   7     w                                   Graphic Design reading
           graphic design                                                 reading 1
                                                                          Complete Graphic Design
11 12    m Social Posting Tools                                           Reading 2
                                                                          Assignemt 1
           The least you need to know about                               Complete video for social
   14    w
           social video                                                   reading
12 19    m Project 2 editorial sessions      Project 2 Due
                                                                          Complete Hootsuite Section
   21    w Influencer marketing
                                                                          on Influencer Marketing
                                             Hootsuite Certification
13 26    m Project 2 editorial sessions
                                             Completion Due Date
                                                                          Complete Reading on
   28    w Social Facebook Advertising
                                                                          Facebook Advertising
                                                4


           Other social advertising/ Native
14 3 DEC m
           Advertising
                                              Review PowerPoints and
   5     w Exam 2 Review                      Review Outline to identify
                                              areas of need
15 10    m Exam 2
                                            5


 Most readings will be provided by the instructor in Canvas or be available within the Hootsuite Academy
 Courseware
                                                             Policies
 Classroom Policies
 Grading Policies
 Final grades are rounded up if decimal is .5 or higher, rounded down if the decimal is below .5
            Grade             Cutoff
            A                 94%
            A-                90%
            B+                87%
            B                 84%
            B-                80%
            C+                77%
            C                 74%
            C-                70%
            D                 65%
            F                 <65%
 Late work
All late work runs the risk of most likely earning none of the avaialbe points for the assignment. Exceptions will only be
made under extreme circumstances. If you turn work in late, do not expect to earn points on it.
 Absences
 Attendance is required for all class meetings and contributes a potential of 4 points to your final grade. In class assignments will get a
 score of zero in the case of unexcused absences. For each unexcused absence after the second instance, a student will lose one of the
 available 4 attendance points. An excused absence is defined as a documented illness, documented University-related absence (sports
 team travel) and religious holidays (prior notification required). Excused absence for illness requires health provider documentation.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •   You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •   You have a right to respect.
     •   You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •   You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •   You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •   You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
     •   You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded
         or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
                                                                      6


    •     You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
          and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
    •     You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your experience
          with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the
          quality of your peers’ experiences.
    •     You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
    •     You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
          and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
      Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
      University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
      integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own
      (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism
      and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
      understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the             University Honor Code which can be found at the
      following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
      If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
      which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
      are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
      http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
      Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
      there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
      possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are
      also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that
      make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
      me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
      committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs
      with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
      Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
      http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
      on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
      rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
     we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
                                                                   7


The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
      improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
      workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
      in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
      (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
      Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
      isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
      sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
      committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
      misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
               1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
               2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
                    involved in a Title IX investigation.
               3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
      which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
      Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
      Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
      they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an
      official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options
      and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
      exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
      given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
      Fire Prevention Services office.
 •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                 8
