                                    Psychology of Advertising
                                 ADV 319|Unique Number: 05850
                           MWF 9-950 AM| JES A121A (Jester Auditorium)
Professor: Dr. Kathrynn (Kate) Pounders
Email: kate.pounders@austin.utexas.edu (Please use this email address instead of Canvas)
Office: BMC 4.388
Office Hours: Monday 1-2; Thursday 11-12
Phone: 636-675-5831 (Cell)
TA: Hannah (Last Name A-K)                           TA: Sabitha Sudarshan (Last Name: L-Z)
Email: hannah.rigdon2016@gmail.com                   Email: sabitha.sudarshan@utexas.edu
Office: BMC Cubicle #11 (4th floor)                  Office: TBA
Office Hours: Wednesday 10-12                        Office Hours: Monday 11-1
Course Description: This course provides an overview of psychology as it pertains to consumer
behavior, particularly in the domain of persuasion, advertising, and more generally, marketing.
Students will become familiar with psychological perceptions such as motivation, perception,
learning, and memory. Additionally, the course introduces concepts related to consumer-
behavior, such as consumer demographics, psychographics, and the decision-making process to
understand both intended and unintended consequences that advertising has on consumers.
Course Objectives:
    1. Illustrate an understanding of psychological concepts as they relate to consumer
        behavior in the domains of persuasion, advertising, and marketing.
    2. Think creatively to solve problems that brands and the advertising industry face.
    3. Dissect how advertising impacts consumers at the individual, group, and cultural levels.
Required Reading: Solomon, Michael. (2017), Consumer Behavior with MyMarketingLab (12th
Edition).
Please note you have 2 options to purchase your required materials for this semester. If you
prefer a paper copy, you will want to consider option #1 from the bookstore or purchase the
loose-leaf text directly from within the MyLab (We’ll review this in class during registration*).
    1. PACKAGE: Loose-leaf + MyLab with etext access
    2. DIGITAL: MyLab with etext access
Both options give you the option of the digital text which can also be available offline for the
duration of the course by downloading the “Pearson etext App”. This option allows you to
highlight, take notes, read anywhere, anytime via your mobile device or tablet.


Please bring your laptop or mobile device to class the first day as we will have a representative
who is traveling from San Antonio to help everyone get registered on MyLab the first day of
class.
Please do not register the access code to MyLab prior to the first day of class – we will do this
together on the first day of class.
Student Responsibilities
Class Attendance: It is your responsibility to attend class. To reward attendance, exams will
include material: presented in class, from in-class assignments, and examples shared by
students and Dr. Pounders during class.
I encourage you to find a section of the lecture hall that you like and to sit in that section
throughout the semester. Get to know your neighbor – they may be the person you start a
successful company with someday – and it is also good to have a friend to study with. Getting
to know other students in class will also make the class feel a lot smaller.
Email: As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate, you must learn to use it
appropriately. Keep your emails formal; write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss
at work, not to your friend. The TA is your first point of contact for your queries about grades.
I am your first contact about the course material. The TA and I will try to return your e-mail
within 24 hours of receiving it on Monday through Friday, or by Monday evening if we receive it
on the weekend. E-mail is an excellent way to communicate if done appropriately.
Canvas: In this class, you will use Canvas to monitor class announcements, access assigned
readings (in addition to the required books) and check grades. It is your responsibility to check
Canvas regularly. The Canvas page is: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1238642
My Responsibilities
Although this is a large class, my goal is to make it as interactive and participatory as possible.
While there will be days when I have to devote much of the class time to lecturing, I will set
aside ample opportunities for discussion and participation.
I will make myself readily available if you have questions, concerns or just want to chat about
the material. The best way to get a hold of me is to stop by during office hours or to contact me
via e-mail. I am always happy to set up a time to talk outside of office hours.
I recognize that individuals learn in different ways and will use teaching and testing methods
that acknowledge this. Lectures will draw on multiple media formats, including video, still
images and audio, in addition to written texts. Quizzes and assignments will be structured in a
variety of ways, including multiple choice, true/false, and short answer. Please contact me ASAP
if you are not performing as well as you would like in class.


Course Requirements and Learning Assessments
Assessment                             Percentage
Exams (3)                              65%
Weekly quizzes                         10%
Individual written assignments         12.5%
Participation and professionalism      12.5%
Total                                  100%
Exams: A total of 4 exams will be given. Three of the four exams will be administered during the
regular semester. The fourth exam is comprehensive and will be given during final exam week.
Of the four exams given, only three will be counted toward your grade. If you miss an exam
(regardless of the reason) you will receive a grade of a zero (0) for that exam and will need to
plan on taking the fourth exam (the comprehensive final). Thus, if you do not miss any of the
exams during the semester the final exam is optional. Given the flexibility of this policy, there
are no makeup exams. Exams will cover material from assigned readings, lectures, videos, and
assignments and will consist of multiple choice and T/F questions. The optional final exam is
tentatively scheduled for Wednesday December 19th from 7-10 PM.
Individual Assignments: There will be 3 individual written assignments throughout the
semester. When submitting work through Canvas you must include your last name, first name,
and EID. Additionally, you must submit a WORD or a PDF document. No late work is accepted.
Quizzes: There will be weekly quizzes administered (with the exception of the first and last
week of class, and Thanksgiving). Quizzes will be posted on Canvas and taken on your own time.
Each quiz consists of 10 multiple choice/TF questions and will be opened each Monday morning
and will close each Friday at 11:59 PM. There is only one chance to complete the quiz – once
you begin you must finish. The quiz is due each week no later than Friday at 11: 59PM. The
quiz must be completed in 10 minutes. Your lowest quiz grade (including a missed quiz) will be
dropped.
Participation and Professionalism: Although this is a large class, I would like the environment
to be as dynamic as possible. You are encouraged to participate in class – you will learn more.
There will be many in-class assignments throughout the semester (roughly one per week) –
some of which will be counted toward your participation grade. Some will be carried out
individually and others will be group assignments. In-class assignments will not always be
announced ahead of time – and so it is very important to attend class. You must be present in
the classroom to receive credit.
Note: This is a very large class in terms of integrating in-class group work. I appreciate your
patience as we figure out the best format for active group learning – it may be a process of trial
and error. J


Facebook Page: There will be two FB pages for this course: ADV 319 Fall 2018 Pounders 1 and 2.
Last Name A-K: https://www.facebook.com/groups/544325696021724/
Last Name L-Z: https://www.facebook.com/groups/544325696021724/
The purpose of the FB page is to share interesting and current events related to course material
– as well as to keep each other updated on course deadlines, assignments, etc. Some students
do not always feel comfortable speaking in large classes, and so this is another outlet to express
viewpoints and opinions, which I think some of you will be more comfortable with. You are
expected to post/comment on current events related to the course. Although you are not
expected to post each week, your online presence should be consistent throughout the
semester in the form of both original content and replies to other posts.
The TA will complete random activity reports throughout the semester, which will be
calculated as part of your participation grade. Please join the course FB page no later than
Wednesday September 5th.
Professionalism: Arrive on time, do not pack up early, and stay the duration of the lass period.
Arriving late and packing up early causes disruption to everyone in the classroom, including
myself. If you must leave class early, please tell me prior to class. You are responsible for any
information missed during an absence.
Be prepared to take notes during class. Laptops may be used for class referencing and note-
taking purposes. All other electronic devices (including phones) should be put away. Any
student caught surfing the Internet, texting, checking e-mail etc. for non-class purposes will
be asked to leave immediately. If the behavior persists, points will be deducted from the
student’s final course grade each subsequent time this occurs. In addition, talking and other
distracting behavior may result in students being asked to leave the classroom.
 Final Grades: Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Additionally,
I do not round, which means a B- is inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.000%.
  A                93-100
  A-               90-92.9
  B+               87-89.9
  B                83-86.9
  B-               80-82.9
  C+               77-79.9
  C                73-76.9
  C-               70-72.9
  D+               67-69.9
  D                63-66.9
  D-               60-62.9


  F                  < 60
Additional Words on Grading:
    •    When your work is graded you start with zero points. You earn points based on the
         quality of the work and the accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers.
         You do not start with 100 points and then lose them based on mistakes you might
         make. Your final points represent the total points earned for that assignment, not
         the number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
    •    Any disagreements about grades MUST be submitted in writing within seven days of
         when the grade is posted on Canvas.
Policy on Lecture Slides: I will post slides on Canvas prior to class; these slides are my
intellectual property. Students who post them online are infringing on my intellectual
property. This activity is prohibited. By accepting this syllabus you must adhere to this policy.
Other Policies and Procedures
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy: The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution
of higher education shall excuse a student from attending classes or other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for
that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from
which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who misses
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day.
Documented Disability Statement: Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512)
471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
(e.g. instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper
alternative text conversion, etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for
field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on
the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video


phone) of reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
  http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating,
plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to
avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is
not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the
future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University.
  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
Drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007
academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a
total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping
more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors
of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not
be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation
shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an
evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office. Additional information regarding emergency evacuation routes and
emergency procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that
provides The University of Texas at Austin’s faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). An
individual can either call the line at 512-232-5050 or report their concerns using the online at
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal


Due to increased student demonstrations and reports of classroom disruptions during the
spring 2017 semester, the Office of the Dean of Students has developed a behavior assessment
and response tool for faculty in a classroom setting. You can download and print
this document for guidance on possible levels of disruption, notable examples and
recommended responses. As always, if at any time you feel you may be in danger, call 911 to
reach UTPD immediately.
In partnership with the Office of the Executive Vice President and Provost, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center’s Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) program has placed CARE
counselors in 13 colleges and departments to provide accessible mental health support for
students are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated
or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
    -   Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
        | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
    - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
 CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
    - M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
 FREE Services at CMHC:
    -   Brief assessments and referral services
    -   Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
    -   MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
    -   Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.htm


