                Sociocultural Influences on Learning (ALD 327/AFR 372D)
                                           Fall, 2018
                                   Unique Numbers: 09030
                                 University of Texas at Austin
                              Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
                                   M, W, F, 11 am – 12 pm
                                           SZB 278
Instructor: Alex Armonda
Office Hours: Tuesdays, 1:30-3pm or by appt.
Office: SZB 528M
Email: armonda@utexas.edu
REQUIRED TEXTS
    •    Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African
         American Students, 2nd Edition
    •    Peter McLaren, Life in Schools: An Introduction to Critical Pedagogy in the
         Foundations of Education, 6th Edition
    •    Angela Valenzuela, Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics
         of Caring
Note: Additional required readings will be posted on Canvas.
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is devoted to exploring the relationships between education, culture, and
society. It will focus on: structures of social and educational inequality, in particular as they
relate to race, class and gender; processes of power and control in education, as they are
expressed in curriculum, policy, and pedagogy; education as a process of social and
cultural reproduction; and teaching as a form of intervention in these processes. The course
will give special attention to the experiences and educational conditions of those who have
been marginalized within U.S. schools. By the end of the course, students will become
familiar with the sociological, cultural, and political contexts and dimensions of education
in U.S. society, will come to understand relationships of power within society and as they
are expressed in schooling, and will develop the foundational knowledge necessary for
working with children and youth from diverse backgrounds.


                                                                      ALD 327, Armonda, p. 2
POLICIES
Attendance: After the first absence, for each additional absence (with the exception of
documented illnesses or medical emergencies) students will lose 3 points from their final
course grade.
Academic Integrity: All work must be your own. If referring to ideas or information from
others, make sure that you cite the source. No credit will be given for work that violates
this principle.
Late Work: Reading Responses will not be accepted if turned in after the deadline. All
other written assignments will lose two points if turned in past the deadline.
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING BASIS
Note: Extended guidelines for the following assignments are provided at the end of this
syllabus.
Reading Responses
You will write a paragraph describing what you believe to be the principal argument of
the assigned readings for the coming week. This response should be specific and brief, and
should describe, from your perspective, the authors’ key ideas.
Access the Reading Response through the assignments/modules page on canvas.
There are 11 opportunities to receive the 10 points of credit throughout the semester. This
means you are allowed to choose a week to skip the Reading Response, or earn extra credit
by completing an additional Reading Response.
Your responses are due by 11:59 pm on the Sunday before our first class of the week. No
late assignments will be accepted. Responses will be completed and submitted on Canvas.
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay you will reflect on your life experience as it relates to the topics and ideas
covered in class. You will describe how your own identity and development have been
influenced by the social and cultural processes in education we are studying, and you will
analyze your own experiences to explain their importance and meanings. The
Autobiographical Essay is due on October 5. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Service Learning
This course includes a 15-20 hour service learning component which you must
complete in order to receive credit for the class. It is your responsibility to contact one of
the sites on the Service Learning Opportunities list (or an equivalent site) to complete
your volunteer service learning. The supervising staff member at your site will be asked
to sign off on a form certifying that you have completed your required hours.


                                                                    ALD 327, Armonda, p. 3
Service Learning Analysis
This assignment consists of five brief reflections on your experiences at your service
learning site. Each of the reflections will focus on a different topic, and in each you will
combine close observation with careful interpretation and analysis. The reflections will
be turned in in two installments. Service Learning Analysis (Part I) is due on Nov.16;
Service Learning Analysis (Part II) is due on Dec. 7. These will be turned in on Canvas.
Group Presentation
In small groups, you will undertake an oral presentation at the beginning of one Friday class
session. This presentation should be related to the topic and readings of the week, but should
examine the key themes in relation to a pop-culture artifact This is an open-ended and creative
assignment, which asks you to take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening the discussion
of it. Please see the extended description at the back of the syllabus for more information.
Final Reflective Essay
In this essay you will reflect on what you have learned during the course, and how it has
affected your thinking about teaching, learning, and/or schooling. While you will engage
with specific course concepts and readings that have made a difference to you, the
assignment is subjective in nature, and asks you to describe, from your own perspective, your
intellectual and emotional growth in relation to this material. The Final Reflective Essay is
due on Dec. 14. Essays will be turned in on Canvas.
Participation
Participation is a very large component of your grade in this course. Besides the reading
responses, it will be the primary way by which I will assess that you are keeping up with
the reading assignments. Both attendance and participation in class is important to facilitate
your own learning and that of others. Our discussion depends on all voices being shared
and heard. In order to engage in class discussions, it is important that you carefully read all
assigned readings prior to class, and that you bring the readings with you to class.
Assignment                                             Points
Reading Responses                                      10
Autobiographical Essay                                 15
Service Learning Analysis                              20
Group Presentation                                     10
Final Reflective Essay                                 25
Participation                                          20
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F


                                                                     ALD 327, Armonda, p. 4
UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES
Academic Integrity: University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or
512-410-6644 (video phone).
    • Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is
        not accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not
        readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
    • Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related
        accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the
        arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
        accessibility, etc.).
    • Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-
        6644 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related
        information: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of
the following policies regarding evacuation:
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you
        entered the building.


                                                                  ALD 327, Armonda, p. 5
   •   If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week
       of class.
   • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire
Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.


                                                            ALD 327, Armonda, p. 6
   SCHEDULE
Week         Topic                Readings                               Due
1            Introduction to       • Baldwin: “A talk to teachers” (time Review
(Aug. 29,    Course                   permitting)                        Service
31)                                                                      Learning
                                                                         Sites, begin
                                                                         to contact
                                                                         site
                                                                         supervisors
                                                                         Select weeks
                                                                         for group
                                                                         presentation
2            Race, Racism, and     • Yosso: “Whose Culture Has           Reading
(Sept. 5, 7, Deficit Thinking         Capital?”                          Response 1:
No class on                        • Weiner: “Challenging Deficit        Sept. 4
labor day                             Thinking”
Sept. 3)
3            Race, Poverty, and    • Pedro Noguera: selections from      Reading
(Sept. 10,   Social Reproduction      City Schools and the American      Response 2:
12, 14)                               Dream                              Sept. 9
4            Power and Ideology    • McLaren, Chapter 5: pp. 131-154     Reading
(Sept. 17,                         • Paulo Freire: Selections from       Response 3:
19, 21)                               Pedagogy of the Oppressed          Sept. 16
5            Class,                • McLaren, Introduction: pp. 1-29     Reading
(Sept. 24,   Corporatization, and  • David Hursh: “Assessing No Child    Response 4:
26, 28)      Education               Left Behind and the Rise of         Sept 23
                                     Neoliberal Education Policies”
                                                                         Deadline to
                                                                         select service
                                                                         learning site
                                                                         Sept. 28
6            Neoliberal Reform     • Dumas: “‘Waiting for Superman’ to   Reading
(Oct 1, 3,   and the Image of the     Save Black People”                 Response 5:
5)           Teacher               • Britzman: “Cultural Myths in the    Sept. 30
                                      Making of the Teacher”


                                                             ALD 327, Armonda, p. 7
                                     Film: Waiting for Superman
                                                                           Autobiograp
                                                                           hical
                                                                           Essay
                                                                           Oct. 5 at
                                                                           beginning of
                                                                           class
7            Gender, Separation,   • Barrie Thorne: selections from        Reading
(Oct. 8, 10, and School               Gender Play                          Response 6:
12)                                                                        Oct. 7
             Service Learning De-
             Briefing
8            Gender, Sexuality,    • American Association of               Reading
(Oct. 15,    and Discrimination       University Women (AAUW):             Response 7:
17, 19)                               “How Schools Shortchange Girls”      Oct 14
                                   • Michelle Fine: “Sexuality,
                                      Schooling, and Adolescent
                                      Females”
                                   • Cris Mayo: “The Tolerance that
                                      Dare Not Speak Its Name”
9            Culture, Language,      •   Valenzuela, Chapter 2: pp. 33-    Reading
(Oct. 22,    and Education               60; Chapter 3 (partial): pp. 61-  Response 8:
24, 26)                                  75                                Oct. 21
10           Cultural Difference   • Valenzuela, Chapter 3 (partial): pp.  Reading
(Oct. 29,    and Marginalization      75-113; Chapter 5 (partial) pp. 161- Response 9:
31, Nov. 2)                           181                                  Oct. 28
11           NO CLASS (Alex out   • Start on readings for next week,
(Nov. 5, 7,  of town)                work on Service Learning
9)                                   Analysis 1
12           Culture and           • Simpson: “Land as Pedagogy”           Reading
(Nov. 12,    Resistance                                                    Response 10:
14, 16)                            • Daniel Solórzano & Dolores            Nov. 11
                                      Delgado Bernal: “Examining
                                      transformational resistance”         Service
                                                                           Learning
                                     •   Suina: “The Pueblo People and     Analysis I
                                         the Dominant Culture”
                                                                           Nov. 16


                                                            ALD 327, Armonda, p. 8
13          Rethinking Resistance    Omatsu: “The ‘four prisons’ and     Enjoy break!
(Nov. 19,                            the movements of liberation” pp.
No class                             298-330
Nov. 21,
23)
14          Teaching, Curriculum  • Ladson-Billings, Chapters 2-4: pp.   Reading
(Nov. 26,   and Social Context       17-84                               Response 11:
28, 30)                           • Giroux: “Teachers as                 Nov. 25
                                     Transformative Intellectuals”
15          Culturally Relevant                                          Service
(Dec. 3, 5, Teaching              • Ladson-Billings, Chapters 5 & 6      Learning
7)                                • Paris & Alim: “What are we           Analysis II
                                     seeking to sustain through
                                     culturally relevant pedagogy?”      Dec. 7
16          Writing Workshop,                                            Service
(Dec. 10)   Summing up                                                   Learning
                                                                         Comp.
                                                                         Form;
                                                                         Final
                                                                         Reflective
                                                                         Essay Due
                                                                         Dec. 14 by 4
                                                                         pm.


                                                              ALD 327, Armonda, p. 9
Reading Responses
You will write a paragraph describing what you believe to be the principal
argument of the assigned readings for the coming week. This response should be
specific and brief, and should describe, from your perspective, the authors’ key
ideas.
Access the Reading Response through the assignments/modules page on canvas.
Your responses are due by 11:59 pm on the Sunday before our first class of the week.
No late assignments will be accepted. There are 11 opportunities to receive the 10
points of credit throughout the semester. This means you are allowed to choose a
week to skip the Reading Response, or earn extra credit by completing an
additional Reading Response.
Additional Notes:
   •   Responses should be approximately 200 words.
   •   If you are having technical difficulties with Canvas, email your response
       directly. Emailed responses must be received by 11:59 pm on Sunday to
       receive credit.
   •   On days when two or more readings are assigned, the response only needs
       to focus on one of the readings. You can choose to discuss two readings if
       you prefer, but three is too many.
   •   Don’t use quotations from the text, since you need the space for your own
       comments.
   •   Your response should focus on the key points of the text, rather than on
       general speculations. Be specific in your writing.
   •   Ten reading responses will be required during the course; each is worth 1
       point.


                                                            ALD 327, Armonda, p. 10
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay (4-5 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on your own life
experience as it relates to the topics and ideas we have been considering in class.
The question for you to respond to in this assignment is:
    •   Who are you, and how has your identity been influenced by, and
        constructed in relationship to your educational experiences?
“Educational experiences” includes school, but can also include other educational
experiences in your family, with peers, or in other contexts. This essay is
concerned with how your development is connected to the educational, social, and
cultural context you have come from. Along the way you should consider how
some of the racial, class, cultural, and gender understandings, differences,
and processes that we have discussed have affected you (and also, if you want,
how you have responded). You should provide specific descriptions of
experiences to make your essay more vivid, and should analyze these
experiences to explain their importance and meanings. (You do not need to
tell your whole life story.)
For this assignment, it is important to connect your description to the topics and
ideas we have been concerned with in class; however, you do not have to cite
specific pages in the texts or lectures.
The Autobiographical Essay is due on Oct. 5 at the beginning of class. Assignments
are to be turned in on Canvas.
Evaluation
This essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) specific discussion of personal experience and identity
2) depth of analysis and insights
3) connections drawn to ideas and topics considered in the course.


                                                             ALD 327, Armonda, p. 11
Group Presentation: Popular Culture Analysis
In small groups, you will undertake an oral presentation at the beginning of one Friday
class session. This presentation should be related to the topic and readings of the week,
but should discuss how the week’s readings (themes, argument, content, etc.) relates to
a particular pop-cultural artifact. This is an open-ended and creative assignment, which
asks you to take initiative in analyzing the topic and opening the discussion of it to the
class.
I am leaving the definition of Pop-cultural artifacts intentionally vague. They can range
from a specific episode of a TV show, a piece of curriculum, a popular song, a film, a
website, or anything along those lines. Once you make your decision as a group, run it
by me along with your plan for analysis.
It is great to engage with the reading, but do not summarize it. This is not a book
report, but rather a comparative analysis between the readings and the artifact you
have chosen. Plan your presentation carefully for about 15 minutes; if you reach
20 minutes you will be stopped.
Key guidelines: 1) choose a relevant, interesting pop-cultural artifact. 2) do not
summarize the text. 3) plan for 15 minutes.
Notes:
     • You will come up to the front of the class for the presentation.
     • Powerpoint/Prezi is good, but not required; however, it helps to have some
         kind of visual aid.
     • Do not leave time in your presentation for discussion, since I have already
         planned discussion time after each presentation.
     • If you invite interaction from the class, make sure it is for no more than 5
         minutes (it should be well-structured and relevant).
     • If you show a video clip, it should be no more than a few minutes so that
         you have time to present your own analysis.
Evaluation
Presentations will be evaluated on:
1) depth of analysis and creativity of presentation/connection to cultural artifact
2) quality of planning and collaboration among presenters
3) insights offered on topic and/or readings of the week.


                                                               ALD 327, Armonda, p. 12
Service Learning Analysis
This assignment consists of five brief reflections (1 full typed single-spaced page
for each) on your experiences at your service learning site, in which you will
explore aspects of the work you are involved in, the organization itself, and your
own responses and accomplishments. Each of the reflections will focus on a
different topic, and in each you should include the following two elements:
1) Description: Provide specific and detailed description of what you see, hear,
and learn. Try to create a vivid picture in the reader’s mind of the place or actions
you are observing.
2) Interpretation: Reflect upon the meanings of the events and processes you
have described. Using the questions provided as a guide, suggest what you think
might be some of the reasons for what you have described, as well as its effects and
significance.
Your descriptive and interpretive comments do not necessarily have to be
separated in different sections, but both should be present in each reflection.
Service Learning Analysis Part I (reflections 1-3) is due on Nov. 16
Service Learning Analysis Part II (reflections 4-5) is due on Dec. 7. Assignments will
be turned in on Canvas.
Reflection 1: Organization Context (Part 1)
Describe the context and mission of the organization you are working with, and
your own thoughts about it. Consider the communities served by the site, the
range of participants, the needs it aims to address, the mission or values of the
organization, and its structure and setup. You can draw from conversations with
staff, observations, organization literature, etc.
    ➢ Interpretation questions: Why has this organization chosen to focus on
        their particular mission? What are some of the key challenges associated
        with the central projects that this organization has taken on? What are
        your initial impressions of the structure and relationships at the site?
Reflection 2: Your Role and Relationships (Part 1)
Document the specific role and tasks you have at the organization, your
relationship to participants and staff, and your feelings about your service learning
at this early stage. Describe specific responsibilities, interactions, events, or
projects that give texture to your individual experience as a volunteer, rather than
focusing on the organization as a whole.
    ➢ Interpretation questions: How does it feel to you so far to be engaged in
        this project? What is exciting about your experience? What is difficult?
        How are you negotiating the relationships you are involved in with
        participants?


                                                              ALD 327, Armonda, p. 13
Reflection 3: Asset-Based Description (Part 1)
In class we have emphasized the importance of an asset-based perspective on
students and communities (as opposed to a deficit perspective). Focusing on the
students/participants you have been working with, describe the strengths and
resources that they bring from their experience, families, and/or communities,
including the specific interactions that demonstrate these assets.
    ➢ Interpretation questions: What strengths and resources allow this person(s)
        to persist and progress in their lives and/or learning? What understandings
        have you gained from working with them? How can the assets they bring
        with them from their family/community help to challenge deficit
        perspectives that might be applied to them or to their community?
Reflection 4: An Accomplishment (Part 2)
Describe one accomplishment or achievement, however large or small, that you
were either responsible for yourself, or that you have been involved in, with regard
to serving participants of the organization. (This could be a student making
progress in one area, leading a dialogue or conversation, establishing a curriculum
or plan of action, etc.)
    ➢ Interpretation questions: What were the essential factors that made this
        accomplishment possible? How can this achievement be sustained and
        deepened? What can be learned from this experience that could be applied
        to other similar situations?
Reflection 5: Social Justice Commitment (Part 2)
Consider in what ways the site at which you are participating is committed to a
project of social justice that aims to broadly transform social conditions for the
communities it serves. Describe whether the staff and participants see the work
they are involved in as reaching beyond the amelioration of individual cases to
broader change, and the ways in which they enact this commitment.
    ➢ Interpretation questions: What does social justice mean to this
        organization? In your view, does the work of this site move toward this
        goal? Has your participation altered your own understandings and views of
        social justice?
Evaluation
The Service Learning Analysis will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) carefulness and specificity of descriptions of site and experiences
2) depth and interest of interpretive comments
3) evidence provided of engagement with service learning organization
4) clarity and coherence of writing.


                                                              ALD 327, Armonda, p. 14
Final Reflective Essay
In this essay (5-7 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on what you have
learned during the course and its various assignments, and how it has affected
your thinking about teaching, learning, and/or schooling. In the course of your
discussion, you should engage specifically with course concepts and readings
that have made a difference to you. The assignment is subjective in nature; in this
essay, you should coherently describe, from your own perspective, your
intellectual and emotional growth in relation to this material. (Some questions
that might spur your thinking for this assignment: How did the course, and
connected field experiences, challenge or change your thinking? How did it
confirm or extend your own insights or experiences? How did it feel to you to work
through the arguments presented? What remains as an important problem or gap
for you?)
In referring to course texts, make sure you use specific references, including
quotations (provide page numbers). Do not summarize the texts; instead, they
will serve as tools to help you work through your ideas. You can also refer to your
own life experience to help you develop your narrative if you wish; however, this is
not an autobiographical essay but rather a narrative of your own response to the
course content.
The Final Reflective Essay is due Dec. 14 by 11:59 pm. The assignment will be turned
in on Canvas. (Assignments turned in late will be lowered two points.)
Evaluation
The final reflective essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
1) depth and interest of reflections, analysis, and ideas
2) specific engagement with course readings and concepts
3) organization and coherence of overall argument/narrative.
