Micropolitan
America
Micro-urbanism in hyper-context
ksestudio
Sofia Krimizi and Kyriakos Kyriakou
Advanced Design Studio, UTSOA
                              Fall 2019 1


Anton, TX
          2


Studio premise:
‘Micropolitan America’ focuses on an alternative
understanding of urbanism that studies the American
town as an instant and autonomous urban setup, one
that is simple enough to be broken down in primary and
identifiable elements, that can be used as tools to enable
micro-urban function. The American town is seen through
the lens of remoteness. Its content is detached from its
form as it invisibly links to greater systems and networks.
The town is seen in two extreme scales. A nationwide scale
of networks and their local built manifestations. Students,
working in defiance of a conventional academic approach
will be asked to identify, analyze and ultimately comment
and intervene on the nodes of the Texan town grid system
through real, surreal or entirely speculative interventions.
Working between and across scales- that of the street,
the town, the road, the territory- students are going to be
operating as archeologists of the immediate future -only to
paraphrase Reyner Banham.
If America is the original version of modernity according to
Baudrillard, then the extremities of the American internal
territory- understood here as a sequence of Greysvilles,
Crossvilles, Maryvilles but also Moscows, Paris, Florences
spread out in Tennessee, Texas, Louisiana or Arizona- offer us
an insight to an accelerated end of that initial modernity.
                                                             3


In situ, TEXAS: (local specificity)
In many ways Texas defied description. Not only in terms of its scale, or the
disconsolate vastness of the West Texan desert, but also as an idea. Larger than
any European country, yet still only one of the 50 states in the union. Texas is a
place where, as the writer Cormac Mc Carthy once suggested, we all come to be
cured of our sentiments. Mark Campbell
Because Texas is a part of almost everything in modern America - the South,
the West, the Plains, Hispanic and immigrant communities, the border, the
divide between the rural areas and the cities - what happens here tends to
disproportionately affect the rest of the nation. Lawrence Wright
We will look into the generic, the unseen, the overlooked, the irrelevant, the
unfinished, the unwrought. Between the micro-urbanism of the Texan town and
the hyper-context of the state, we will deal with urbanism and architecture in a
radically small and vast scale respectively.
The Studio study area will focus on the territory along the Mexico border an area
of rich tradition and constant conflict currently at a state of crisis…
     Ed Ruscha, Drive
                                                                                   4


Map of road-trips 2018-2019
                            5


The Project:
Phase 1a – Research:
The students will be asked to perform an in depth reading of the selected territory
aspiring to generate an understanding of the region through the elemental
notion of the town inscribed within the networks that power it. The networks at
play can be physical or notional and can be summarized as the basic requirements
to organize and sustain an urban community. Each network finds its manifestation
in a building typology, an outlet that connects the town to the network.
Network types:
Nutrition (Water network, food provision)
Energy (Oil/ gas- gas stations, electricity - power plants)
Education (Schools, universities)
Transportation of people and goods (Railway, highway networks)
Administration (Local government, state, federal)
Law (Legislation, police and correction)
Organized Religion (Temples and communities)
Leisure (Recreation, tourism)
Building types:
Town Hall, Courthouse, Jail, School, Church, Gazebo, Genral Store, Water tower.
Phase 1b – Trip:
With specific towns as targets, the students will travel long spans and
eventually “settle” in these places. At this point they will conduct meetings
with local authorities (city hall, school, church) trying to decode the dynamic
relationships within (local laws, community events, Facebook groups) and around
(dependencies with other towns or places, sourcing of goods, relationships with
government) the town unveiling the networks in power. The studio will establish
an archive of urban and/or building typologies and associate them with the
greater networks they serve and the social behaviors they produce. Both the
building types and the networks will be broken down with consecutive zoom
ins and outs until they are able to formulate a new understanding and a critical
position vis-a-vis the studio premise.
                                                                                 6


Phase 2- Design Interrogation:
Coming back from the trip the students will be asked to translate their
observations into design interrogations acting on the latent potential of the
town. The objective is to loop the design arguments through a local intervention
scale that exemplifies and challenges the current conditions as identified during
the research. The aim is to be critical and not attempt to solve problems, rather
hack the laid-out system and subvert it.
Phase 3 – Design Thesis:
During the final phase of the studio the students will be asked to select the
design medium through which they are going to deliver their thesis. The
intellectual arguments produced by each project are expected to invent a format
specific to each case and challenge conventions of architectural representation.
The studio will emphasize the importance of dealing with the context and
the design innervation on equal terms in an attempt to elevate the existing
architecture to an unprecedented level of detail and focus.
                                                                                  7


8

Studio Methodology:
Team work is extremely important in the context of this studio. The research
produced in all stages is considered an open resource within the group. What
is more, students are invited to work in teams of two or three throughout the
semester.
This is a research upper lever studio meaning that the syllabus is only providing
an intellectual framework and an overall methodological process, not a building
brief.
Nevertheless, the specific and unique argument and thus thesis and direction
proposed by each team is going to be derived from their original research and
intellectual curiosity.
Students will be asked to produce a coherent analytical index of the typology
Deliverables:
they have elected to work with that will seamlessly blend into a synthetic
proposal for a diversion of the current condition. Larger analytical drawings of
the town and relationship with the territory can be produced within the groups.
Archival in-situ research is also expected in the initial stages in order to tap into
local resources (libraries, town archives, collections etc.).
As we proceed towards specific typologies, each student will develop a body of
work identifying a thesis question around the chosen type that will be explored
through a design proposal that intervenes in a microscale while consciously
affecting a much wider context.
Architecture can be vast and urbanism radically small in the context of the
Grading Criteria:
Thesis: A clear and precise narrative and line of historical grounding that delivers
a critical argument about the project throughout the semester.
Representation: The ability to challenge drawing conventions and prepare the
necessary graphic documents that both design and communicate the thesis.
                                                                                      9


Engagement: Class attendance, participation in conversations, creative and
productive response to feedback.
Intellectual contribution: The ability to produce original ideas and introduce
findings, demonstrating a deep understanding of both the research/ analysis,
and the project thesis, as well as the ability to develop the project accordingly.
Output: The quality and volume of final production. Emphasis is given to
exploratory drawings, models and hybrid studies.
Proposed timeline:
Phase 1:
8/28/19 Studio lottery
8/30/19 Introduction, formation of groups
9/02/19 Labor day
9/04/19 Preparation for road trip.
9/9/19 Road trip
Phase 2:
9/16/19 Presentation of findings
9/19/19 Discussion of analytical schemes
10/4/19 Analysis presentation
10/17/19 Design interrogation
10/11/19 Mid review Analysis presentation &
Design interrogation
Phase 3:
10/14/19 Design thesis formulation
11/27/19 Pre-final review
11/28/19 Thanksgiving
12/6/19 Final review
                                                                                   10


Selected Bibliography:
Banham, Reyner. Scenes in America Deserta. Salt Lake City: Gibbs M. Smith, Inc,
1982.
Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment. 2. ed. Lon-
don: Architectural Press, 1984.
Baudrillard, Jean. Simulations. Foreign Agents Series. New York City, N.Y., U.S.A:
Semiotext(e), Inc, 1983.
Baudrillard, Jean, and Chris Turner. America. 11. impr. London: Verso, 2000.
Breuer, Karin, Edward Ruscha, and Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco, eds. Ed
Ruscha and the Great American West. San Francisco: Fine Arts Museums of San
Francisco, 2016.
Buckley, Craig, Mark Wasiuta, Dan Graham, and Columbia University, eds. Dan
Graham’s New Jersey. Living Archives Series 5. Zürich: Müller, 2012.
Campbell, Mark. Paradise Lost. London: Architectural Association, 2016.
Frank, Robert, and Jack Kerouac. The Americans. 1. ed. Göttingen: Steidl, 2008.
Hirshorn, Paul, and Steven Izenour. White Towers. Rev. ed. Cambridge, Mass.: The
MIT Press, 2007.
Jackson, John Brinckerhoff. Discovering the Vernacular Landscape. New Haven:
Yale Univ. Press, 1984.
Lasansky, D. Medina, ed. Archi.Pop: Mediating Architecture in Popular Culture.
London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2014.
Lavin, Sylvia, MAK Center for Art and Architecture, and Schindler House, eds.
Everything Loose Will Land: 1970s Art and Architecture in Los Angeles ; [... on
the Occasion of the Exhibition “Everything Loose Will Land: 1970s Art and Archi-
tecture in Los Angeles”, Organized by the MAK Center for Art and Architecture,
Los Angles, at the Schindler House, May 9-August 4, 2013]. Nürnberg: Verlag für
moderne Kunst, 2013.
Venturi, Robert, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour. Learning from Las Ve-
gas. Cambridge Mass: MIT Pr, 1972.
Kerouac, Jack. On the Road. New York, N.Y.: Penguin, 2011.
Solnit, Rebecca. A Field Guide to Getting Lost. London: Penguin, 2006.
Sontag, Susan. In America: A Novel. 1st ed. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
2000.
Steinbeck, John. Travels with Charley: In Search of America. New York, NY: Pen-
guin Books, 1987.
                                                                                   11


Miami, AZ
          12


Studio Culture:
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learn-
ing encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The
studio offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make
proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting profes-
sionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from
faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her criti-
cal thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic
form of education, where project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an
understanding of and commitment to the school’s core values — broadmindedness, inter-
connectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture’s fun-
damental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
Grade Descriptions:
A/A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and tech-
niques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- : above average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required proj-
ects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with
dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are
not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowl-
edge base.
F : fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note
that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not complet-
ing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used
after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a new com-
pletion date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which
you are enrolling, according to School of Architecture policy.
                                                                                                    13


Collaboration:
Projects are developed in collaboration with a partner, and your performance will be evalu-
ated collectively. You should be mindful of the give and take that is associated with a collab-
orative design process. If the relationship between you and your partner becomes strained
in any way it is imperative that you bring such issues to the attention of your instructors. In
addition to the specific relation you will have with you partner, a general spirit of collabora-
tion amongst all members of the studio will be expected.
Attendance:
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Students are expected to work on their proj-
ect in the studio. Active participation in studio readings and discussions is expected.
With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered
by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused
absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with writ-
ten documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as
one (1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or
absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or
absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
Religious Observances:
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose.
A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which
the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so
that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an oppor-
tunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                                                                  14


Academic Integrity:
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary pen-
alties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integ-
rity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Care Program:
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health profes-
sionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental
health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Laura Dannenmaier (LCSW) is the CARE Program Director and is the assigned CARE coun-
selor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE coun-
selor or students may directly reach out to her.
Laura Dannenmaier | BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
Student with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that doc-
uments the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hear-
ing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Security, safety and the studio:
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates
the careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint or any
other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio
that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave
your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and
your studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
                                                                                                 15


BCAL:
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns.
Emergency Evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:
•       Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires
exiting and assembling outside.
•       Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and
building they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used
when entering the building.
•       Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty
or class instructors.
•       Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Ser-
vices offices.
Softwares:
We use Adobe software in this course. When accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you
will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not required to purchase Creative Cloud ser-
vices to sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to create a free Adobe ID. That can be
done here:https://accounts.adobe.com/
Inquiries:
Feel free to contact us at Kyriakos.Kyriakou@austin.utexas.edu and sofia.krimizi@austin.utexas.edu
                                                                                                   16


17