    CONTEMPORARY BLACK WOMEN WRITERS: SPECULATIVE FICTION OF THE
                                       AFRICAN DIASPORA
FALL 2018
Professor Matt Richardson
E376M/AFR 372E
Course Description:
In this course, we will examine the novels and films of women of African descent produced from
the 1970s to the present. We will focus on issues of imagination and the creation of spectacular
images of the past and the future. Considering the past violence and violations suffered under
systems of racism, misogyny and homophobia, what would a utopia or a dystopia look like?
How does collective experiences of trauma affect our visions of the future? In this course, we
will use the work of history, critical race theory, queer theory and feminist theories to assist our
exploration of these questions and issues.
Course Requirements:
Office Hours: Students are encouraged to come to office hours at least once during the semester
to discuss your progress in the class and any additional questions you may have. You are
encouraged to take further advantage of office hours and I am also available by appointment.
Attendance and Participation: Students are expected to attend class every session. Participation
in all aspects of the class is MANDATORY including short in-class writing assignments that will
happen throughout the semester. All readings and assignments should be completed before class
meetings and students are responsible for adding to class discussions of material. Please note that
attendance and participation is worth 15% of your total grade. Late arrivals are disruptive to
class and I will not repeat concepts and assignments given during class. If you miss a class or are
late, you are still responsible for any announcements, assignments, lecture material and/or
deadlines that are made. Your grade will be affected if you have more than 1 unexcused absence
during the semester.
Close Reading Assignments: Each member of the class is required to hand in short response
papers for most texts this semester. Response papers are brief (one page maximum!) discussions
of a particular passage due 6pm on a Sunday before it will be discussed in class. Submit them to
the course blog at blackwomenwriters.wordpress.com. Collectively, they are worth 20% of your
total grade.
Midterm and Final: The midterm and final papers are designed to assess students’ accumulated
knowledge. The final will be a take home exam. Papers must be TYPED, double-spaced, with
times new roman (or equivalent) 12 point font and 1inch margins.


Canvas: I will be in contact with you about updates in assignments through Canvas It is the
students’ responsibility to make sure that Canvas has your updated email address.
http://canvas.utexas.edu/
NO LATE PAPERS. NO LAPTOPS. NO CELL PHONES
Code of Mutual Respect: In general, this is not a lecture class, but one grounded in dialogue.
Feel free to be candid and direct in this class. Your opinions and insights are important, and your
voice needs to be heard, so look forward to the opportunity to chime in. I will respect you as
adults and assume that you will treat others in the class with respect as well. Because we will be
sharing many personal ideas which may conflict with your own personal ideas and beliefs, it is
important that you strive to be considerate, sensitive, and respectful. Be prepared to offer
constructive criticism as well as receive it. We will discuss work that includes lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender themes in this course. Students are expected to approach all class
material with maturity and academic rigor.
Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are
not your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action which will also be reflected in their grade.
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who
requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities
area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for users who
are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, please come talk to me.
Required Books:
Toni Morrison, Beloved
Octavia Butler, Parable Of The Sower
Ana Maurine Lara, Erzulie’s Skirt
Nalo Hopkinson Brown Girl In The Ring
Jewelle Gomez, The Gilda Stories : Expanded 25th Anniversary Edition
Toni Cade Bambara, The Salt Eaters
Books are available at the University CO-OP and the Course Reader is available at Jenn’s Copy
at Guadalupe St. (512) 473-8669. Please note that there are some required readings that are not in
the course reader or the main texts. They will be available online or as handouts in class.
Grading Policy


Midterm Paper (6 pages )     30%
Blog Posts/Close Reading     20%
Final Paper (10 pages)       35%
Attendance & Participation   15%
 Week One
           30-Aug INTRODUCTION
 Week Two
                    “Interview with bell hooks and Julie Dash” from Daughters of the Dust: The
                    Making of An African American Woman’s Film, by Julie Dash, NY: The New
                    Press, 1992, 27-67. Excerpt from Finding Soul on the Path of Orisa. Film:
             4-Sep Daughters of the Dust
             6-Sep Film: Daughters of the Dust
 Week Three
                    Film Daughters of the Dust Daughters of the Dust Discussion; “The Spirits” from
                    Introduction to African Religion by John S. Mbiti, Heinemann Educational Books
                    pgs 71-81 and “Concept of Time” and “The Nature of God” from African
                    Religions and Philosophy by John S. Mbiti, Heinemann Educational Books pgs 15-
            11-Sep 38.Close Reading of Daughters of the Dust Due 6pm on Sunday
  September 13      Discussion of Mbiti and Daughters of the Dust;
 Week Four
                     Brown Girl in the Ring; M. Jacqui Alexander, “Pedagogies of the Sacred: Making
                    the Invisible Tangible,” from Pedagogies of Crossing: Meditations on Feminism,
                    Sexual Politics, Memory and the Sacred, Durham, NC: Duke University Press,
            18-Sep 2005, 287-300; Close Reading of Brown Girl in the Ring Due Sunday at 6pm
                    Brown Girl in the Ring; Discuss Brown Girl in the Ring and “ ‘Making the
                    Impossible Possible’: An Interview with Nalo Hopkinson” in Social Text, Vol 20
            20-Sep no. 2, Summer 2002, 97-113.
 Week Five
                    Discuss Brown Girl in the Ring; and M. Jacqui Alexander, “Pedagogies of the
            25-Sep Sacred: Making the Invisible Tangible,”
            27-Sep Film: Eve's Bayou
 Week Six


           2-Oct Eve's Bayou
           4-Oct Discussion of Eve's Bayou
Week Seven
           9-Oct Beloved
         11-Oct Beloved
Week Eight
         16-Oct Beloved: Midterm Paper Due
                 First 1/2 Erzulie's Skirt; and “Ezili” from Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in
                 Brooklyn by Karen McCarthy Brown, Berkeley: University of California Press,
         18-Oct 1991, 220-257.
Week Nine
                 Second 1/2Discuss Erzulie's Skirt and "Ezili"; Close Reading of Erzulie's Skirt due
         23-Oct Sunday 6pm
         25-Oct Finish Erzulie's Skirt; First 1/2 of Parable of the Sower
Week Ten
         30-Oct Discussion of Parable of the Sower
                 Finish Parable of the Sower; Close Reading of Parable Due on Sunday at 6pm
          1-Nov Octavia Butler, Parable of the Sower; Start Jewelle Gomez, The Gilda Stories
Week Eleven
          6-Nov The Gilda Stories
          8-Nov The Gilda Stories; Close Reading of The Gilda Stories Due 6pm Sunday
Week Twelve
                 The Salt Eaters; Invisible Southern Black Women Leaders in the Civil Rights
                 Movement: The Triple Constraints of Gender, Race, and Class, Bernice McNair
        13-Nov Barnett
        15-Nov The Salt Eaters; Combahee River Collective Statement
Week Thirteen
        20-Nov Thanksgiving
        22-Nov Thanksgiving
Week Fourteen
        27-Nov The Salt Eaters


                Film: Pumzi, Brujas Princess Nokia; The Ibeji; Close Reading of The Salt Eaters
         29-Nov Due 6pm Sunday
Week Fifteen
          4-Dec Dirty Computer
          6-Dec Film: Oya: Rise of the Orisha
          8-Dec Final Paper Due by 5pm
