AET 323D Course Syllabus
                                     Interactive Music
                                             AET 323D
   “If you don't like what you're doing, you can always pick up your needle and move to another
                                        groove.” – Timothy Leary
                                          Fall 2019, MRH 3.124
                                          MW, 12:30pm – 2pm
Instructor:               Jack W. Stamps, DMA
Office Hours:             T BA
Email:                    jstamps@austin.utexas.edu
I.       Rationale:
Interactive Music explores the techniques of modern electronic music (EDM)
improvisation through the use of the Ableton Push 2 Controller as a live, performable
instrument. Improvisation, interactivity and spontaneity using the Push 2 can help to
dispel the presumptions and stereotypes regarding electronic music being cold, pre-
programmed and predictable. The aim of the course is to explore the improvisational and
interactive aspects of modern electronic music while studying work of visionaries of the
EDM world.
II.       Course Aims and Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
     •   Understand the principles of sequencing beats and playing drums.
     •   Understand the principles of drum variations
     •   Understand the principles of sequential melody.
     •   Understand the principles of melodic step sequencing.
     •   Understand the principles of classic and modern sampling.
     •   Understand the principles of live audio recording, routing, sidechaining and warping
     •   Understand and demonstrate the principles of live electronic (EDM) performance
                                                     1


AET 323D Course Syllabus
III.     Assessment Model:
         Daily Attendance: 10%
                 Daily attendance is essential to the successful completion of the course. Please do
                 everything you can to attend all classes.
         Weekly Class Quizzes & Demos 30%
                 Quizzes are administered through Canvas and will usually be assigned on
                 Wednesdays for completion by the following Monday. Demos will be in-class check-off.
         Topic Assignments: 30%
                 The online text comes with lots of suggested assignments. I will be pulling
                 assignments from these the aggregate of which will equal 35%.
         Final Composition & Performance: 30%
                 Absolutely no late submissions will be accepted .
         Letter Grade Policy:
         To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage.
         Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not
         recognize the grade of A+. Thus, the conversion from percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
         A = 94 – 100
         A- = 90 – 93.999…
         B+ = 87 – 89.999…
         B = 84 – 86.999…
         B- = 80 – 83.999…
         C+ = 77 – 79.999…
         C = 74 – 76.999…
         C- = 70 – 73.999…
         D+ = 67 – 69.999…
         D = 64 – 66.999…
         D- = 60 – 63.999…
         F = 0 – 59.999…
IV.    Academic Integrity
Cheating and Plagiarism
By enrolling in this course, you agree to abide by the student Honor Code and Academic Integrity policies
as outlined by the Office of the Dean of Students here. Infractions of this policy will be severely penalized.
We have uncovered evidence of students cheating on quizzes or caught plagiarism on creative projects
red-handed in the past. In such cases, failing the course, suspension from school, or even expulsion are
all penalties that may be applied at the discretion of the Office of the Dean of Students. Academic
Dishonesty may ruin your grade, academic career, and can stain your reputation for decades to come.
Academic Dishonesty
“Academic dishonesty” or “scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism,
collusion, falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair
academic advantage to the student or the attempt to commit such an act. In AET 319, this includes but is
not limited to:
       1) Submitting all or part of someone else’s work as your own, without properly crediting
             your sources (this especially applies to creative projects)
       2) Sharing answers to quizzes or assignments with other students
       3) Using forbidden aids like internet searches on quizzes or theory assignments
                                                       2


AET 323D Course Syllabus
V.     Course Schedule
 Unit   Date                      Class Session              Assignments and Comments
         8/28   Introduction, Syllabus, Overview
          9/2   Labor Day Holiday: NO CLASS
          9/4   Step Sequencing Beats
          9/9   Playing Drums
         9/11   Playing Drums - Advanced
         9/16   Creating Drum Variations           DRUMS ASSIGNMENT
         9/18   Sound Design: Drums
         9/23   Playing Melodies
         9/25   Playing Chords
         9/30   Chromatic Note Mode
         10/2   Sounds Design: Melodic Parts
         10/7   Melodic Step Sequencer
         10/9   Not Mode and Step Sequencer
        10/14   32-Note Melodic Step Sequencer     MELODY ASSIGNMENT
        10/16   Sampling: Overview
        10/21   64-Pad Mode
        10/23   Sampling Classic Mode
        10/28   Sampling: One Shot Mode
        10/30   Sampling: Slicing Mode             SAMPLING ASSIGNMENT
         11/4   Session View
         11/6   Session View: Advanced
        11/11   Mixing
        11/13   Automation
        11/18   Sound Design
        11/20   Recording Audio; Routing
        11/27   NO CLASS/THANKSGIVING              ADVANCED SESSION ASSIGNMENT
         12/1   Side-Chaining
         12/4   Navigate and Browse
         12/9   Wrap-up
         TBA                                       FINAL CONCERT
                                                 3


AET 323D Course Syllabus
VI. Course Requirements
          1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                  (a) Attendance—and attentiveness—is essential and required. Attendance is facilitated
                      through the LAITS broadcast stream in Canvas and assessed by Instapoll and
                      discussions.
                  (b) If one must miss a class session and desires to ask for an excused absence, it is
                      the student’s responsibility to let the TA team know by email in advance of the
                      absence. We do not guarantee an excused absence will be granted if you notify us
                      only after missing a class session. It is the student’s responsibility to catch up with
                      material or class activities missed due to the absence—the TA team will not
                      necessarily remind the student of what needs to be made up from the class
                      session missed.
                  (c) Instapolls and Attendance can be excused, but other in-class activities—Quizzes and
                      Topical Discussions—must be made up or they will receive zeroes. There is a narrow
                      window of time after each missed in-class activity within which make-up submissions
                      will be accepted, so contact the TA Team ASAP after the missed class session (or
                      preferably, before) to receive instruction on how to make up the assignment.
                  Religious Holy Days
                  By UT Austin policy, you must notify the TA Team of your pending absence at least
                  fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
                  a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
                  religious holy day, we will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work
                  within a reasonable time after the absence. With advance notice, we are happy to
                  accommodate religious holy days.
VII. Other University Notices and Policies
 Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
 All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
 policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his
 or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular
 basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that
 certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked
 daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions
 for updating your e-mail address are available at
 http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not
ask questions related to a student’s condition or diagnosis when receiving an official
accommodation letter.)
   •    If you require accommodations on completing assignments and quizzes/exams, please bring your
        accommodation letter from SSD to Dr. Stamps during office hours as early in the semester as
        possible. We will be happy to provide accommodations as specified in the accommodation letter
        from SSD.
   •    Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
        (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper
        alternative text conversion, etc.).
                                                       4


AET 323D Course Syllabus
    •   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for
        field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on
        the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
    •   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
        (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
 Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
 provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
 Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
 Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
   permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course
   a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
   shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
                                                     5
