                                                                                Fall 2019
                                                                               Latina/o/x
                                                                              Spirituality
                                                                            MWF 12:00-
                                                                                   1:00pm
                                                                                 BUR 128
                                 Dr. Rachel González-Martin
                    Department of Mexican American& Latina/o Studies
                                     Office: 2.314 GWB
                            Contact: rvgonzal@austin.utexas.edu
                            Office Hours: Mondays 2:45-4:45pm
Course Description: This course introduces students to the religious and spiritual
practices of diverse Latina/o populations living in the United States. Students will work
with primary and secondary texts, to examine the diverse ways in which Latina/o
communities’ create spiritual meaning in their lives. It will examine the religious and
spiritual practices from the vantage point of transition and change as a way of
understanding larger aspects of cultural and social change within 21st century U.S.
Latina/o publics. It will expressly look at cultural productions from the vantage points of
gender and race politics, and incorporate the spiritual tradition of women, queer
communities, and various “othered” Latina/o identifying community members.
    By the end of the course, students will be able to:
        1. Identify major themes in the study of Latina/o spiritual practice in the US.
        2. Evaluate cultural studies and adjacent disciplinary texts to understand how
                studies of patterns of shared belief form strategies of self-hood in
                multicultural contexts.
        3. Critically, and creatively assess the value and purpose of various research and
                presentation methodologies in circulating knowledge in academic
                contexts.
                                               1


This course holds 3 Flags:
   • Cultural Diversity (content). This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in
       the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your
       familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
       should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
       assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S.
       cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
   • Writing (assignments). This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses
       are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline.
       In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete
       substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you
       improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more
       assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You
       should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
       written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of
       Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility,
       established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
            v Students will receive weekly feedback from the professor to help support
                 the refinement of their written work.
   • Independent Inquiry (research methods). This course carries the Independent
       Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you in the
       process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
       opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project
       related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
       grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own
       work.
Required Text:
   1. Gaston Espinosa and Mario T. Garcia, eds. Mexican American Religions:
                Spirituality, Activism, and Culture (2008)
   2. Solimar Otero and Toyin Falola, eds. Yemoja: Gender, Sexuality, and Creativity
                in the Latina/o and Afro-Atlantic Diasporas (2014)
   3. Joseph M. Murphy. Botánicas: Sacred Spaces of Healing and Devotion in Urban
                        America (2015).
   4. Desirée Martin. Borderlands Saints: Secular Sanctity in Chicano/a and Mexican
                Culture (2013)
*All other readings can be found on CANVAS.
                                               2


Classroom Expectations:
Students will…
         1) Arrive to class on time and prepared to contribute to class discussion.
         2) Complete all assigned readings before class.
         3) Communicate with instructor regarding absences, questions, problems, or
         concerns.
         4) Cultivate a respectful classroom environment.
Attendance Policy: Attendance is required. If an unplanned absence causes you to miss
an assignment or in-class quiz or test, you must bring in official documentation of your
absence (by a doctor, lawyer, civic-authority, etc.) to justify earning credit for work
submitted after the due date.
Classroom Engagement: Engagement is worth 20% of your course grade. Our classes
are fueled by both lecture and group discussion. It is vital that every student engages and
actively contributes in every class meeting. In order to do so successfully, you must do
the readings, and be prepared to discuss them. Students are responsible for checking their
email and class-based discussion threads before our class meetings.
Accommodations: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.
               http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/accommodations-and-services/
Academic Integrity: All students are responsible for reviewing and understanding the
University’s guidelines on academic dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/ or dismissal from the University. For further information about
what constitutes academic dishonesty on the UT campus visit:
                    http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
  UT Honor Code: As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the
                core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.
Assignments: Students will have a variety of writing and participatory assignments over
the course of the semester including:
Weekly Reading Responses (15%): These are 1-2-page reading reflections that students
question and comment upon a weekly reading assignment, while supporting their ideas
with textual evidence. Students will consult and utilize MLA style citation guidelines for
formal writing. Grades will be based on content as well as writing style.
                                               3


Research Journal (7%-included in Research Portfolio Grade): Students will be divided
into research groups to help plan and execute a chosen final research project and
presentation. Each week, students will write a 1-page summary of their group meeting
as it relates to the development of their personal research progress. These will be
submitted each Monday following a Friday, in-class group meeting. These entries will be
formally written, but need not cite external sources. These are places to share ideas and
questions about different level of the research process. Student will collate entries, and
submit them as part of the final research project.
Research Portfolios (35%): Students will plan and execute an original research project
thematically tied to the theory or content discussed in class. Students will work
collaboratively to decide on an original method of research presentation. Students will
have the opportunity to present their research results in creative (non-written) forms.
Finalized research portfolios will include:
         Research Proposal (8%): 1 page write up of Research Question and
                  Thesis/Hypothesis Statement
         [Research Journal: 7%]
         Annotated Bibliography (10%): 5-7-source bibliography of academic
theoretical              support.
         Research Methods Statement (Draft 5%, Final 20%) 3-5-page statement of
         chosen research methodology.
         Final Creative Submission (30%): Variable.
         Group Research Presentation (20%): Students will illustrate the productivity of
         having multiple approaches to one shared topic/theme.
Midterm Exam and Final Exam (15% x 2): Students will have two short in-class exams
that will selectively cover course reading and lecture.
Total Grade Rubric:
         Engagement: 20%
         Research Portfolio: 35%
         Reading Responses: 15%
         Exams: 30%
                                              4


                                    Class Schedule
Week 1:
Introduction to Course and Expectations
8/28: Syllabus
8/30 Discussion: Research Groups Introductions & Topic Assignments;
Project-STEP 1
Week 2: 9/2-9/6
Theoretical Approaches to Latino Spiritualties
Parkin. “Practice Theory.” In The Dictionary of Anthropology
Monday: Labor Day Holiday
Wednesday: Espinosa and Garcia. “Introduction” & “Chapter 2”
Friday: Discussion Project-STEP 2
Week 3: 9/9-9/13
Monday: Spirituality in Context(s)
Wednesday: Espinosa and Garcia. Chapter 5 & 7
Friday Discussion: Project-STEP 3; Reading Response #1
Week 4: 9/16-9/20
Monday: Indigenisma / Reclaiming Histories through Spiritual Practice
Wednesday: Espinosa and Garcia. Chapter 9; Broyles-González. “Indianizing
Catholicism: Chicana/India/Mexicana Indigenous Spiritual Practices in Our Image”
Friday Discussion: Peer-Review; Research Proposal Due
Week 5: 9/23-9/27
Monday: Institutional Hispanic Catholicism & Gender Roles
Wednesday: Espinosa and Garcia.“Chapter 11”; Sanchez-Korrol. “In Search of
Unconventional Women: Histories of Puerto Rican Women in Religious Vocations
Before Midcentury.”
Friday Discussion: Media; Reading Response #2
                                            5


Week 6: 9/30-10/4
Monday: Popular-Religion
Wednesday: Espinosa and Garcia. “Chapter 6” & “Chapter 13”; Otero and Falola.
“Chapter 2.”
Friday Discussion: Project -Step 4; Reading Response #3
Week 7: 10/7-10/11
Monday: Feminism & Spiritual Self Determination
Wednesday: Otero and Falola. “Chapter 5”; Lara. “Bruja Positionalities”; Flores. “ Why
Young Makers are Proudly Reclaiming Bruja Feminism”
<http://remezcla.com/features/culture/bruja-feminism-culture-makers-latinx/>
Friday Discussion: Media; Reading Response #4
Week 8: 10/14-10/18
Monday: Midterm Exam Review
Wednesday: Midterm
Friday: Research and Writing Day (No Class)
Week 9: 10/22-10/26
Monday: Spirituality and Art
Wednesday: Otero and Falola. “Chapter 6”; Espinosa and Garcia. Chapter 14.
Friday: Guest Lecture
Week 10: 10/28-11/1
Monday: Diasporas and Faith Systems
Wednesday: Otero and Falola. “Chapter 4 & 6.”
Friday: Step 5; Reading Response #5
                                            6


Week 11: 11/4-11/8
Monday: Healing in Diaspora
Wednesday: Murphy. Botánicas Introduction & Chapter 1, 2; Espinosa and Garcia.
Chapter 11.
Friday: Project- Step 6; Annotated Bibliography Due
Week 12: 11/11-11/15
Monday: Healers in Situ
Wednesday: Murphy. Botánicas. Chapter 3 and 5; Espinosa and Garcia. Chapter 11.
Friday Discussion: Media; Reading Response #7
Week 13: 11/19-22
Monday: Gender and Power
Wednesday: Otero and Faiola. “Chapter 1”; Espinosa and Garcia. Chapter 4 & 15.
Friday Discussion: Project-Step 7
Week 14: 11/25-11/29
 No Classes-Thanksgiving Break
Week 15: 12/2-12/6
Monday: Secular Saints/ Popular Power
Wednesday: Martin. Chapter 1, 4 & 5.
Friday: Final meeting with group.
Week 16
12/9
Monday: In-Class Group Presentations
Final Portfolio & Creative Submissions due on the last day of class.
                     Final Exam: December 12, 2019 9am-12noon
                                           7
