                                       S CREENING R ACE
                                    Radio-Television-Film 323C
                             Cross-Listed with AFR 372E and AMS 325
                                             Spring 2018
                                              Lectures:
                         Tuesdays and Thursdays 3:30-5pm in CMA 3.116
                                             Screenings:
                                   Tuesdays 5-7:30 in CMA 3.116
Professor: Dr. Jennifer McClearen, Dept. of Radio-Television-Film
Office hours: Mondays 3:45-4:45pm; Tuesdays and Thursdays 2:30-3:30
Office: CMA 6.128C
Email jennifer.mcclearen@utexas.edu
Twitter: @jmcclearen
Web: jennifermcclearen.com
Teaching Assistant: Rusty Hatchell, Ph.D. Student, RTF
Office hours: By appointment
Email: rustyhatchell@utexas.edu
Note: This syllabus is subject to revision! Please check Canvas and your email frequently for any
                             updates to readings, screenings, or class.
                                                                                                1


C O U RS E D E S C RI PT I O N :
RTF 323C, Screening Race is designed to provide students with the language and critical tools
to understand and discuss racial and ethnic representation and production issues in U.S. film
and entertainment television. We will survey the history and evolving representations of race
and ethnicity in the entertainment media and related topics of concern to media producers,
audiences, and scholars. While a variety of theoretical and methodological approaches will be
reviewed, critical and cultural studies approaches to film and television criticism will be
emphasized.
This course carries UT’s Cultural Diversity flag. It focuses on the representation of African
Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, and American Indians/Alaskan Natives in narrative film
and television, as well as on Middle Eastern/Arab, Jewish, and European American
representation and the construction of “whiteness.” In addition, intersections of class, gender,
sexual orientation, and citizenship with race and ethnicity in mediated representation will be
explored.
Some questions we’ll explore and answer through the course of the semester:
▪         How have representations of various ethnic and racial groups evolved in the U.S.
throughout film and television history? What is their significance in relation to social
history and hierarchies in the United States?
▪         How can we assess contemporary representations, particularly in light of the increasing
ethnic diversity of the U.S. audience and casting trends that emphasize ethnic and racial
ambiguity?
▪         What can screenwriters and media producers do to attempt to improve how
various groups are represented in film and television texts?
R E Q U IRE D T E X T S
All required texts are available for download on Canvas.
S C RE E N IN GS
The screenings in this class are required course material, like assigned reading in a literature
course. If you do have to miss a screening, be sure to watch what you’ve missed before the next
class.
A S S I GN ME N T S
All written assignments will be turned in on Canvas. I will provide additional details and
information on these assignments on Canvas as well.
I: Reading and Screening Pop Quizzes. (20% of final grade).
          Throughout the course I will administer pop quizzes on the readings, screenings, and
          lectures to test your basic knowledge of course content. I will not necessarily warn you
          that a pop quiz is coming the next class day and you should be ready to take the quiz on
                                                                                                   2


          any day. The quiz questions will consist of content since the last quiz. Your lowest quiz
          grade will be dropped.
II. Engagement Activities. (10% of final grade).
          Engagement activities are opportunities for you to engage course content more deeply
          and share your insights in writing or with your classmates. These may be short reflective
          writing exercises, pair work, or group activities. Your two lowest engagement activities
          scores will be dropped.
III: Weekly Discussion Posts. (25% of final grade).
          Each Friday you will submit a 300-word discussion post reflecting on some aspect of
          race and media covered that week and respond to two other students’ posts. Each post
          will cite at least one reading and one screening or topic discussed in class. Your two
          lowest discussion post scores will be dropped. Please see additional assignment
          instructions on Canvas.
IV: Final Group Project Part 1: Photo Essay (20% of final grade)
          You will analyze found images of a race in the media topic that interests you using
          concepts, theories, and discussions from this course. This activity will be done in groups
          of two. The photo essay that is essentially a first draft of your final video essay (see
          description below). You will select 8-10 images that help you argue a major thesis about
          some aspect of race in the media. You’ll also provide written descriptions of the images
          that includes an introduction, body, and conclusion. The photo essay is due on
          November 19. More information on this assignment is on the Canvas assignment page.
V: Final Group Project Part 2: Video Essay (25% of final grade)
          Your final project for this class will be a 5-minute video essay and will be completed with
          the same partner and on the same topic as your photo essay. A video essay is similar to
          a final paper in that you have to use analysis skills to make a claim about a particular
          media artifact. The assignment requires you to incorporate photos, video, and your own
          voices into the video essay. This assignment will be completed in pairs and I have
          reserved some class time for you to work with your partners. You do not need to have
          experience in video essays to do this assignment well and there will be dedicated class
          time for learning video editing/how to do video essays. The assignment is divided into
          three parts.
                       a)    5-minute video essay
                       b)    Feedback on Student Videos
                       c)    Self and Peer Evaluation of Group Assignment
                       More information on this assignment is on the Canvas assignment page.
C L A S S P O L IC I E S
Syllabus Revisions: Changes to the course schedule and assignments may occur due to
unforeseen circumstances; please make sure you check Canvas frequently for updates.
                                                                                                    3


Grading system: This class will be graded using the following letter grade system: A (94%+), A-
(90-93%), B+ (87-89%), B (84-86%), B- (80-83%), C+ (77-79%), C (74-76%), D (60-69%), and F
(less than 60%). Final grades that are .5 and above will be rounded up.
Access and Accommodation: Your experience in this class is important to me, and it is the
policy and practice of the University of Texas to create inclusive and accessible learning
environments consistent with federal and state law. Please inform me early in the first weeks of
the semester if you have a learning difference or other issue that could affect your performance
in this class. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Inclusion: Consideration for each other is very important in this classroom. This includes being
respectful of diversity of all kinds: race, ethnicity, sex and gender, sexual orientation,
ability/disability, among others. The diversities that each of us bring to the classroom allow us
to be exposed to other points of view. Please show consideration for each other, and be open
to listening to new perspectives and ideas. If you have any concerns about any of these issues
within this class, please let me know as soon as possible. Conversations will remain confidential
unless you request otherwise. Alternatively, students seeking support around these issues can
find more information and resources
Attendance: Each week we will have pair and group activities that will help you engage more
deeply with course content. Although attendance is not specifically required, active
engagement is a portion of your grade and a major factor in your learning. If you must be
absent, please check with a classmate to find out what you have missed.
Late assignments. For purposes of fairness for all students, you will be given a reasonable
amount of time to complete all assignments. Late assignments will be subject to a grade
penalty.
Digital Devices. Computers and tablets are allowed (and encouraged) in in our media
classroom, but please only use them for class related work! People with laptops should sit in
the middle or back of the room to avoid distracting other students. Cell phones should be on
silent and put away during class.
Mutual Respect: In lecture and discussion sections we will be talking about such loaded topics
as race and racism in the media industries and American society. In this endeavor, one of my
main responsibilities is to ensure that the classroom is a space in which everyone can feel safe,
speak up, and feel respected. I don’t expect that we’ll always agree or that conversations will
always be comfortable for everyone. In fact, I encourage discussion and debate in class. What I
do ask, is that you engage with me and with each other with attentive listening and mutual
respect. If discomfort ever gives way to fearing for one’s emotional or physical safety, then
please address these concerns with me immediately.
                                                                                                  4


Academic Honesty: Work turned in by a student should be solely her/his own work. Any time
an outside source is utilized in the writing of a student paper and not properly acknowledged,
this is a form of plagiarism. Plagiarism, cheating on an assignment or exam, or other academic
misconduct will not be tolerated and results in severe sanctions, which can include failing the
course or expulsion from the university. Please don’t put yourself in this position. For more
information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Writing Support: I encourage you to seek writing assistance from the Moody College Writing
Support Program or the University Writing Center. The Moody College Writing Support
Program, located at BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students
seeking to improve their writing in all fields of communication, including film and television
studies. Students may book half-hour appointments at
moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting or drop in during all stages of the writing process.
The University Writing Center, located in Learning Commons, PCL 2.330, also offers
individualized assistance to students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no
charge, and students may come in on a drop in or appointment basis. They are at 512-471-
6222 and uwc.utexas.edu.
Counseling Support: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything
else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
         ▪ Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th
             floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
         ▪ CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
         CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
         ▪ M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is
             unavailable)
         FREE Services at CMHC:
         ▪ Brief assessments and referral services
         ▪ Mental health & wellness articles -cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
         ▪ MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
         ▪ Classes, workshops, & groups -cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CLASS SCHEDULE
(Please refer to Canvas frequently for revisions to the schedule)
Week 1: Introductions and Foundations
         Tuesday Jan. 22 Introductions to the Course
                 Reading: The course syllabus (Canvas)
                                                                                                5


      Screening:
              Film: Jordan Peele (2017). “Get Out.” (153 mins)
      Thursday Jan. 24: What is Race? What is Representation?
              Reading: Omi and Winant, “Racial Formations;”
              Reading: Sara Boboltz and Kimberly Yam. “Why On-Screen Representation
              Actually Matters”
Week 2: Representations of Blackness/Whiteness
      Tuesday Jan. 29: Discuss “Get Out” and Early Hollywood Film
              Reading: Lanre Bakare, “Get Out: The Film that Dares to Reveal the Horror of
              Liberal Racism in America”
              Reading: Donald Bogle, “Black Beginnings”
              Screening:
                      Film: John Stahl (1934). “Imitation of Life” (111 min.)
      Thursday Jan. 31: Constructions of Blackness and Whiteness
              Reading 1: Richard Dyer. “The Matter of Whiteness”
              Reading 2: David Pilgrim, “The Tragic Mulatto Myth”
      Friday Feb. 1: Discussion Post 1 Due
Week 3: Intersectionality
      Tuesday Feb. 5: What is intersectionality
              Reading: Thinking Race Blog (2017). “We’re All Just Different: How
              Intersectionality is Being Colonized by White People” (Canvas)
              Reading: bell hooks, “Is Paris Burning?”
              Screening:
              Film: Jeannie Livingston (1990). “Paris is Burning” (78 min.)
              TV Episode: Ryan Murphy. (2018). “Pose” S1E1
      Thursday Feb. 7: Intersections of Race and Gender (Guest Lecture: Ralina Joseph in in
              BMC 5.208 from 3:30-5:30)
              Reading: Ralina Joseph (2018). “Because Often Its Both:” Racism, Sexism, and
              Oprah’s Handbags.
      Friday Feb. 8: Discussion Post 2 Due
Week 4: Stereotyping
      Tuesday Feb. 12 : Stereotype Part 1
              Reading: Charles Ramírez Berg, “Stereotypes in Film” pp. 38-42 only;
              Reading: Stuart Hall, excerpt, “Spectacle of the Other,” p. 225-233, 239-253.
              Screening
                                                                                            6


              Film: Miguel Pickler & Chyng Sun (2012). “Latinos Beyond the Reel: Challenging
              Racial Stereotypes” (84 Minutes)
      Thursday Feb. 14: Stereotypes Part 2
              Reading: Karin Wilkins, “Fearing the ‘Other’ in the Name of Security.”
      Friday Feb. 15 Discussion Post 3 Due
Week 5: Complexities of Latina/o (Under-)Representation
      Tuesday Feb. 19: Histories of Latina/o Representation and U.S. Racial Riddles
              Reading 1: Angharad Valdivia, excerpt, Introduction, Latina/os and the
              Media (pp. 4-14)
              Reading 2 Robert S. Lichter and Daniel R. Amundson. “Distorted Reality:
              Hispanic Characters in TV Entertainment.”
              Screenings
                      TV Episode: Jane the Virgin. S1E1
                      Film: Cristina Ibarra (2014) Las Marthas. (60min)
      Thursday Feb. 21: Contemporary Latinidad
              Reading: Jaime S. Gomez, “Telenovelas from the Rio Grande to the Andes”
              (Cristina Ibarra sections)
              Canvas Reading: 6 Ways Jane the Virgin is Destroying Latino Stereotypes
              (Canvas)
      Friday Feb. 22: Discussion Post 4 Due
Week 6: Native American Representation
      Tuesday Feb. 26 The Hollywood Western
              Reading 1: John O’Connor, “The White Man’s Indian;”
              Reading 2: Gary Edgerton and Kathy Merlock Jackson, “Redesigning Pocahontas”
              Screening
                      Film: Wind River (2017)
      Thursday Feb. 28 Contemporary Native Representation
              Reading: TBD
      Friday March 1: Discussion Post 5 Due
Week 7: Asian and Pacific Islands American (APIA) Representation
      Tuesday March 5: Histories of Asian American and Pacific Islander Representation
              Reading: Doobo Shim, “From Yellow Peril Through Model Minority…”
              Reading: Chong-suk Han. “’Sexy Like a Girl and Horny Like a Boy’: Contemporary
              Gay "Western" Narratives About Gay Men”
                                                                                             7


             Screening:
                     Film: Crazy, Rich, Asians
      Thursday March 7: TBD
      Friday March 8: Discussion Post 6 Due
Week 8: Mixed Race Representation
      Tuesday March 12: Evolving Taboos and Images
             Reading: Ralina Joseph. (2014). Recursive Racial Transformation: Selling the
             Exceptional Multiracial on America's Next Top Model
             Reading: Sarah E. Gaither. I Study Biracial Identity in America. Here’s Why
             Meghan Markle is a Big Deal
             Screening: TBD
      Thursday March 14: “Racelessness”
             Reading: Mary Beltrán, “The New Hollywood Racelessness: Only the Fast,
             Furious (and Multi-racial) Will Survive”
      Friday March 15: No Discussion Post due (Enjoy Spring Break!)
Week 9: Spring Break
Week 10: Representing Whiteness
      Tuesday March 26: Classed Whiteness
             Reading: Tasha Rennels. (2015). “Here Comes Honey Boo Boo: A Cautionary Tale
             Staring White Working-Class People.”
             Screening:
             Film: Deepa Kumar (2017): “Constructing the Terrorist Threat: Islamophobia,
             The Media, and the War on Terror.”
             TV Episode: Shameless. S1 E1
      Thursday March 28: Representing Arab and Jewish Americans
             Reading 1: Peter Baumaunt: Homeland is a Brilliant Drama. But Does it Present a
             Crude Image of Muslims (Canvas)
             Reading 2: Joyce Antler, “Jewish Women on Television: Too Jewish or Not
             Enough?”
      Friday March 29: Discussion Post 7 Due
Week 11: Photo Essays: Reading Strategies
      Tuesday April 2: Photo Essays
             Reading: Photo Essay Assignment description
                                                                                            8


              Screening
              none
      Thursday April 4: Group Work on Photo Essays
      Friday, April 5: Photo Essay Due
Week 12: Resistance
      Tuesday April 9: Coding Strategies
              Reading: Stuart Hall, excerpt from “Spectacle of the Other” (pp. 269-275)
              Screening
              Film: Ryan Coogler (2018). Black Panther.
      Thursday April 11: Media Production
              Reading: Reading: Clarisse Loughrey. “Black Panther Brings Afrofuturism to
              the Mainstream.”
      Friday, April 12: Discussion Post 8 Due
Week 13: Diversity Debates
      Tuesday April 16 Peer Feedback on Photo Essays (Engagement Activity)
              Reading: none
      Thursday April 18: Diversity Debates
              Reading 1: Emily Nussbaum, “Primary Colors: Shonda Rhimes, Scandal, and the
              Diversity Debate;”
              Reading 2: Alfred Martin. “Pose(r): Ryan Murphy, Trans and Queer of Color
              Labor, and the Politics of Representation
              Reading: Mary Beltrán, “Meaningful Diversity”
      Friday, April 19: Discussion Post 9 Due (last discussion post!)
Week 14: Going Public
      Tuesday April 23: Documentary for Public Dialogue on Race
              Reading: TBD Canvas
      Thursday April 25: Video Essays
              Reading: Final Project Description on Canvas
Week 15: Group Work
      Tuesday April 30: Group Work on Final Project
      Thursday May 2: Group Work on Final Project
Week 16: Screening Final Projects
                                                                                          9


Monday May 6: Final Project Due at 11:59pm
Tuesday May 7: Screening Final Projects
Thursday May 9: Screening Final Projects
      Due: Feedback on Video essays due by 11:59pm
      Due: Partner and Self Evaluations due by 11:59pm
                                                       10
