                      HISTORY OF RELIGION IN THE UNITED STATES
                               RS316U (42935)/HIS317L (38825)/AMS315 (31045)
                                                     Spring 2019
                                              Professor Jennifer Graber
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This class explores how religious people and communities in the United States affirm their faith, understand
the ethical life, engage in ritual acts, and organize their communal relations. It looks at how religious practice
has developed in the United States through a historically organized survey of religious groups. We begin
with the continent’s original diversity in its hundreds of Native American traditions. Moving to the colonial
era and continuing through the contemporary moment, we explore immigrant streams that have brought
European Jews, Catholics, and Protestants, along with practitioners of Islam, Buddhism, and Hinduism
from Asia and Africa to North America. We also investigate movements birthed in the United States,
including Mormonism, Pentecostalism, and the Nation of Islam. Through this survey, we consider a variety
of religious communities, the changing state of the population’s religious composition, as well as how
Americans have navigated those shifts using concepts such as disestablishment, diversity, and pluralism.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
Students will:
o Learn about the academic study of religion
o Gain knowledge about the history of religions in the U.S.
o Be exposed to diverse religious traditions and multiple perspectives on those traditions
o Think critically and construct arguments about the role of religions in American culture
o Learn about scholarly resources for answering their questions about religions
REQUIRED BOOKS AND OTHER READINGS
o Albanese, America: Religion and Religions (5th ed.)      o Course pack (available at UT Coop)
COURSE REQUIREMENTS & EVALUATION
o Engagement – 15 points                                   o   Quiz #2 – 10 points
o Mapping assignment – 10 points                           o   Quiz #3 – 10 points
o Artifact assignment – 15 points                          o   Quiz #4 – 10 points
o Quiz #1 – 15 points                                      o   Final essay – 15 points
A = 93-100                               B- = 80-82                           D+ = 68-69
A- = 90-92                               C+ = 78-79                           D = 63-67
B+ = 88-89                               C = 73-77                            D- = 60-62
B = 83-87                                C- = 70-72                           F = below 60


CLASS SCHEDULE
January 23-25
W – What do you know about religions in the United States?
F – Tools for the academic study of religions
        PREPARATION: Albanese, introduction & register for Squarecap
January 28-February 1
M – Introducing key terms: diversity and pluralism
        PREPARATION: Hutchison, “Religious Pluralism as a Work in Progress” (CP)
Unit 1: The Pre-Colonial Continent & Religion in the Colonial Era
W – At the heart of North America
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 1 (pages 21-26) and Pauketat, “Mother of Native North
         America” (CP)
F – On the cusp of colonization
        PREPARATION: Bring two questions you have about Native American life prior to 1492
February 4-8
M– Jewish arrivals in North America
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 2 (page 42 through “The Moral Law” on page 54)
W – Catholic arrivals in North America
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 3 (pages 62 through “Paraliturgical Devotions on page 68)
F – Protestant arrivals in North America
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 4 (pages 85 through “Pluralist New York” on page 95)
        Mapping assignment due at 5:00pm
February 11-15
M – Religion in the English colonies
        PREPARATION: Butler, “The Crisis of Christian Practice” (CP)
W– Indigenous-colonist contact
        PREPARATION: Richter, “War and Culture” (CP)
F – Wrap up, historiography, and quiz prep
February 18-22
M – QUIZ #1
Unit 2: Immigrant arrivals and new religions
W – Protestant transformations
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 5
F – African American Protestants
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 6 (pages 138 through “Black Church in Freedom” on page
        146) and Raboteau, “African Americans, Exodus, and the New American Israel” (CP)
February 25-March 1
M – Latter-day Saints
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 7
W – Latter-day Saints continued
        PREPARATION: Rohrer, “An American Exodus: Mormons and the Westward Trek” (CP)


F – Catholic immigration and growth
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 3 (pages 71 through “Pluralism and Americanization” on page
         78)
March 4-8
M – Native and American contacts in the period of expansion
        PREPARATION: Baigell, “Territory, Race, Religion” (CP)
W – African American religion in Civil War and Reconstruction
        PREPARATION: Harvey, “Redemption: Religion, Race, and Reconstruction in the South, 1861-
        1900” (CP)
F – Wrap up, historiography, and quiz prep
March 11-15
M – QUIZ #2
Unit 3: Immigrant arrivals and new religions
W – Protestant transformations
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 4 (pages 103 to “Protestant Liberalism” on page 106) and
        Balmer, “Evangelicals: Twentieth Century” (pages 804-807) (CP)
F – Emergence of Pentecostalism
        PREPARATION: Alexander, “Pentecostals” (CP)
March 18-22 – SPRING BREAK
March 25-29
M – Artifact workshop
        Artifact paper due 9:00am
W – Jewish immigration and transformation
        PREPARATION: Goldstein, “The Great Wave: Eastern European Jewish Migration to the United
        States” (CP)
F – European Catholic immigration and transformation
        PREPARATION: Orsi, “The Days and Nights of the Festa” (CP)
April 1-5
M – Latino Catholic immigration
        PREPARATION: Matovina, “Companion in Exile: Guadalupan Devotion at San Fernando
        Cathedral” (CP)
W – Chinese and Japanese Buddhist immigration
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 7 (pages 207 through “Nearer East” on page 209 and page 227
        through “East is West” on page 234)
F – African American new religious movements
        PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 6 (pages 148 through “In Overview” on page 155) and
        Johnson, “The Rise of the Black Ethnics” (CP)
April 8-12
M – “Tri-faith” America
        PREPARATION: “Religion and the Cold War” (CP)
W – Wrap up, historiography, and quiz prep


F – QUIZ #3
April 15-19
Unit 4: Immigrant arrivals and new religions
M – African American religions in 1960s
         PREPARATION: Chappell, “Religious Revivalism in the Civil Rights Movement” (CP)
W – Catholic transformations
         PREPARATION: Reading TBA
F – Hindu immigrants after 1965
         PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 9 (pages 221-227)
April 22-26
M – Hindu transformations
         PREPARATION: Eck, “Seeing the Divine Image in America” (CP)
W – Muslim immigrants after 1965
         PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 9 (pages 214-221)
F – Protestant transformations
         PREPARATION: Albanese, chapter 10 (pages 237-238, 247-259)
April 29-May 3
M – Muslim transformations
         PREPARATION: Yazbeck-Haddad, “The Post-9/11 ‘Hijab’ as Icon” (CP)
W – Wrap up, historiography, and quiz prep
F – QUIZ #4
May 6-10
M – You choose the lecture!!
W – In-class work on final essay
F – What do you know about religions in the United States?
         Final essays due at 9:00am
Classroom policies
Laptop policy: As a rule, laptops and phones are not allowed in class. Myriad studies have found
that students retain lecture and discussion information when taking notes by hand. There are some
in-class activities that will involve laptops and phones. During those times, you are welcome to use
yours. Otherwise, keep them out of reach and out of sight.
If you have a documented disability related to note taking and laptops, please let me know about
your need for an accommodation to this policy.
Engagement: Part of your course grade is earned by your engagement with class. You earn
engagement credit by attending class (as registered through Squarecap), preparing for and
participating in class, and a variety of other activities listed below.
Engagement grades in the range of 12-15 points = no more than two absences, answering most reading
questions correctly, answering most polling questions, contributing to class discussion, and engaging in three


or more of the following activities: visiting the writing center, visiting office hours with professor or TA,
attending study sessions for quizzes, and attending a talk on campus related to class material.
Engagement grades in the range of 9-11.5 points = no more than four absences, answering some reading
questions correctly, answering most polling questions, and engaging in at least two of the following
activities: visiting the writing center, visiting office hours with professor or TA, attending study sessions for
quizzes, and attending a talk on campus related to class material.
Engagement grades in the range of 6-8.5 points = no more than six absences, answering some reading
questions correctly, answering some polling questions, and engaging in at one of the following activities:
visiting the writing center, visiting office hours with professor or TA, attending study sessions for quizzes,
and attending a talk on campus related to class material.
Engagement grades in the range of 3-5.5 points = no more than eight absences, answering a few reading
questions correctly, answering some polling questions.
Engagement grade under 3 points = more than eight absences, answering very few reading questions
correctly, answering few polling questions.
Attendance: Students are responsible to sign in during the beginning of the class period. If you miss
a class because of official UT activities, you can submit a 2-page (double-spaced) report on the
reading prior to class in order to receive engagement credit for that session. If you have a situation
or illness that will keep you from two or more classes, see me to arrange make alternative
arrangements.
When you are absent, you are responsible for the assigned reading, as well as for getting class notes
from another student.
Students taking the class pass/fail must attend at least half of the class sessions in order to pass the
class.
Assignments and deadlines: Late assignments will be docked 5% if submitted on the same day
they are due and 10% more for each subsequent day. Because the Canvas folder for uploading
assignments closes at the deadline, submit your late assignments via email to
jgraber@austin.utexas.edu.
Communication: The best way to reach me is to stop by my office during office hours or to send
me an email. I check email between 8:00am and 3:00pm on weekdays. Do not expect a quick
response to messages sent outside those times. If you are struggling in class, come by to see me.
Evaluation of written work:
• Work in the A range involves excellent critical analysis; thoughtful reflection; sophisticated and
     creative use of evidence, and clear writing.
• Work in the B range involves good to very good analysis and reflection, solid use of evidence, and
     writing that is solid, although not spectacular.


•    Work in the C range involves satisfactory analysis, although mostly summary, an attempt at analysis,
     but incomplete or incoherent, several errors of grammar and style that makes the paper difficult to
     understand.
•    Work in the D range is unsatisfactory, may not address the question/issue in a meaningful way, may
     offer no analysis, and/or contains several errors of grammar and style.
•    Work given an F fails to meet minimum requirements.
University Policies
Religious holy days: A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in
advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence.
Students with Disabilities: Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may
require to accommodate a disability-related need. You may find out more information on the
Services for Students with Disabilities website: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/ and/or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-register-with-ssd/
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please
visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
Work submitted on Canvas is reviewed by Turniitin, a service that checks for plagiarism from
sources external and internal to UT.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students: All students should be familiar with the
University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the
University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail
on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. The complete text of this policy and
instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
University of Texas Honor Code: “As A Student Of The University Of Texas At Austin, I Shall
Abide By The Core Values Of The University And Uphold Academic Integrity.”
