                           Cultural Heritage on Display:
  Fairs, Festivals, and Museum Exhibitions in the American Public Sphere
                   The University of Texas at Austin, Spring 2020
                             Anthropology 325L (31705)
                                 MWF 9:00-10:00am
                              WCP (formerly SAC) 4.118
Instructor: Dr. Suzanne Seriff
Office: WCP (formerly SAC) 4.126 (24rd and Speedway)
Office Hours: M 10-11am; W 11-12AM or by appointment
Phone: 512 471-0816
sseriff@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description:
        This course is designed to take you behind the scenes in the public
construction, negotiation, contestation and display of “American culture” by
focusing on a number of cultural heritage sites in the public sphere. In particular,
the course will examine fairs, festivals, theme parks, history sites, and museum
exhibitions as contested sites of heritage production in American history—
focusing especially on those moments when defining and displaying an image of
the “true American” becomes an active—if contested— agent in the process of
nation building and ideological construction. We will focus closely on the
histories and agencies of specific “exhibitionary complexes,” paying close
attention to what one critic calls ‘the problematic relationship of their objects to
the instruments of their display.” (Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett). Such sites
might include museum, world’s fairs, festivals, theme parks, confederate
monument sites, college campuses, and more. Students will have the opportunity
to conduct original research and participate directly in confronting and critiquing a
contested cultural heritage site through a proposed museum exhibition, art
installation, or public experience.
 Readings and Requirements
The class format will be structured around discussions, in-class activities, out of
class fieldwork, and lectures. In-class discussions, weekly discussion blogs
based on the readings, three written assignments and a final group project are
required for this class.
Required Textbooks:


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                            2
Seriff Spring 2020
     •   Thatcher Freund, Objects of Desire: The Life of Antiques and Those Who
         Pursue Them. (Reproduced University Co-op Packet) (or check online for
         used copies)
     •   Weekly book chapters and articles will be uploaded on Canvas under
         “Files.” You will be responsible for reading all articles for the week before
         our Monday class, unless otherwise instructed.
Course Requirements and Grading:
Success in this course involves using both the concepts and the tools of the
cultural researcher. Thus, you will be asked to do certain things as well as
display certain knowledge. There will be a variety of different types of
assignments and opportunities to tailor the assignments to your own interests. All
written assignments should be double-spaced, 12 point font, typed, and stapled.
A Note about Due Dates and Academic Integrity
      Academic life places all of us under demanding time constraints. Please
mark your calendar with due dates for the assignments and begin working on
these projects early in the semester. I will not accept assignments that are
turned in late or give incompletes unless your work was delayed due to a
religious observance, a death in the family, or a serious illness just prior to the
due date. If this is the case, I will ask you for written verification from your doctor
or from a family member.
Grading:
1. ESSAYS: (40%)
 Three short (5 page) papers based on readings, in-class materials, and student-
initiated research. I will hand out specific project assignments at least two weeks
in advance of each due date. The first assignment is an “object biography” of a
personal heritage object of significance to your identify and family. The second
assignment requires interviewing a collector and analyzing the collection and the
collector’s story. The third assignment is an analysis of a contested cultural
heritage site of your choice. Please follow the instructions for the projects
carefully. No credit will be given for projects that are handed in late without prior
approval from the instructor. The first writing project will be worth 10% of your
grade; the second and third will each be worth 15% of your grade.
2. DISCUSSION BLOG (20%)
Students will be required to respond to a weekly prompt on our Canvas
discussion board and keep up with it each week. There will be a total of 10
blogs—one for most weeks and each entry should be a full typewritten page:
1)   the entry will be based on a written prompt from the instructor which will be
     posted each week (for the next week). Some of the prompts are listed in your


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                          3
Seriff Spring 2020
    syllabus as well, but be sure to check on the discussion board site which will
    have the most up-to-date blog prompt for that week-which may be different
    from that which is in the syllabus.
2) in most cases, students will respond to the posted blog by 9pm, Sunday
evening before our Monday morning class.
3) The blog will be based on the readings for the upcoming week, in most cases.
You should expect to have read, and comment on, each of the readings in your
blog. So, if your blog is due on a Sunday night at 9, the topic of the blog will
usually be taken up in class the next day, Monday, and will include the readings
for the upcoming week. In other words, the blogs are a way to ensure that you
come to class on Monday morning prepared to discuss the readings and topic for
that week.
4) Each blog entry will be worth two points, for a maximum of 20 points. Students
will receive one point for turning the blog in on time and addressing the posted
question. Students will get the maximum 2 points by demonstrating a command
of all of the readings, addressing each aspect of the prompt, and showing insight
and effort in your response to the prompt.
No points if your entry is late, skipped, or grossly incomplete.
3. FINAL PROJECT (25%):
You will work in groups of 4-5 for your final project which will critically explore a
contested heritage site/sites on UT’s campus or its surroundings through a
contemporary museological, performative, or representational lens. Topics (and
mode of presentation) must be selected in consultation with (and prior approval
from) the professor.
Each student will be responsible for a written proposal, in the form of a 5-6 page
grant proposal, addressing each of the key components of the project (10%) and
including a separate annotated bibliography.
In addition, each group will present their project to the class. The group
presentation will take the form of a “pitch” for a proposed public presentation or
experience. The pitch might include a physical model for an exhibition/public
experience, or a trailer for a documentary, or a pop up art installation or a walking
tour/public dialogue (10%).
Finally, each student will submit a two page, written, final reflection piece to
complete this assignment. (5%)
Our final group project “pitches” will be presented to the class during our last
week of classes. Attendance is mandatory.
Note: There will be no final exam during final exam period.
4. IN CLASS ATTENDANCE and PARTICIPATION (15%):


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                                4
Seriff Spring 2020
Attendance will be taken each week. You will be allowed one missed class with
no penalty. After that, each unexcused missed class will count 1 point off.
Attendance will be 10% of your final grade.
Active participation in class seminar-style discussions will constitute 5% of your
final grade. If you contribute regularly to class discussion you will receive 4
points. If your contributions are consistently insightful and high quality, you will
receive the full five points. If you only contribute to class discussion when called
on, but are otherwise attentive to the discussion and up on the readings, you will
receive 3 of the total 5 points. If you come to class, participate in small group
discussion, but do not contribute at all to full class discussion, you will receive 1-2
points. If you fall asleep in class more than once, or consistently come to class
late, you will receive 0-1 points for participation. No participation points will be
given if you have more than 10 absences.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Honesty:
Students are required to do their own research and work. All students are
responsible for knowing the standards of academic honesty:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php. Plagiarism, using research
without citations or using a created production without crediting a source, is
forbidden; will result in a grade of zero for the assignment or for the class, or
even expulsion from the university, depending on the severity of the plagiarism.
This applies to any non-credited websites as well as written sources.
Students with Disabilities:
Students with disabilities may arrange for necessary accommodations for the
course by contacting the office of Services for Students with Disabilities, within
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement. This office can make
arrangements in coordination with the instructor, given proper advance
notice. For more information, as well as the relevant online forms, call SSD at
471-6259 or look them up at: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Classroom Etiquette:
Please respect the class, the instructor and your fellow students by avoiding
disruptive behaviors. Absolutely no cell phones are allowed in class. Computers
only allowed in lecture with prior permission.
Title IX:
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB
212), the professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further investigation
any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating
violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law
and university policy also requires reporting incidents of sex- and gender-based
discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title IX incidents). This


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                            5
Seriff Spring 2020
means we cannot keep confidential information about any such incidents that you share
with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality, please
contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT
Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly
urge you make use of these services for any needed support and that you report any Title
IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
Use of Canvas and Electronic Reserves
The course has a Canvas website which will be demonstrated during the first
week of the class. It includes an electronic grade book and access to required
readings. As noted in the below schedule of assignments, most readings will be
available through Canvas under FILES.
Announcements concerning the course will also be made on Canvas. Students in
the class are responsible for checking this website regularly. All e-mails to the
professor should be done through Canvas, or to my UT email:
sseriff@austin.utexas.edu.
                           Schedule of Topics and Readings
Week One (1/22-1/24) --Orientation: Contested Representations of the Self:
Personal History on Display
       Course introduction: identifying expectations and goals for this course;
       exploring the concept of cultural heritage, contested heritage, material
       culture, representation and display. Introduction to the idea of “critical
       reading” of a “text”—including objects, performances, events, displays, as
       well as printed media.
       Exercise 1. Introductions: I Show and You Tell: Representing the Self to
       Others: My cultural heritage on display.
       Exercise 2. Introductions: You Show and I Tell: Representing Others;
       Contested truths
       Read for Friday, 1/24: (please access your readings from Canvas, in a
       folder for Week One, under “Files” for our course).
       David Lowenthal. The Heritage Crusade. Ch. 2: Personal Legacies.
       Tim O’Brien. “The Things They Carried” in The Things They Carried.
Discussion Blog Topic Prompt #1: Personal Legacies
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, January 26, to be posted on our Canvas
discussion board:


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                         6
Seriff Spring 2020
Personal Reflection: Describe an object of particular importance/significance to
you that you consider an “heirloom” from your family. It could be something that
we would normally associate as an heirloom like a valuable piece of jewelry or
furniture or religious object passed down to you from your ancestors. Or it could
be a family recipe, a vacation cabin, a favorite restaurant, a holiday
decoration/ornament, a kitchen table, or other item of material culture that is filled
with memories for you of your family traditions, and expresses an aspect of who
you are or where you come from or what you believe and value. After you have
reflected on why this object is important to you, reflect on whether there is any
aspect of the object’s story that might be “contested” by another member of your
family, or significant others.
 Assignment for next week, Jan 27-Jan 31:
Select an object, or an image of an object from a magazine or other mass media
form that you feel is "representative" of, or a symbol of, the United States, and
bring it in for class on Monday, 1/27. This could be an advertisement, a product,
a coin, a cartoon, an image of a national symbol, a piece of cloth—a mass-
produced object, or an image that sums up or illustrates what the USA "stands
for" to you. You will be asked to explore what, if anything, might be “contested”
about this image and the significance it has for you, and by whom? Please do not
select an artist’s rendition of an object or symbol, or draw, copy, or “create” an
object or collage yourself. I want you to find/select an image or object that is
mass produced or mass circulated and already in existence.
Week Two (1/27-1/31) The Changing Meaning of Things: Challenging The
Presence/Presentation of the Past in our Everyday Lives
        Exercise: Class presentation and discussion of "representative" icons of
        American culture:
        How objects change in meaning over time and in different contexts
        Read for this Week:
        David Lowenthal. Collective Legacies. Ch. 3.
        Marita Sturken and Lisa Cartwright: Ch. 1: Images, Power and Politics
        pgs. 22-47, In Practices of Looking: An Introduction to Visual Culture.
        Oxford: 2009.
Discussion Blog Prompt: #2: The Changing Meaning of Things.
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, Feb 2, to be posted on our Canvas discussion
board.
In our readings, Sturken and Cartwright note, "to interpret images is to examine
the assumptions that we and others bring to them at different times and in
different places and to decode the visual language that they ‘speak.’” (46). They


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                       7
Seriff Spring 2020
go on to say, "All images contain layers of meaning that include their formal
aspects, their cultural and socio-historical references, the ways they make
reference to the images that precede and surround them, and the contexts in
which they are displayed."
Your task in this assignment is to take the image or object you selected to
"represent America to you" and analyze the different and sometimes
controversial "layers of meaning" encoded in it—its formal aspects, its iconic
referent, its socio-historical references, and the ways in which the meaning of the
object or image has changed over time, with different communities, and/or in
different contexts of history, performance, or use in American popular culture. Be
sure to adequately describe what it is you brought in--whether it is an object, an
object that is a replica, photograph of an object or thing, a digitized image of a
photograph of an object or thing, a cartoon depicting the object or thing, etc.
Also, of course, the object may have many different meanings to many different
people based on its context of consumption.
First Writing Assignment: Object Biography: Due Date: 2/14/20
Assignment for next week:
Part I. Bring to class on Monday (Feb 3) an example of an object (could be an
image of an object taken from a magazine or advertisement) that is presented as
if it is a model of “good taste” according to the ideas of connoisseurship, and an
example of an object that would be considered by a connoisseur to be “bad
taste.” Sometimes this has to do with marketing, packaging, branding, or other
forms of presentation; sometimes it is more about the thing itself—a diamond, a
haircut, a fur coat, etc.
Part II for Wednesday (Feb 5). Select a collector or dealer from the "cast of
characters" described in Freund's Objects of Desire, and prepare to discuss
what "moral" qualities are used to describe him--or that others use to define him--
as a "connoisseur" or arbiter of taste in the realm of folk furniture or classic
Americana furniture. Your "character" could be someone from history--i.e.,
Thomas Willing--or one of the collector/dealers in whose hands the piece of
furniture has passed in more recent times. Note that some of the collectors--such
as Richard Rosen--are described not so much as "connoisseurs" but as
"knowledgeable" in a sort of plodding, uncreative way.
Week Three (2/3-2/7) The Changing Value of Things: Fashion, Taste,
Connoisseurship
          Read for the week:
          Freund: Objects of Desire 1-68
          Sturken and Cartwright: “ Aesthetics and Taste” Ch. 2, pgs. 56-62


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                        8
Seriff Spring 2020
       Sally Price: “The Mystique of Connoisseurship”. In Primitive Art in Civilized
       Places
No Discussion Board Prompt for next week
Week Four (2/10-2/14); On Collecting Things; On Collecting Cultures; On
Collecting Controversies
       Read for This Week:
       Finish Reading Freund's Objects of Desire (69-end of book)
       Marita Sturken and Lisa Cartwright : “Collecting, Display and Institutional
       Critique” pgs. 62-68
       Stewart, Susan, “ The Collection; Paradise of Consumption.’ In On
       Longing; Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir and the
       Collection.
       James Clifford. “On Collecting Art and Culture.” In The Predicament of
       Culture
Discussion Blog Prompt: #3: Theorizing Heritage
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, Feb 16, to be posted on our Canvas discussion
board.
In her article, Theorizing Heritage, Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett discusses five
propositions about cultural heritage as a contemporary practice. (The five
propositions are introduced on page 369.). Select one of these propositions and
discuss how it fits with David Lowenthal's notions of the purpose and practice of
heritage, and Kapchan’s notion of the irony of heritage. (After four or five of you
have written on one of BKG's propositions, the next student should select
another one so that we get a range.)
Second Written Essay: An Ethnography of Collectors and Collecting: Due:
3/13/20
Week 5: (2/17-2/21) : The Meaning of America’s Past: How does History
Compare to Heritage Production?
       Read for the Week:
       David Lowenthal: The Heritage Crusade and the Spoils of History : Chs. 5
       and 6
       Barbara Kirshenblatt-Gimblett. “Theorizing Heritage” In Ethnomusicology.
       Vol 39, No. 3. Pgs.367-380
       Deborah Kapchan: “Intangible Rights: Cultural Heritage in Transit,” In
       Cultural Heritage in Transit: Intangible Rights as Human Rights.


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                       9
Seriff Spring 2020
(We will spend Monday of this week going over key ideas on collecting/collectors
from last week’s readings in preparation for your upcoming papers).
Discussion Board Prompt: #4: Exhibitionary Complexes and the Idea of
Spectatorship, Power and Knowledge
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, Feb 23, to be posted on our Canvas discussion
board.
In next week’s excerpt from Sturken and Cartwright’s book, the authors discuss
the relationship of the gaze to questions of institutional power, knowledge, and
“the Other.” For this prompt I'd like you to discuss Tony Bennett's idea of an
“exhibitionary complex” in terms of these notions of the gaze and its relationship
to institutional power and knowledge in the modern age. How does Bennett
define an “exhibitionary complex?” What function does it serve in the modern
age? And how does Sturken and Cartright’s idea of “the gaze” help us
understand the nature of such complexes?
Week 6 : (2/24-2/28): Exhibitionary Complexes: What Does it Mean to Show?
        Read for This Week:
        Tony Bennett: “The Exhibitionary Complex” In Boswell and Evans, eds.
        Representing the Nation.
        Marita Sturken and Lisa Cartwright, Discourse and Power, Pgs. 104-111
Discussion Board Prompt: # 5: The Rise of American Museums as
Exhibitionary Complexes
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, Mar 1, to be posted on our Canvas discussion
board.
Based on your reading of the first two Conn chapters from Museums and
American Intellectual Life, and Donna Harraway's "Teddy Bear Patriarchy,"
discuss the ways in which natural history museums of the 19th century in
America reflect the characteristics of an exhibitionary complex as described by
Tony Bennett. Be explicit about what the overarching "narrative" or "discourse" is
about America that is forwarded through these museums.
Week 7: (3/2-3/6): Cultural Heritage on Display: The Rise of the Museum as an
Exhibitionary Complex in America
        Read for this Week:
        Donna Harraway: “Teddy Bear Patriarchy: Taxidermy in the Garden of
        Eden”
        Steven Conn: Museums and American Intellectual Life, 1876-1926, chs. 1-
        3.


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                         10
Seriff Spring 2020
        Eileen Hooper-Greenhill, ch. 1, “Culture and Meaning in the Museum,”
        pgs. 1-22. In Museums and the Interpretation of Material Culture.
        Routledge. 2000.
No discussion board prompt for next week.
Week 8: (3/9-3/13): The Exhibitionary Complex of the World’s Fair in 19th and
early 20th century America
        Read for This Week:
        Robert Rydell “The Chicago World’s Columbian Exposition of 1893: And
        was Jerusalem Builded Here?” In Boswell and Evans Ch. 13.
        Curtis Hensley: “The World as Marketplace: Commodification of the Exotic
        at the World’s Columbian Exposition, Chicago, 1893” In Karp and Lavine,
        Ch. 18.
        Beverly K. Grindstaff: “Creating Identity: Exhibiting the Philippines at the
        1904 Louisiana Purchase Exposition.”
        Film: Bontoc Eulogy
Discussion Board Prompt: # 6: Representation of the Philippines: 1904-
2004
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, (March 22), to be posted on our Canvas
discussion board.
Do you think the presentation of Filipino folk culture at the 1998 Smithsonian
Folklife Festival differed significantly from the representation of Filipinos at the
1904 Louisiana Purchase Expo in St. Louis? Name one example of difference in
presentation and how this affected whether or not Filipinos might have been
viewed by visitors as uncivilized or depersonalized? Try to give a different
example or aspect from other students who have entered the discussion board
before you.
Second Paper Due 3/13/20.
Week 9: SPRING BREAK: (3/16-3/22)
Week 10: (3/23-3/27): The Politics of Public Display: Heritage Production in
Contemporary Folk Festivals
        Read for This Week:
        Journal of American Folklore Vol 1221 Winter 2008. Special Issue:
        Constructing Folklife and Negotiating the National: The Smithsonian
        Folklife Festival


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                      11
Seriff Spring 2020
        Diamond and Trimillos: “Introduction: Interdisciplinary Perspectives on the
        Smithnsonian Folklife Festival”
        Trimillos: “Histories, Resistances, and Reconciliations in a Decolonizable
        Space: The Philippine Delegation to the 1998 Smithsonian Folklife
        Festival”
        Satterwaite: Imagining Home, Nation, World: Appalachia on the Mall”
        Hafstein, “Making Festivals,” In Making Intangible Heritage
Discussion Board Prompt: # 7: Making Heritage
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, March 29th, to be posted on our Canvas
discussion board.
Drawing on Gottdiener's article on themed environments, explain what you think
makes Disneyland such an effective themed environment and what some of the
advantages and/or disadvantages might be of such an environment for the
presentation of history.
Third Paper Due 4/10/20. Cultural Heritage Site Analysis
Week 11 (3/30-4/3) The Politics of Public Display: Themed Environment, Disney
Style
        Read for this Week:
        Michael Gottdiener, “The Las Vegas Casino, Theme Parks, and the
        General Trend of Theming, ch. 4
        Michael Sorkin: “See you in Disneyland”
        Cary Carson, “Mirror, Mirror, on the Wall, Whose History is the Fairest of
        Them All?
        William Van Wert, “Disney World and Post History”
        Nigel Briggs, Reaching a Broader Audience” The Public Historian Vol. 22,
        No. 3(Summer, 2000) pp. 95-105 ( http://www.jstor.org/stable/3379581
Week 12: (4/6-4/10) The Politics of Public Display: The Racial Geography of a
University Campus
Did you realize that the UT campus is a racialized and gendered space which
publically “displays” traces of its apartheid beginnings hidden in plain sight? Why
is Gearing Hall placed where it is, shaped the way it is, and what does that have
to do with gendered space? What are the politics of the West Mall? How does
the plaza at the foot of the tower speak powerfully about cultural hierarchies?
Why was our campus so key to the construction of Austin’s racial
geography? Who is that woman in Littlefield Fountain and why would a
Mississippi slave-owner, confederate officer, cattle baron, and regent want her
placed there? (From Edmund Gordon’s Racial Geography Tour.
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/aads/racial-geography-tour-.php)


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                     12
Seriff Spring 2020
        Read for this week: Bryant, Scott, Seriff: “Statues of Limitation: Are
Museums the Rightful Home for Confederate Monuments” AAM MUSEUM
March-April 2019.
Friday: (4/10): Fieldtrip: Racial Geography Tour or Exhibit: From Commemoration
to Education. Dolph Briscoe Center for American History
Group Assignments and Appt with Instructor this week to discuss final project.
Discussion Board Prompt: # 8: Audience and Artist Engagement
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm April 12, to be posted on our Canvas discussion
board.
Drawing on your readings for this week, especially the theoretical discussion of
the "post museum" in Hooper Greenhill's chapter, discuss the revised role and
conception of the "audience" as active agents in this new model of museum
engagement, and propose one concrete way in which you think contemporary
museums might be successful in reorganizing museum culture and museum
exhibitions to promote this new relationship between museums and their
audiences. In addition to audiences, museums are also interacting with artists
differently as well. “What happens when artists step into the arena of
interpretation? Perhaps more than any other exhibition in the last quarter century,
Mining the Museum at the Maryland Historical Society changed the way museum
professionals see their work and themselves.” (Letting Go? Pg 207) Finally,
Discuss this quote and what you think the change is that they are talking about,
in light of Hooper-Greenhill’s ideas about the Post-Museum.
Third Paper Due 4/10/20.
Week 13 (4/13-4/17) Remapping the Museum in the 21st Century: The Post
Museum
        Read for this week:
        Eilean Hooper-Greenhill, Chs. 6, 7, The Rebirth of the Museum, in
        Museums and the Interpretation of Visual Culture
        Sturkin and Cartwright, ch. 10: The Global Flow of Visual Culture, pgs.
        389-430
        Melissa Rachleff: Peering Behind the Curtain: Artists and Questioning
        Historical Authority. In Letting Go? Pgs. 228.
        Conversation with Fred Wilson, Paula Marincola and Marjorie Schwarzer:
        Mining the Museum Revisited, In Letting Go. Pgs. 230-241
        Film: Fred Wilson: Mining the Museum (utube 32 minute interview)


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                           13
Seriff Spring 2020
Discussion #9: From Community Outreach to Community Engagement
Due Date: Sunday night 9pm, April 19th to be posted on our Canvas discussion
board.
Draw on your readings for this coming week to discuss the difference between
Community Outreach and Community Engagement. Give three concrete
examples from the readings. Finally, offer one example of how you might
"engage the community" in your final project for the Texas State History
Museum, keeping in mind the ideas of community engagement discussed in your
readings for this week.
Week 14 (4/20-4/24) Throwing Open the Doors: From Community Outreach to
Community Engagement
        Read for this Week:
        Adair, Filene, and Koloski: Section: “Throwing Open the Doors: From
        Community Outreach to Community Engagement.” In Letting Go? Sharing
        Historical Authority in a User-Generated World. Pgs. 68-123
        Black, Graham. “From Engaging Communities to Civic Engagement.” In
        Transforming Museums in the Twenty-First Century, pgs. 202-240.
Discussion Blog #10: Prototyping as a Form of Visitor Engagement
Due Date: 9pm April 26th
This week's readings discuss prototyping as a design technique for effectively
including visitors in the exhibition process from soup to nuts. All of our authors for
this week allude to the fact that truly building an exhibition from the ground up
with visitor input and collaboration is not for the faint of heart, as it challenges just
about everything museums hold dear in terms of their expertise and authority.
Discuss in this blog your thoughts about the relative challenges and rewards of
this type of improvisatory, low-tech, inclusive exhibit design. How might you think
about the advantages and difficultires of utilizing these methods in your own final
project?
Week 15 (4/27-5/1): Prototyping as Exhibit Development Practice: Everything
Here is a Work in Progress
        Read for this Week:
        Kathleen McLean. “Museum Exhibit Prototyping as a Method of
        Community Conversation and Presentation.”
        Nina Simon. Participatory Design and the Future of Museums. In Letting
        Go? Pgs. 16-33


Cultural Heritage on Display                                                  14
Seriff Spring 2020
       Suzanne Seriff and Marsha C. Bol. “Folk Art and Social Change in an
       American Museum.” In Folklife and Museums, Selected Readings. 2nd
       Edition. Kurt Dewhurst, Patricia Hall and Charles H. Seemann, Jr. eds.
       Barbara Lau, Jennifer Scott and Suzanne Seriff. “Designing for Outrage.”
       2017
Final Project Written Proposal Due: 5/1
Week 16 (5/4-5/8) : Cultural Heritage on Display: Group Presentations
Personal Reflection Papers due: 5/8
