                                       ADV 305
                   FUNDAMENTALS OF ADVERTISING
                                  Unique # 05885
                                        Fall 2019
Time：M/W/F, 12:00p.m.-1:00 p.m.
Location: RLP 1.106
Instructor: Wan Wang
           Telephone: (512) 915-4889
           Email: wangwan44@utexas.edu or via Canvas (please contact me
           through email).
           Office hour: Wednesdays 2：30 pm-4:00pm & after class or by
           appointment
           Location: Belo 4th floor, 4.322
TA: Nikita Mathur
           Email: nikita_mathur@utexas.edu or via Canvas
           Office hour: Tuesdays 2-3:00 p.m.
           Location: Belo 4th floor, 4.322
Textbook:
           Title: M: Advertising
           Edition:3rd
           Author:William Arens,Michael Weigold,Christian Arens,David Schaefer
           ISBN-13: 978-1259815942
           ISBN-10: 1259815943


Description:
 ADV 305 is an overview of advertising for non-ADV majors offered by the Stan Richard
School of Advertising and Public Relations in the Moody College of Communication. This
class meets the needs of those who are interested in careers which related to persuasive
communication and strategic market planning. This course will cover the basic concepts
in advertising, marketing and integrated marketing communications (IMC), and talk about
advertising’s role and function in the market. This class will also give you an idea of how
the industry work and what the process is like for advertising campaign planning.
Objectives:
The student who successfully completes this course will ideally be able to:
        1. Know the basic concepts in Adv and Marketing;
        2. Understand the role and function of advertising in the market and whole
              society;
        3. Apply the basic concepts and follow the planning process to design their own
              adverting campaign.
COURSE OUTLINE
Approach:
    This course will be comprised of 40 sessions plus exam week with each individual
    session being approximately 1 hours in length. The course will be designed to include
    a mixture of lecture by the instructor and guests, group discussion, and in-class
    activities.
Class Preparation:
    1. It is expected that each student will be prepared to participate in lively, intelligent
        and professional discussion. This includes listening respectfully to all.
    2. Reading assignments and homework must be done prior to attending class so that
        everyone will benefit from an in-depth discussion of issues.
    3. All written assignments are to be typed. Spelling, grammar, and punctuation must
        be of professional or business standard. You must use a recognized citation
        standard when referencing the works of others in your written submissions.
    4. All cell phones and pagers will be turned off prior to class. Laptops are permitted
        but such privileges may be rescinded in the discretion of the instructor if laptops
        are used for other than class use.
Attendance:
    Students are expected to attend every class which is critical to the success of the
    course. As noted below, a large part of your grade will come from in class activities.
    Students are to be prepared to start the class session on time.


   If for some reason you are unable to attend class, the student is expected to inform
   the instructor via email prior to class.
   Being absent or late for class may result in a reduction of your grade for the course.
   If a student misses a class for any reason, it is the responsibility of the student to be
   informed of the materials covered during the class. Each student is encouraged to
   find a “class buddy” who can share information, handouts, and assignments.
 Academic Integrity and Standards:
   Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and
   integrity in all course activities and assignments. It is expected that there shall be no
   deception regarding the representation made by the student of his/her preparation,
   participation, or performance.
   Plagiarism is a form of fraud. Proper acknowledgement makes the difference.
   Plagiarism is presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own. Plagiarism
   is the presentation of a sequence of words, from another writer, quoted without
   quotation marks and presented as one’s own work. It is crucial that acknowledgement
   of sources be accurate and complete. This includes citations of all sources on written
   assignments. The instructor uses various tools to determine if plagiarism has
   occurred.
   The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and
   plagiarism are subject to the standard policies and procedures for all UT-Austin
   students as established by UT-Austin.
   .
University of Texas Honor Code：
   The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
   leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university
   is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
   respect toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement：
   The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
   accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
   contact Services for Students with Disabilities at
   471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). Also, see
   http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/


Use of Canvas in Class
   In this class we use Canvas — a web-based course management system with
   password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course
   materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit
   assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys. You can find support in
   using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6
   p.m., so plan accordingly.
Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to your requests for their
feedback) and University Course Evaluations
   During this course, I will be asking you to give me feedback on your learning in informal
   as well as formal ways, including through anonymous surveys about how my teaching
   strategies are helping or hindering your learning. It’s very important for me to know
   your reaction to what we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these
   surveys (including completing university course evaluations), ensuring that together
   we can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
   Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you
   are responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information
   and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about
   changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and
   frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with
   university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find
   UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
   http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
   By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
   days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class,
   an examination, a work assignment, or a project to observe a religious holy day or for
   travel related thereto, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within
   a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
   If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
   Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
   behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
   of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
   Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
   Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


Emergency Evacuation Policy
   Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and
   assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated, or an announcement is made. Please
   be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
   • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
   Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered
   the building.
   • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
   class.
   •   In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
   Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire
   Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Q drop Policy
   The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
   academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
   • “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may
   not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
   including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
   education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
   You can find advice, models, templates, and other resources for designing your
   course syllabus on the DIIA website at http://www.utexas.edu/academic/diia/
   NOTE:
   Moody College Writing Support Program
   The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3.322,
   https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting offers one-on-one assistance
   without charge to students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of
   communication. We have specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and
   Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen core writing skills in each
   field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-hour
   appointments on our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing
   process.
Grading and Evaluation:
   Details of each assignment will be provided as semester going on.
 Assignment                             points                               percentage
 3 exams+1 optional                                          100 x 3 =300pts         25+25+25=75%
 1 weekly assignment                                          10 x 10=100pts                  10%
 2 writing assignment                                           10 x 2=20pts                  10%
 Attendance/participation                                         Good luck!                   5%


  extra credit                                                            TBD
  Total                                                                420pts                100%
Exam:
     Each exam covers the material since last exam. Non-accumulative. Format will be
     multiple choices, true or false, and matching questions. We will have 3 exams in total
     on week 5, 10, 15.
     Optional exam: optional exam will be an accumulative exam which covers all the
     materials of this semester. If your optional exam grade is higher than any of the 3
     exams, the lowest grade will be dropped.
Weekly assignment—blog post:
     Manage your own brand and advertising yourself—run your own social media blog!
     Create a social media account on whatever topic you are interested in and upload
     weekly post. Post will be graded by the keywords you provided at the beginning of
     the semester.
Writing assignment:
     Writing assignment will be short reflective papers of a selected topic. Each one is 1-
     2 pages single space. Font size:12.
Attendance & participation:
        We will not ask you sign attendance sheet each class. However, we will have some
        class activities, and your attendance score will come from there.
Extra credit.
        Extra credit lectures or other extra credit opportunities may be available and will
        be posted and\ or discussed in class.
               1. Super Star Bonus: the student who has the highest subscriber amount
               at the end of semester will get 2 extra point. If we get an Ultra-star, whose
               subscriber reached 20,000, 5 extra point!!! (Exclude those who “already-
               stars”).
               2. ShowTime Bonus: the “already-stars” can register for experience
               sharing presentation. 2 extra points for the presentation.
NOTE: You accumulate points over the course of the semester by completion of all
of the above graded activities. Maximum points available equal 100 (plus any extra
credit). If you miss any of the graded activities or fail to complete or submit them,
the points associated with those activities are forfeited and as such, will impact
your final grade.
Grading


Under the plus/minus grading system of the university, grades will be calculated using
accumulated points from graded activities as follows:
 Semester-long Accumulated Points (Includes Extra Credit Points) Grade
 100-93                                                                A
 92.9-90                                                               A-
 89.9-87                                                               B+
 86.9-83                                                               B
 82.9-80                                                               B-
 79.9-77                                                               C+
 76.9-73                                                               C
 72.9-70                                                               C-
 69.9-67                                                               D+
 66.9-63                                                               D
 62.9-60                                                               D-
 59.9-0                                                                F
Course Plan (Subject to change, will inform the class in advance for any change)


