                          GOV f335Q: GLOBAL JUSTICE
         Unique ▫ 80674 ▫ Web-based ▫ First Summer Session 2020 ▫ Writing Flag
Professor Gregg ▫ email at any time ▫ office hours via Zoom Personal Meeting Room
COURSE DESCRIPTION ▫ This writing-flag seminar provides an overview of major
scholarly contributions to the analysis of core issues of global justice today. Each of these
issues is unavoidably controversial. Students likely will disagree with each other and with
the authors on many of these seven topics. Our goal is not to reach agreement but rather
for each student to determine where she stands on each of the seven issues after
thoughtful analysis of the assigned authors. The student will articulate and defend that
standpoint in each of her four essays. The Teaching Assistants will evaluate essays in
terms not of the particular value-commitments and beliefs that guide the student's
analysis but rather in terms of how well she articulates, develops, and defends her
position, with respect to the two authors, whatever her particular beliefs and value-
commitments.
SEVEN TOPICS ▫ We study seven core issues of justice across national borders by
analyzing pairs of competing essays, one pair each on sovereignty (is justice possible
outside and among nation states?); group right to self-determination (is it just that some
few peoples, but not the vast majority of peoples, enjoy the right to a sovereign political
community?); nationalism and patriotism (is it morally wrong to privilege our
compatriots over foreigners?); global poverty and international distributive justice (are
citizens of rich countries such as the USA immoral or unjust if they decline to transfer
some of their national wealth to poor countries?); the social and legal status of women in
different cultures (should there be universal norms for gender equality across all cultures
or is that idea culturally imperialistic toward some cultures?); terrorism (can a minority
group without a military force justifiably target non-combatant members of the majority
when the majority perpetrates genocide or ethnic cleansing against the minority?); and
human rights (if human rights cannot be anything but the particular values and
commitments of particular cultures, are human rights just one more exercise in “might
makes right”: human rights as power politics of powerful nations?).
COURSE REQUIREMENTS ▫ The seminar requires (a) the close reading and careful
analysis of assigned texts, (b) active participation in student-centered discussions on each
of our seven issues, conducted synchronously on Zoom, as well as (c) four essays that
critically analyze our authors comparatively.
EVALUATION ▫ A student’s final grade will be the average of four essays, each no
fewer than 3 pages and no more than 4 pages in length, weighted as follows: Essay 1
counts for 10% and Essays 2, 3, and 4 each count for 30%. That average may be adjusted
for quality of participation in seven Zoom discussions. Students enjoy the option of
revising, for content and writing, either the second or third essay, for a higher grade (see
Writing Flag below). All essays to be uploaded to the seminar’s Canvas site, as Word
documents in doc. or docx. No late essays accepted unless for a verified medical


condition, documented by a physician's or nurse's note, received within 24-hours of the
submission deadline. Grading scale: A 93-100, A- 90-92, B+ 87-89, B 83-86, B- 80-82,
C+ 77-79, C 73-76, C- 70-72, D+ 67-69, D 63-66, D- 60-62, F 0-59.
INSTRUCTOR & TEACHING ASSISTANT AVAILABILITY ▫ Will respond to email
within 24 hours, any day of the week, throughout the session. One-on-one Zoom
meetings available on request.
REQUIRED DIGITAL TEXT ▫ The Global Justice Reader, ed. T. Brooks (2008)
RECORDED LECTURES ▫ One for each of the fourteen assigned readings (plus an
introductory lecture); for each assigned author, available in advance of the required
Canvas post and the associated Zoom meeting. ▫ Lectures available on Canvas, in Files.
REQUIRED ▫ 7 brief, written responses to each set of readings, uploaded to Canvas ▫ and
participation in 7 group discussions of assigned readings, on Zoom, hosted by your TA.
REQUIRED ▫ CANVAS POSTINGS ON EACH SET OF READINGS ▫ Before 11 pm
the day before the Zoom discussion, each student shall submit, as a post, to the following
day’s agenda on our seminar’s Canvas site (under Discussions), a brief, thoughtful,
critical, textually based initial thoughts on the two authors of the articles in the unit
assigned. Always cite (and reproduce) at least one brief passage from both of the unit's
two texts and include the page numbers of material cited. Keep your comments brief,
never longer than a short paragraph. Always compare and contrast the two readings
critically with one another.
REQUIRED ▫ PARTICIPATION IN ZOOM DISCUSSIONS IN REAL-TIME ▫ For each
of the seven discussion sections, students have been assigned randomly to one of the two
Teaching Assistants. If for any reason you are ever unable to attend a particular
discussion section (e.g., for documented health reasons), please contact your TA before
the scheduled meeting to arrange a make-up.
IN EVENT OF TECHNICAL PROBLEM, NOTIFY YOUR TA BY PHONE ▫ Students
who experience technical difficulties in posting initial thoughts to Canvas, or in
uploading an essay to Canvas, or in participating in a Zoom discussion, should notify the
TA immediately by telephone.
THE DISCUSSION AGENDA ▫ For each discussion session, your Teaching Assistant
will prepare an agenda. Drawing on some of your responses to (and questions about) the
readings, he will facilitate a thoughtful, textually informed discussion among students
about two authors.
ESSAYS ▫ For each of the essays the instructor will provide a list of topics from which
students may choose. Students may modify the topic chosen in ways that suit the logic of
their argument. Each essay should develop original insights about our authors, in the
student’s own and unique voice. Develop those insights in terms of one of each of the


two authors from your own perspective. Your summary of those insights will form your
thesis. (Under Files, see a handout about how to write a thesis statement.) (a) State that
thesis within the first paragraph of your essay, (b) then defend it with clear, discursive
arguments based on your careful, critical reading of the two authors; (c) your reading of
the authors should practice close textual analysis, whereby you interpret the authors by
your own best lights and defend your interpretation. (d) Develop your argument in terms
of one thoughtfully chosen concrete or historical example. (e) Write as concisely and
clearly as possible. Avoid convoluted sentences and overuse of adjectives; avoid run-on
paragraphs. Be mindful of word-choice. (f) Provide complete page references for all
textual citations. (g) Place material of secondary importance (e.g., definitions of key
terms, or background information explaining your empirical or historical example) in an
endnote (single-spaced); endnotes do not count toward the page limit and are not limited
in length or number.
▫ WRITING FLAG ▫ This course provides students experience with writing in an
academic discipline. Students write regularly during the session, complete four
substantial writing projects and receive feedback from a Teaching Assistants to improve
their writing. Students have the option (not a requirement!) to revise the second or third
essay, reflecting the Teaching Assistant's feedback on writing and content. To receive
credit, the student must use Word’s Track Changes for the submitted document, and she
must develop the essay's content substantially beyond the Teaching Assistant's initial
feedback. The optional revised essay is due on July 11 before 11 pm (same due date and
time as the fourth essay). Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives
of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility,
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
                                           Schedule
June 4 (Thursday) ● Optional informal Zoom meeting at 6 pm ▫ get acquainted with the
instructor, TAs and other students ▫ ask questions
                                               ▫
Lecture 1 ● Introduction, file available (as of May 16) on Canvas, under Files (page
numbers on slides refer to printed text, not to digital pagination)
       1. INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AMONG NATIONS: A STATE OF
                                          NATURE?
Lecture 2 ● Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan
Lecture 3 ● Charles Beitz, “A State of Nature”
June 7 (Sunday) ● Deadline 1 for uploading to rubric: Discussions: brief, comparative
response to Hobbes and Beitz before 11 p.m.


June 8 (Monday) ● Zoom Discussion 1 ● on sovereignty: at your TA's hour listed above
June 8 (Monday) ● First essay prompts published on Canvas by 8 a.m.
June 9 (Tuesday) ● Optional informal Zoom meeting at 6 pm ▫ ask questions about the
first essay assignment
June 10 (Wednesday) ● Upload first essay (unit 1) to rubric Assignments before 11 p.m.
(recommended: submit at least three hours before the deadline; no late essays accepted)
                2. A PEOPLE'S RIGHT TO SELF-DETERMINATION
Lecture 4 ● A. Margalit and J. Raz, “National Self-Determination"
Lecture 5 ● Allan Buchanan, “Theories of Secession”
June 13 (Saturday) ● Deadline 2 for uploading to rubric: Discussions: brief, comparative
response to Raz and Buchanan before 11 p.m.
June 15 (Monday) ● Zoom Discussion 2 ● on a right to self-determination: at your TA's
hour listed above
                       3. NATIONALISM AND PATRIOTISM
Lecture 6 ● Robert Goodin, “What is So Special about Our Countrymen?”
Lecture 7 ● David Miller, “The Ethics of Nationality”
June 17 (Wednesday) ● Deadline 3 for uploading to rubric: Discussions: brief,
comparative response to Goodin and Miller before 11 p.m.
June 18 (Thursday) ● Zoom Discussion 3 ● on nationalism and patriotism: at your TA's
hour listed above
June 18 (Thursday) ● Second essay prompts published on Canvas by 8 a.m.
June 20 (Saturday) ● Upload second essay (units 2 & 3 ) to rubric Assignments before 11
p.m. (recommended: submit at least three hours before the deadline; no late essays
accepted)
    4. GLOBAL POVERTY AND INTERNATIONAL DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE
Lecture 8 ● Peter Singer, “Famine, Affluence, and Morality”
Lecture 9 ● Thomas Nagel, “The Problem of Global Justice”


June 23 (Tuesday) ● Deadline 4 for uploading to rubric: Discussions: brief, comparative
response to Singer and Nagel before 11 p.m.
June 24 (Wednesday) ● Zoom Discussion 4 ● on global poverty and distributive justice:
at your TA's hour listed above
                       5. JUSTICE FOR WOMEN GLOBALLY
Lecture 10 ● Susan Okin, “Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women?”
Lecture 11 ● Martha Nussbaum, “Capabilities as Fundamental Entitlements”
June 28 (Sunday) ● Deadline 5 for uploading to Canvas Discussions: brief, comparative
response to Okin and Nussbaum before 11 p.m.
June 29 (Monday) ● Zoom Discussion 5 ● on women and global justice: at your TA's
hour listed above
June 29 (Monday) ● Third essay prompts published on Canvas by 8 a.m.
July 01 (Wednesday) ● Upload third essay (units 4 & 5) to rubric Assignments before 11
p.m. (recommended: submit at least three hours before the deadline; no late essays
accepted)
              6. TERRORISM AS A MEANS TO FIGHT TERRORISM
Lecture 12 ● David Rodin, “Terrorism without Intention”
Lecture 13 ● Saul Smilansky, “Terrorism, Justification, Illusion”
July 5 (Sunday) ● Deadline 6 for uploading to rubric: Discussions: brief, comparative
response to Rodin and Smilansky before 11 p.m.
July 6 (Monday) ● Zoom Discussion 6 ● on terrorism: at your TA's hour listed above
                                 7. HUMAN RIGHTS
Lecture 14 ● Charles Beitz, “Human Rights as a Common Concern”
Lecture 15 ● David Sussman, “What’s Wrong with Torture?”
July 8 (Wednesday) ● Deadline 7 for uploading to rubric: Discussions: brief, comparative
response to Beitz and Sussman before 11 p.m.
July 9 (Thursday) ● Zoom Discussion 7 ● on human rights: at your TA's hour listed
above


July 9 (Thursday) ● Fourth essay prompts published on Canvas by 8 a.m.
July 11 (Saturday) ● Upload fourth essay (units 6 & 7) to rubric Assignments before 11
p.m. (recommended: submit at least three hours before the deadline; no late essays
accepted)
