                       History of Rome: The Empire (C C 325; HIS 321)
                                          Spring 2019
Instructor: Professor Rabun Taylor, rmtaylor@austin.utexas.edu
     Office hours: WAG 14b, M 1-4
Teaching Assistant: Josh Renfro, jsrenfro@utexas.edu
     Office hours: WAG 121, Th 11-2
Lecture sessions: MW 10-11, WAG 201
Sections:
     Thurs 9-10 (Unique # 33270, 38860): PAR 210
     Thurs 10-11 (Unique # 33280, 38870): PAR 210
     Fri 9-10 (Unique # 33275, 38865): GAR 1.134
     Fri 10-11 (Unique # 33285, 38875): GAR 1.134
This course flies the Global Cultures flag. It also fulfills the Cultural Expression, Human
Experience, & Thought Course area requirement.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Attendance: Attendance is mandatory; prompt arrival is requested. Quizzes will be given
at the start of class. No accommodation can be made if you arrive late. Please silence
cell phones before entering the classroom. If you find yourself unable to attend class, let me
know of the conflict as soon as you can via email.
Electronic devices: No electronic devices may be used in class unless you get
clearance with an instructor. You’ll be required to take notes by hand unless you have a
disability that requires another format. Writing longhand on an electronic tablet is OK, but
that’s the only standard exception. Occasionally I may ask the class to look something up
online during a discussion, but otherwise this rule is firm. There is a large visual
component to this course. Many students have difficulty initially processing projected
images and spoken words simultaneously, but they soon get the hang of it. If you feel you
need help learning how to take notes efficiently, visit the Sanger Learning Center in Jester
A332: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
Participation: This course has section meetings, which will be dominated by discussion and
group activities. You will be required to participate in these activities in full. Also, you must
write an online response to readings or other assignments when we request it. Your
participation in class and in online discussion boards will be noted and graded as part of the
Attendance & Participation rubric (see grading breakdown below). There is no formal writing
component in this course, but your informal writing—that is, your online responses in the
discussion boards—will be assessed as part of your participation grade. There may be
some impromptu writing exercises in the section meetings, and these two will constitute part
of your participation grade.
Readings: Readings fall into two categories. Every week there will be foundational
readings: chapters from one of the two main textbooks (M=Mackay, Ancient Rome;
G&S=Garnsey and Saller, The Roman Empire, to be bought at the bookstore or online)
and/or from other secondary sources (available on Canvas under Files > Readings). These
are listed at the beginning of each weekly unit in the calendar below. They are to be read
before the first lecture of the week (usually Mondays, except when exams fall on Mondays).
My lectures will assume you have read the text already, and you will take an online quiz
                                                 1


on the contents of the readings before the first lecture each week, starting with week 3
(Monday, Feb. 4). There will also be section readings for the section meetings, drawn from
ancient and modern sources and sometimes supplemented by images. The before-class
quizzes will not cover these. They should also be read/viewed before your weekly section
meeting, and you will often be asked to discuss them on your Canvas discussion board
before the meeting as well. Before-class quizzes will cover only the weekly foundational
readings. Exams will cover both sets of readings as well as the lectures. IMPORTANT: Note
that you must take the quiz before the first lecture of the week). Some reading
assignments and thematic material may be revised or refined over the semester, but
I’ll give you adequate notice.
Quizzes: There will be two types of quiz in this course: before-class quizzes and in-class
quizzes. On before-class quizzes, see Readings above. In-class quizzes will be somewhat
more substantial, and will consist mostly or entirely of material that you can study in advance
on Canvas; they are scheduled into the calendar below on Wednesdays. Quizzes of this
kind will focus on categories of information (e.g., maps, terms, etc.) I may need to move
some quiz dates or change their themes; if I do, I’ll give adequate notice.
Exams: You will have three 50-minute in-class exams. There is no exam scheduled for
Finals Week. Your first two exams will be on February 25 and April 8, both Mondays,
during a regular class session. Your third exam will be in the final week, either on
Wednesday of during your section meeting. Since the exams draw liberally upon visual and
material culture, they may include a visual component, requiring you to identify and discuss
projected images. We’ll ask you to bring THREE blue books on the first exam date.
We’ll collect all but one to distribute for later exams.
Email: Please do not contact us through Canvas. Also, don’t respond directly to our
regular Canvas-based announcements. (These go straight into my spam folder through no
fault of my own!). Instead, please use our utexas.edu email accounts listed at the top of
this syllabus.
Grading
      Attendance & participation                  20%
      Before-class quizzes (lowest 3 dropped)     15% (10 x 1.5%)
      In-class quizzes                            20% (5 x 4%)
      3 midterm exams                             45% (3 x 15%)
We won’t grade on a curve for this course. All grading, except on short quizzes, will be done on
a 100-point scale: A = 90-100, B = 80-90, etc. Your final grade will be on a plus / minus scale
based on your cumulative numerical score. In the final calculations, we will bump up a grade if
the numeric score falls just short of the next letter grade. We will not negotiate grades except
in the event of a calculating error.
POLICIES
CAMPUS CARRY:
I (Rabun Taylor) do not allow any kind of firearms in my office.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact SSD at
471-6259, or go to http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
                                                 2


Keep in mind that this course is heavily oriented toward visual information.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS:
If you need to miss a class or other required class activity for the observance of a religious
holiday, you must notify us at least 14 days in advance so we can make alternative
arrangements for your absence. The University's Religious Days Policy is online:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/
SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY:
Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a failing grade for the course.
Scholastic dishonesty includes any kind of cheating or collaboration on tests, or submitting work
that is not either your own or accurately attributed to its source. For more information, contact
Student Judicial Services at 471-2841, or go to:
https://utexas.collegiatelink.net/organization/StudentJudicialServices/about
UT HONOR CODE:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS:
If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line (BCAL) to discuss your concerns by phone. This service is provided through a partnership
among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),
the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit:
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
CALENDAR
Week 1 (Jan. 23-25): Republic to Empire
     No readings this week
Week 2 (Jan. 28-Feb. 1): The rise of Augustus
     Foundational reading: M11
     uWednesday, Jan. 30: In-class quiz #1: map of Roman provinces and cities
     Section reading: Zanker, “Rival Images” (Canvas)
Week 3 (Feb. 4-8): The reign of Augustus
     Foundational reading: M13, 18
     Section reading: Dio Cassius’ Roman History, book 52: Democracy or monarchy? The
         debate between Agrippa and Maecenas (Canvas)
Week 4 (Feb. 11-15): From the Julio-Claudians to the Flavians
     Foundational reading: M14
     uWednesday, Feb. 13: In-class quiz #2: map of the city of Rome
     Section reading: Suetonius, Life of Claudius (Canvas)
Week 5 (Feb. 18-22): From the Flavians to Trajan
     Foundational reading: M15
     Section reading: Selections from Josephus, The Jewish War; Cohen, “The Credibility of
         Josephus” (Canvas)
Week 6 (Feb. 25-Mar. 1): Hadrian through the Antonines
     uMonday: EXAM #1
     Foundational reading: M16
     Section reading: K. Harper, “Apollo’s Revenge” (ch. 3 in The Fate of Rome) (Canvas)
                                                 3


Week 7 (Mar. 4-8): Severans and the Third-century crisis
   Foundational reading: M17, 19
   Section reading: W. Liebeschuetz, “Was There a Crisis of the Third Century?”; S. Lusnia,
      “Urban Planning and Sculptural Display in Severan Rome: The Septizodium and Its
      Role in Dynastic Politics.”
Week 8 (Mar. 11-15): Diocletian and Constantine
   Foundational reading (for Wednesday): M21, 22
   uWednesday, Feb. 25: In-class quiz #3: names and terms
   uNo section meeting this week
SPRING BREAK
Week 9 (Mar. 25-29): Rise of the Christian Empire and fall of the West
   Foundational reading: M23, 24
   uWednesday: In-class quiz #4: review of the emperors
   Section reading: Peter Brown, “Religion” (Canvas)
Week 10 (Apr. 1-5): Families, patronage, and social relations
   Foundational reading: G&S 9-10
   Section reading: Juvenal, Satires Book 9; excerpt from Taylor, “Two Pathic Subcultures
      in Ancient Rome” (Canvas)
Week 11 (Apr. 8-12): Intellectual life
   uMonday: EXAM #2
   Foundational reading: A. A. Long, “Roman Philosophy”; E. Rawson, “Roman Rulers and
      the Philosophical Life” (Canvas)
   Section reading: O. Brendel, “Observations on the Allegory of the Pompeian Death’s-
      Head Mosaic” (Canvas)
Week 12 (Apr. 15-19): Slavery
   Foundational reading: Bradley, Slavery and Society at Rome, chs. 2, 5
   Section readings: Wiedemann, Greek and Roman Slavery, ch. 5; Trimble, “The Zoninus
      Collar and the Archaeology of Roman Slavery” (both on Canvas)
Week 13 (Apr. 22-26): Economy 1: Primitive or advanced?
   Foundational reading: G&S 5; Wilson, “Machines, Power, and the Ancient Economy”
      (Canvas)
   uWednesday: In-class quiz #5: technologies & economic terms
   Section reading: Chapter 3 from E. Mayer, The Ancient Middle Classes (Canvas)
Week 14 (Apr. 29-May 3): Economy 2: Supply, trade, and technology
   Foundational reading: G&S 7; Lo Cascio, “State and Coinage in the Late Republic and
      Early Empire” (Canvas)
   uSections: meet at the Dolph Briscoe Center for American History, SRH Unit 2
      (room TBA)
Week 15 (May 6-10): Religion
   Foundational reading: G&S 11
   uWednesday (or during section, depending on our progress): EXAM #3
                                             4
