                                 Sociology of Race and Work
                    AAS 330 (32195) / SOC 321R (44780) / WGS 322 (46020)
                                  MWF 12-1 PM           GEA 127
Instructor: Dr. Aarti Bhalodia
Office: BUR 562
Office Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays 1-2:30 PM or by appointment
Email: bhalodia@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description
Work is a central activity in the lives of most people. Along with providing an income, the type
of work one does shapes the worker’s sense of personal identity. Social interaction in the work
place provides workers with a set of skills, values, and mindset that influences how the work is
done. Structure of a society determines the kind of work it does, who does what type of work,
and how much people are paid for their efforts. In the United States, individuals’ racial and
gender characteristics deeply shape how labor markets emerge and how skills are evaluated. Jobs
are often gender segregated and men and women are remunerated differently. This course is a
critical examination of work through a gendered and racial lens. The purpose of this course is to
examine concepts such as labor markets, globalization, racial segregation, and gendering of the
work place. This course is cross-listed with Asian American Studies and Women’s Studies.
This course carries the Cultural Diversity in the United States flag. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that
has experienced persistent marginalization.
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/ccc/teaching-resources/syllabus
Course Objectives
Students will be able to sociologically identify concepts such as global markets, transnational
labor, care work, service industry, gendered work, and racial segregation in the work place. A
majority of the readings, films, and class meetings will focus on contemporary work
environment. Students will examine workers in the retail industry, care workers such as nannies,
maids, and nurses, transnational workers in the STEM fields, and migrant labor. We will start the
class with a survey of different forms of labor throughout the United States’ history. Students
will be able to make historical connections between American citizenship, work, and value of
one’s labor.
                                                  1


Required Reading
Articles on Canvas
The following are on reserve at the PCL library.
Lowe, Lisa. Immigrant Acts: On Asian American Cultural Politics. Duke University Press. 1996.
Assigned readings from this book are available on Canvas.
Skhlar. Judith. American Citizenship: The Quest for Inclusion. Harvard University Press. Any
Edition.
The following books are available in a digital format (“electronic resource”) through the
UT libraries. You can download relevant chapters in PDF format. Use the following link to
do a title search.
http://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/search/t
Ngai, Mae. Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modern America. Princeton
University Press. 2013.
Thistle, Susan. From Marriage to the Market: The Transformation of Women’s Lives and Work.
University of California Press. 2006.
Wharton, Amy edited. Working in America: Continuity, Conflict, and Change in a New
Economic Era. Routledge. 2016.
Wright, Melissa. Disposable Women and Other Myths of Global Capitalism. Taylor and Francis.
2013.
Assignments and Grading
Attendance: 5%
Written assignments and class participation: 15%
Two Exams: 50% (2x25)
Research Essay: 20%
Research essay proposal and bibliography: 5%
Research presentation: 5%
Attendance: You are required to attend all class meetings. I expect to be informed before the start
of class if you are unable to attend due to health reasons or family emergency. More than two
unexcused absences will affect your grade.
Class participation: You are responsible for completing all the assigned readings before each
class meeting. Participation in class activities is crucial and a component of your final grade. We
will have regular class discussions based on required readings in which you are expected to
participate. If I am not satisfied with class participation I will give a pop quiz.
                                                    2


Written assignments: In class and take home assignments will also count towards class
participation. The written assignments will be based on assigned readings, films and class
discussions.
Films: We will watch documentaries through the course of the semester. You will be tested on
film content and themes that come up in class discussions. You should treat the films as visual
texts.
Exams: You are responsible for completing two non-cumulative exams, each worth 25% of the
final grade. Exams will consist of short essay and short answer questions. Bring a blue book to
class on the day of the scheduled exams.
Research Paper: The essay is a 10 page (double spaced) research paper due on the last day of
class. I will discuss ways in which one researches and writes a successful paper. You can also
find research essay guides on Canvas. A research description (350 words) along with a
preliminary bibliography is due in class on the assigned date. This assignment will help you
improve your research, analytical, organizational and writing skills.
You will also get an opportunity to share your work with the rest of the class. In the final weeks
of the semester all students will give an 8 minute oral presentation. This will serve as an exercise
in public speaking. In the oral presentation introduce and discuss your topic. Tell us why you
chose this particular topic. What sparked your interest? What sources are you using? Describe
their strength and weaknesses. If you are concerned about public speaking come talk to me and
we will figure out a solution.
Deadlines: Assignments are due in printed format at the beginning of class on the assigned due
date.
If you are having trouble in class or are dissatisfied with your assignment grade/s come see me
promptly. Don’t wait until the end of the semester to seek my guidance on how to improve your
standing in the course.
           Grade         Cutoff
           A             94%
           A-            90%
           B+            87%
           B             83%
           B-            80%
           C+            77%
           C             73%
           C-            70%
           D+            67%
           D             63%
           D-            60%
           F             <60%
                                                   3


Academic Integrity
As per University policy, those who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Refer to http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php for more
information on academic integrity, plagiarism, and consequences of academic dishonesty.
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-232-2937 (video phone).
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
If you have a disability you need to notify me during the first two weeks of the semester and
provide appropriate documentation.
Emergency Situation
Please familiarize yourself with recommendations from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security (512-471-5767) on what to do in the event of an emergency.
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: utexas.edu/emergency.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
The instructor reserves the right to change the syllabus. All changes will be announced in
class and via email. Make sure you have an active email account with UT.
                                                   4
