The University of Texas at Austin                                                                                               Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                                         Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
Course Syllabus
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Historic Buildings Survey and Drawings
Class Schedule:
Monday 9:00 – 12:00 and Wednesday lab
9:00 – 12:00
Room: SUT 3.112 & Lab at studio space GOL 4th floor (Reviews
and pinups locations TBA)
Level:
Graduate MSHP
Prerequisites Graduate: Historic Preservation, Architecture +
Undergraduate Interior Design: Upper-level Architecture +
Interior Design, others with instructor’s permission
Instructor:
Benjamin Ibarra‐Sevilla, Assistant Professor of Architecture
Oﬃce hours: Tuesdays 10:00 to 12:00 WMB 4.120
                                                                           Image from thirteen-century Manuscript drawn by Villars of Honnecourt .The figure shows a
Appointments at b.ibarra@utexas.edu                                                                   documentation method for tall towers used in the gothic period.
Course Description:
         “The architect should be regarded as a kind of physical historian, because he constructs relationships across time: civilizations in fact”.
                                                                                                Vincent Scully, American Architecture and Urbanism
The work of the historic preservationist is multifaceted. Often times the professional in this field is required to
collect physical evidence in order to reconstruct historic events, moments, and construction phases inscribed
within the buildings and the site itself. Other times, as a technician, the professional is asked to assess the state
of conservation of a determined structure or building. Graphic representation is the tool to communicate
eﬀectively the evidence, findings, or assessment; and one can say that drawing is the universal language that
describes with accuracy the physical characteristics embedded within many objects, including buildings.
In this class we will focus on the techniques and processes involved in the documentation of historic buildings.
We will review several of the most common methods used in the documentation of cultural resources and will
learn about the standards and guidelines established by the National Park Service’s Historic American Buildings
Survey (HABS).
            In this class you will learn through practice. The skills gained in this course will be developed through a
series of exercises that require active participation. The course is designed to get you involved in practical
activities rather than passive “infusion” of knowledge. Team work is encouraged to create a collective learning
environment therefore, you will be asked to work collaboratively and individually. Discussions in class regarding
the work are vital to the learning process and each student is encouraged to engage in the discussions
productively.
                                                                                                                                                             !1


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                   Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                  Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
          During the first half of the semester you will engage a number of hands-on exercises and lectures that
will help to build your documentation skills using diﬀerent tools. The purpose of this exercises is to prepare you
for the documentation project that you will develop during the second half. The idea is that you gain experience,
confidence, and necessary knowledge to embrace a real documentation project involving the HABS guidelines
and other requirements.
          During the second half of the semester the class will be assigned to document a historic site by means
of architectural field survey. This is a team hands-on project where you will engage the documentation of a
selected historic property. The documentation will be performed by means of research, architectural
photography, analytical sketches, measurement of existing architecture (exterior and interior) and photogrammetry
techniques. The overarching goal of this portion of the semester is to discover the joy of knowing a building
intimately through its history while conveying the most relevant features in a set of precise and well-drafted
measured drawings, selected photographs and sketches. In previous years, students from this course have
completed a HABS document set and submitted this set for consideration to the Charles E. Peterson Prize. This
year you have the option to continue with this tradition.
          At the end of the semester you will be asked to compile and edit the information created during the course
in order to prepare a portfolio of your own work. This portfolio will be produced in hard copy and digital form.
Course Objectives:
Upon final completion of this course you should be able to identify and combine the appropriate tools in order to
document specific cultural properties depending on the needs and documentation objectives. You will know the
HABS documentation guidelines and you will be able to understand how using graphic representation is key to
recognizing, identifying, and categorizing the object’s features and particular aspects of the historic built
environment including original design, construction methods, modifications and alterations. As we move through
the semester you will gain skills in field sketching, measuring buildings, drafting (digital and analog), analog and
digital photography, and design and photogrammetric software.
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the semester the you should be able to:
• Develop a holistic approach to documentation of historic properties defining the proper strategy to obtain
   pertinent information following the HABS standards
• Use photography as a tool to document eﬀectively cultural resources
• Use drawing techniques for the depiction and documentation of historic properties.
• Gather and synthesize existing relevant historic material necessary to prepare a graphic historic report that
   involves a narrative of a historic property.
• Prepare a portfolio as a visual communication technique for professional development
Course structure and format:
This course will include a combination of lectures, fieldwork, and studio time. Monday’s sessions will be
dedicated to lectures, students’ presentations and discussions that will provide the theoretical foundations for
this course’s content. Friday’s sessions are considered “Lab sessions” where you will engage a studio
environment developing work or reviewing techniques, software, etc.
          Lab sessions will oﬀer you the time and place to complete the work. These exercises will vary widely
                                                                                                                          !2


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                     Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                    Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
and can include tasks such as preparing slideshows, sketching and properly organizing the information collected
in fieldwork, developing drawings or preparing documents required for this course. Lab sessions will also include
more personalized tutorials for you who might need to review foundational knowledge on orthographic
projections and other depiction conventions in architecture. It is encouraged that you use Lab session time for
work related to this course only. Please keep in mind that the nature of the Lab session does not require that the
instructor is present at all times but you are expected to dedicate the assigned time slot to the Lab as stated in
the syllabus and schedule for this course.
          Fieldwork will be executed in order to provide the environment often experienced in the professional
field. You are expected to travel with the entire group to develop the fieldwork during one “long weekend” from
October 12th to October 16th. There is a possibility that a small group will need to return to the site to verify and
recollect information.
          Students in this class come from multiple backgrounds and disciplines and, for many, this course will be
an introduction to the studio culture. Studio culture implies a collective learning environment where you will gain
knowledge, skills, and insightful comments about your work from your peers. Working collaboratively, sharing
information and collegiality will be crucial to complete the assignments.
Class Schedule:
Class day is Mondays from 9:00 to 12:00 at SUT 3.112. Lab is schedule on Wednesday
 from 9:00 to 12:00 at Studio. Please refer to the schedule attached to this syllabus for a detail calendar of
activities.
Course Overview:
Assignments will be explained with detail and handouts (assignment sheet and rubric) will be provided with each
assignment. This summary is for you to understand an overview of the course content.
• Recording Methods
This segment of the course will introduce the main concepts behind the creation of a HABS report. The
class will study how building documentation is produced including the processes and methods involved
in recording and depicting historic structures as well as collecting information appropriate to follow HABS
guidelines and standards. This portion of the semester will be structured with a mixture of lectures and
hands-on Lab work. You will engage hands-on exercises measuring structures within campus and we
will use this buildings to build your skills in Drafting orthographic projections of historic properties using
pencil and paper.
• Photography,
Building skills on Photography as a tool for building documentation. This segment will focus on building
skills in Photography, as a tools for the documentation of historic properties. You will be introduced to
the basics of photography in order to learn the most common instructions to operate an interchangeable
lens camera (ILC). During this segment you will also receive a tutorial on how to operate a large-format
film camera.
• Fieldwork
In this portion of the semester you will engage in a real documentation project for the National Park Service. At
                                                                                                                            !3


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                               Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
this point the course emphasizes in the fieldwork necessary to create a complete set of drawings following HABS
guidelines and standards. You will be asked to conduct fieldwork, collect information and convey the information
in a graphic form (sketches) using the diﬀerent software and techniques reviewed in class during previous
segments.
           - Travel
Carlsbad Caverns, New Mexico, is a National Park that is about 470 miles west from the Austin area, this is
considered a long travel for university standards and you should plan accordingly for the visit scheduled in this
course. Travel to Carlsbad National Park will be on vehicles rented by the school including gasoline, you will get a
perdiem amount to support your travel expenses (food and possibly lodging). Details about the visits will be
presented opportunely during the course sessions, schedule for this trip is available in the class calendar.
• Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) History Report, Measured Drawings, Sketches and
   Photographs
This segment of the course will focus on the standards for the production of a HABS report for the
building called “Ship on the Desert” located in Guadalupe Mountains National Park, in west Texas. The
report includes a history report, sketches, measured drawings, and large-format photographs in black
and white film.
This segment will take a substantial amount of time and energy from the entire class. First, the group will
be responsible for creating a history report which is an important component of the submission package
for HABS. The class should produce a compelling report that follows HABS guidelines and standards.
You will be asked to conduct fieldwork, collect information from primary and secondary sources and
convey the information in a document that will be submitted to the NPS.
You will create a set of well-crafted and well-organized sketches that depict the information collected
during the fieldwork. The goal of this sketches is to reveal the fieldwork eﬀort and also communicate the
documentation to others who in the future might want to access the primary sources of your
investigation,
You will develop measured drawings using CAD software. You will be asked to acquire software to
develop exercises. Software basic instructions will be provided in class but keep in mind that this is not
a software class therefore you will be asked to complete software learning by doing homework and
watching tutorials online.
Finally, the group will organize the large-format film photographs taken during the field-work in order to
archive them following the HABS guidelines.
• Poster and portfolio
This the last portion of the semester where you will be dedicated to collect and organize the work developed
throughout the semester and put it together in a compelling form. You will be asked to design and print out a
portfolio. The class will engage in a discussion about better practices and design standards for the production of
such documents as a tool for documenting and presenting work to others and as a tool for job searching.
Grading:
The nature of this class’ work is highly dependent on evaluations that can only be done after the work is
completed. While every attempt will be made to identify and warn students who are in jeopardy of missing a
                                                                                                                       !4


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                      Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                   Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
minimum passing level as early as possible, a passing midterm grade implies only the expectation of a passing
final grade, not a guarantee. All exercises must be completed in order to obtain a passing grade, no exceptions.
Final grades will be determined by:
Activity                                                                                                  % of Final Grade
1. Class exercises (stairs, readings, photo assignments)                               …..……………..………... 30%
2. Documentation (HABS report )                                                       .………………………..…. 45%
3. Portfolio                                                             ……………………………………..…. 15%
4. Class participation                                                                 …………..…….…….….. 10%
_____________________________________________________________________________________________
___________
          Total                                                     …………………………………..………..100%
Grading equivalence:
Grades will be assigned using a number scale. Each assignment includes a rubric that explains how the
assignment will be graded including the numbers below. This process makes it fair at the end when students
obtain final grade because the instructor uses a spreadsheet that calculates grades accurately. The Grading
equivalence will be as follows:
      A            A-           B+        B          B-          C+          C             C-            D            F
   100-98       97-95        94-92      91–89      88-86        85-83      82-80        79-77          77-75       74-72
UT Austin School of Architecture Grading Standards:
A: EXCELLENT WORK
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual
rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is
discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B: GOOD WORK
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and
suggestions presented in class and puts in eﬀort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels
and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C: REQUIRED WORK
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor.
Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
D: POOR WORK
Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation
are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.
F: UNACCEPTABLE WORK
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will
be assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
X: EXCUSED INCOMPLETE
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is
not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate
                                                                                                                             !5


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                 Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
Deans’ oﬃces and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Studio work must be completed before the
second week of the next design semester in which you are enrolling, according to School of Architecture policy.
Equipment, Supplies & Materials
You should budget for the purchase of textbooks, digital storage media (USB flash drive), tools, drafting
instruments, printing costs, photography printing costs, and portfolio production. You will also need access to a
interchangeable lens or equivalent digital camera. Your combined expenses have been estimated in the past for
$300 or more (camera not included) and this semester is likely to be similar. You are encouraged to share tools
with studio-mates, when applicable and convenient.
          Sources for supplies include University Co-op, Asel's, Miller Blueprint, Dynamic Reprographics, and a
host of others, any of which oﬀer special student discounts. In addition, you can often find some of your supplies
and materials at the chain hobby stores Michael's and Hobby Lobby at vastly lower price.
Computer and Software
There are no explicit computer purchase requirements for SoA students enrolled in non-design degree programs;
however, it is highly recommended that incoming graduate students acquire a laptop computer to aid in their
studies. Students in this class will need access to a computer capable of running AutoCad, Adobe Suite, Adobe
Bridge and PhotoScan. Preferably that should be a laptop computer owned by the student, either Mac or PC will
work for this class. Student versions of AutoCad are available for download at no charge through AutoDesk.
Photoscan student version also has a substantial discount. Other software can be accessed at the SoA
Computer Lab, or can be purchased at reduced student rates from the Campus Computer Store. If acquiring
software is not possible, desktop computer access is available through the SoA Computer Lab (see website for
lab hours). You might use Adobe software in this course (and following courses). When accessing Adobe
software in SOA computer labs, you will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not required to
purchase Creative Cloud services to sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to create a free Adobe
ID. That can be done here: https://accounts.adobe.com/”
Email and Canvas website:
Class announcements will be posted to an electronic mailing list. You should access your university email
account and regularly check your email. You may send questions or other messages to the instructor. Instructor
will be available during the weekdays and regular working hours, you should not expect replies to e‐mails during
weekends or late night on weekdays. Our class Canvas site will include the following materials:
1. announcements,
2. syllabus,
3. updated syllabus or calendars (in case of changes),
4. slide shows of lectures,
5. assignments,
6. tutorials,
7. links to valuable information and
8. other information relevant to the class.
Please make sure you visit our Canvas site at least twice a week.
                                                                                                                        !6


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                   Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                  Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
Reference Texts for this course:
If available, these books can be found in the architecture library. Purchase of the books is not required although
these texts are highly recommended as a reference for a future specialist in preservation.
• Burns, John A., ed. Recording Historic Structures. 2nd Edition. Hoboken, N.J. : Wiley. 2004.
• Ching, Francis D., Architectural Graphics. 5th Edition. New York : Wiley. 2009.
• Ching, Francis D. Building Construction Illustrated. 4th Edition. Hoboken, N.J. : Wiley. 2008.
• Shih, Randy H., AutoCad 2015 Tutorial First Level: 2D Fundamentals. Mission, K.S., SDC Publications, 2011.
(used copies may be available at the Co-op Bookstore under ME 201)
• HABS /HAER Standards. Heritage Documentation Programs, National Parks Service. (download PDF file from
HABS website or available on Canvas site for this course)
• HABS. American Place; the Historic American Building Survey at Seventy-five Years, NPS 2009, (https://
www.nps.gov/hdp/habs/AmericanPlace.pdf or available on Canvas site for this course)
• Bucher, Ward, ed. Dictionary of Building Preservation. Hoboken, N.J. : Wiley, 1996.
Harris, Cyril M., ed. Dictionary of Architecture and Construction. 2nd Edition. New York : Dover Publications.
1977. McAlester, Virginia and Lee. A Field Guide to American Houses. New York : Knopf, 1985.
Readings and online tutorials:
There will be readings assigned throughout the semester. You will be asked to work with online tutorials as
reference for software learning. In addition to these readings and tutorials, you will find books for this course in
the UT library system. As a reminder, the library has a vast collection of books and magazines that may help to
nurture your work and they are highly encouraged to take advantage of this resource.
Class Expectations:
Class will meet three hours per week for regular session plus Lab session (also 3hrs/week). Additional time will
be required for fieldwork survey. Lectures will deliver the theoretical platform and basic instructions to complete
the diﬀerent assignments given in class. Any part of class time may be used for discussion, peer presentations,
review and other activities as stated in the class calendar. We will try to use the class time eﬀectively to develop
the assignments and projects. In most cases you will be asked to continue with your exercise as homework
outside of class and/or during Lab sessions. Punctual attendance is required for all class sessions. We have only
a short amount of class time together. You must make every eﬀort to be on time. Not only is arriving late rude, it
also distracts the entire class.
Cellphones and Computers:
Computers are not the preferred note-taking method in lecture and other sessions. By experience computers
are distracting to both instructors and students. It is preferable that you bring a paper notebook to take notes.
There will be sessions where computers will be necessary, mostly for software learning and/or in class
presentations. The use of cellular phones must be avoided during class time, you must silence your cell phones
while the class is meeting.
Late Work:
No late work will be accepted except in the case of bona fide emergencies. Giving some students extensions is
unfair to them and to others.
Attendance Policy:
                                                                                                                          !7


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                   Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                  Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
Attendance is your responsibility; random attendance will be taken during the semester. Attendance might have a
positive or negative impact in the students final grade. Class participation is strongly encouraged. It is the
student’s responsibility to inform the instructor of any intended absences for religious observances and it is the
student’s responsibility for finding out what was missed in class.
           Students who fail to complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal
academic penalties.
Questions in Class:
The instructor strongly encourages students to ask questions in class (the worst question is the question you
don’t ask). Framing questions is part of the learning process. Some questions will be answered right away and
some questions will be answered in the next class. The former because it is important to clear up a confusing
point that is critical to the class topic and the second might be beyond where we are in class. Instructor will be
always willing to answer students questions. Feel free to contact the instructor by phone or email if further
clarification to a question is needed.
Subject to Change:
With the exception of the grade and attendance policies, the calendar and other parts of this syllabus are subject
to change with advanced notice, as deemed appropriate by the instructor.
Academic Integrity:
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is highly valued and seriously regarded
at The University of Texas at Austin. More specifically, you and other students are expected to maintain absolute
integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. This is a very
basic expectation that is further reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete
any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty. University policy pertaining to
scholastic dishonesty applies to in-class assignments, research reports/projects, papers, and assignments
required in this course. This includes plagiarism or the unacknowledged submission or incorporation of another's
work into one's own work. Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will
be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for oﬃcial University policies
and procedures on academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Code of Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/
#universitycodeofconduct
Sexual Harassment:
The University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining an educational environment that is free from
inappropriate conduct of a sexual nature. UT Austin encourages students who believe that they may have been
subjected to sex discrimination, sexual harassment or sexual misconduct by university faculty, staﬀ, students,
visitors or contractors to report it immediately to Christa F. López, Associate Director of Student Emergency
                                                                                                                          !8


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                      Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                     Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
Services, Oﬃce of the Dean of Students, at 512-471-5017. Students may also contact Katherine Antwi Green,
Assistant Vice President for the Oﬃce of Institutional Equity, at 512-471-1849.
Students with Disabilities:
Students with disabilities that aﬀect their ability to participate fully in class or to meet all course requirements are
encouraged to bring this to the attention of their instructor so that appropriate accommodations can be arranged.
Further information is available at Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video
phone) or website http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Mental Health and Support Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
In-house CARE counselor (see below)
For immediate support
Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line:
24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
Free services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
           CARE Program
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the
colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are
struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staﬀ may
refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is
unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting diﬀerently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Oﬃce of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050
or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
                                                                                                                             !9


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                   Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                  Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
Religious holy days
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. Sections 51.911 and 51.925 of
the Texas Education Code address absences by students and instructors for observance of religious holy days.
          Section 51.911 states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A
student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be
allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a
reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in
advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
          Section 51.925 prohibits the university from discriminating against or penalizing an instructor who is
absent from class for the observance of a religious holy day. Proper notice must be given to the department
chair. Prior to the beginning of classes each semester, the instructor must provide the department chair a list of
classes that will be missed due to observance of a religious holy day. The list must be personally delivered,
acknowledged and dated by the chair, or sent certified mail, return receipt requested. Consistent with regular
University policy, the instructor is responsible for finding a qualified substitute UT Austin instructor for any missed
class(es).
Security, Safety, and Sustainibility
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to
the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop.
Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold
yourself and your studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce
material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with
white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate materials and take what they
need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA
Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the
Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
Emergency Evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In
the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services oﬃces.
                                                                                                                        !10


The University of Texas at Austin                                                                  Benjamin Ibarra-Sevilla
School of Architecture                                                                 Associate Professor of Architecture
MS Historic Preservation
ARC386M Graphic Documentation
Fall 2019
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Campus Carry S.B.11
On Monday, August 1st 2016, the state's new Campus Carry law goes into eﬀect, and license holders will
generally be allowed to carry concealed handguns at UT Austin and other public universities. The facilities in
which license holders are allowed to bring their guns with are limited. The rules are strict and the university has
made everything possible to implement this new law smoothly. For more information about Campus Carry and
the responsibilities and obligations that a license holder has, please visit https://campuscarry.utexas.edu It is
highly recommended that all students watch “The Basics” video in the website. If you are concerned and see
something suspicious please call 911.
                                                                                                                       !11
