                           THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
               STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:          SW 393R               Instructor: P. Cody
                                              triciacody@austin.utexas.edu
Unique Number:          87650                 Office: Zoom/Phone for summer 2020
                                              Office Hours: By appointment
Semester:               Summer 2020           Office Phone: 512-413-6405 (cell)
Meeting Time/Place: Mon/Wed                   5:30pm-8:00pm
                        Zoom: https://utexas.zoom.us/my/patriciacody
                          Treatment of Children and Adolescents
I.      STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
The course is designed as an advanced clinical selective for graduate students in the School of
Social Work who wish to increase knowledge and skills for practice with children, adolescents,
and their families. Students will develop a working understanding of children and adolescents from
diverse backgrounds, affirming and respecting their strengths and differences. This course is
grounded in the identification, analysis, and implementation of empirically-based intervention
strategies for working with children, adolescents, and their families. This course will focus on
using multiple perspectives in the advanced application of theories, models and skills utilized in
varying treatment modalities, with emphasis placed at the micro and mezzo levels of practice. The
framework of the course is based on social work values and the ethical decision-making process,
as illuminated by the NASW Code of Ethics. A bio-psycho-social and cultural emphasis will be
applied to the various problem areas and disorders covered.
II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
    1. Demonstrate the ability to integrate theories and empirical research knowledge
        under girding fields of practice areas with child, adolescent, and family populations.
    2. Demonstrate skill in the application of different treatment modalities, including
        formal and informal systems of care.
    3. Demonstrate an advanced clinical knowledge of the relationship between
        assessment and intervention as it relates to the strengths, the processes involved in
        human change, and the capacities and resources of children, adolescents and
        families.
    4. Demonstrate the ability to adapt intervention models and strategies to reflect an
        understanding of persons from diverse backgrounds, including (but not limited to)
        race, ethnicity, culture, class, gender, sexual orientation, religion/spirituality,
        physical or mental ability, developmental level, age, and national origin.
                                                                                                 1


    5. Critically evaluate and analyze different theoretical and intervention models as to
        their effectiveness in given situations. This includes: (a) the adequacy of the
        research and knowledge base; (b) the range of applicability; (c) the value and ethical
        issues, including the student’s own value system; and (d) the policy implications
        involved in delivery of services to children, adolescents, and families.
    6. Demonstrate the ability to implement and evaluate the effectiveness of clinical
        interventions for children, adolescents, and families.
    7. Demonstrate the ability to tailor and integrate clinical interventions for children,
        adolescents, and families based on the context in which they are delivered.
    8. Demonstrate advanced knowledge of social work values and ethical decision-
        making processes as they relate to ethical dilemmas in clinical intervention with
        children, adolescents, and families.
III.    TEACHING METHODS
This class provides opportunities for both theory and skill development. Various models and
theories will be presented through a combination of lectures, demonstrations of the practice
interventions, discussions about skills, videos, as well as small group and experiential exercises.
IV.     REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
Weisz, J. R. & Kazdin, A. E., (Eds.) (2017). Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and
adolescents, 3rd edition. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
This text is available through the UT library system for no cost during this summer semester.
van der Kolk, B. (2014). The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of
Trauma. New York NY: Penguin Random House.
This book is available via amazon and is also available on audible and kindle.
Perry, B. & Szalavitz, M. (2006). The Boy Who Was Raised as a Dog: And Other Stories From a
Child Psychiatrist’s Notebook. Philadelphia, PA: Basic Books.
This book is available via amazon and is also available on audible and kindle.
Additional Readings are posted on Canvas.
                                                                                                    2


V.     COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Attendance and Participation                                           10 points
Promising Practices Paper and Presentation                             30 points
       The paper component of this assignment (25 points) is an opportunity to learn about a
       treatment approach that you otherwise might not have the opportunity to learn about.
       This assignment is to be completed on your own. The topic must be approved by the
       professor by Wednesday 6/26/2020 and the paper is due the last day of class, Monday
       7/27/2020. The paper should be approximately 5-7 pages and cover the following areas:
               1. Description of the approach (What is it? How does it work? Who is it used
               with?)
               2. What theory or theories support the use of this approach? (Describe the
               theoretical framework that is the basis for this approach. This may be available in
               the literature or you may have to critically think through the approach and figure
               out the theoretical perspective.)
               3. Review the current research or literature available about the approach. If there
               is little or no research, you may have to look at related research. What is the
               current state of the research? Is there any outcome research? What are the
               findings?
               4. How does the approach address diversity issues such as race, ethnicity, culture,
               class, gender, sexual orientation, religion/spirituality, physical or mental ability,
               developmental level, age, or national origin?
               5. What is your personal assessment of the strengths and areas for improvement of
               this approach?
       The presentation component of this assignment (5 points) is a short 5-10 minute
       presentation on the last day of class. Each student will share their topic and provide the
       class with a 1 page handout summarizing the topic. Power points are not necessary for this
       presentation.
The Boy Who Was Raised as a Dog Paper and Presentation                 30 points
       This is a group assignment. Each group will consist of 2, possibly 3 students. During the
       first week of class each group will be assigned one chapter of the Bruce Perry book. The
       paper and presentation are to be developed and submitted as a group.
       The paper and presentation should discuss the clinical significance of the content of each
       chapter, its connection to the larger field of social work as well as your professional and
       personal “take aways” from the chapter. The paper and presentation will reflect the
       collaboration and discussion that each group should have about the content. This paper
       should truly be collaborative as opposed to using a “divide and conquer” approach and
       will likely be 5-7 pages. The presentation should be approximately 10-15 minutes.
       The paper and presentation are both due on Monday 7/6/2020
Professional and Personal Reflection Papers                            30 points
       Three reflections papers (10 points each) are due throughout the semester. Each paper
       should be related to a topic that is covered in class and should be 2-3 pages. The approach
       of the paper can be decided by each student for each paper but should be more than simply
       a recounting of the material covered in class and the readings. Each reflection paper should
                                                                                                     3


         demonstrate a deeper level of thinking and consideration about the topic of the reflection
         paper. Students should think about how the topic relates to the larger field, how the topic
         relates to their personal goals, how the topic impacts them personally, the deeper meanings
         of the topic, professional critique and/or how it connects to their professional goals.
         Due dates: Monday 6/22/2020; Wednesday 7/1/2020; Wednesday 7/15/2020
VI.      GRADES
         94.0 and Above               A
         90.0 to 93.999               A-
         87.0 to 89.999               B+
         84.0 to 86.999               B
         80.0 to 83.999               B-
         77.0 to 79.999               C+
         74.0 to 76.999               C
         70.0 to 73.999               C-
         67.0 to 69.999               D+
         64.0 to 66.999               D
         60.0 to 63.999               D-
         Below 60.0                   F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
We will be meeting on Zoom throughout this summer session. During our Zoom session, please
leave your webcam on so that we can all be involved with the discussion as much as possible.
During lecture sections of class, you are welcome to mute your computer but during discussion it
would be best to unmute your computer, if you can do so without a lot of background noise, so
that we can all share in the discussion.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM/ON ZOOM. The
professor expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on
time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one
another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various
backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex,
physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among
others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual
respect. Social Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be
challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom
experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues.
In this environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not
                                                                                                     4


agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students
engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public
social networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users
cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work
students choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen,
read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc.,
can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective
careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
                                                                                                     5


USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing
accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
                                                                                                    6


for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    •    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
         of class.
    •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    •    Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                                                                    7


IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
 Date Topic                         Assignment Due    Readings
 Mon     Zoom                       After class,      Syllabus
 6/8     First Day of Class         complete the      Expectations and summer plans for this course
         Introductions and Overview online survey
         *Media Monday*             regarding chapter
                                    assignments for
                                    The Boy Raised
                                    as a Dog – survey
                                    due by Tuesday
                                    6/9 – assignments
                                    will be made
                                    during class on
                                    6/10.
 Wed     Zoom                       --                Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 1
 6/10    Ethics                                       Introduction: Context, Background, and Goals
         Theoretical Foundations
         working with Children and                    Weisz & Kazdin, 2017; Ch. 26
         Adolescents                                  Ethical Issues in Child and Adolescent
         Culture, Ethnicity, and                      Psychotherapy Research
         Language
                                                      On Canvas:
                                                      Prochaska, J. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2002).
                                                      Transtheoretical model with guidelines for
                                                      families with child abuse and neglect. In A. R.
                                                      Roberts & G. J. Greene (Eds.), Social
                                                      Workers’ Desk Reference (pp. 379-384). New
                                                      York, NY: Oxford University Press.
                                                      Parra‐Cardona, R., López‐Zerón, G.; Leija, S.
                                                      G.; Maas, M. K.; Villa, M.; Zamudio, E.;
                                                      Arredondo, M.; Yeh, H. H.; & Domenech
                                                      Rodríguez, M. M. (2019). A Culturally
                                                      Adapted Intervention for Mexican‐Origin
                                                      Parents of Adolescents: The Need to Overtly
                                                      Address Culture and Discrimination in
                                                      Evidence‐Based Practice. Family Process. Vol.
                                                      58 Issue 2, p334-352.
 Mon     Zoom                       --                Weisz & Kazdin, 2017 --
 6/15    Evidence Based Practice                      Ch. 21- Evidence-Based Psychotherapies with
         with Children and                            Ethnic Minority Children and Adolescents
         Adolescents                                  Ch. 27-Implementing Evidence-Based
         *Media Monday*                               Psychotherapies for Children and Adolescents
                                                      within Complex Mental Health Systems
                                                      Ch. 29- Personalizing Evidence-Based
                                                      Psychotherapy for Children and Adolescents in
                                                      Clinical Care
                                                      Ch. 33- The Present and Future of Evidence-
                                                      Based Psychotherapies
                                                                                                      8


Wed  On your own time (we’ll    --               On Canvas:
6/17 start class on 6/22 with a                  Charry-Sánchez, J.D. (2018). Effectiveness
     brief discussion about the                  of animal-assisted therapy in the pediatric
     readings)                                   population: Systematic review and meta-
     Complementary and                           analysis of controlled studies. 39(7), 580-590.
     Alternative Treatments
     with Children and                           Ahmetoglu, E. (2019). The contributions of
     Adolescents                                 familial and environmental factors to children’s
                                                 connection with nature and outdoor activities.
                                                 Early child development and care. 189 (2),
                                                 233-243.
                                                 Eren, B. (2018). Teaching the Skill of Reading
                                                 Facial Expressions to a Child with Autism
                                                 Using Musical Activities: A Case Study. 7 (6),
                                                 156-164.
Mon  Zoom                       Reflection Paper Weisz & Kazdin, 2017;
6/22 Trauma                     #1 due           Ch. 15 – Trauma Focused Cognitive-
     *Media Monday*                              Behavioral Therapy for Traumatized Children
                                                 van der Kolk; Ch. 1-6
                                                 Perry, Ch. 1-5
Wed  On your own time           Promising        van der Kolk; Ch 7-10
6/24 Trauma                     Practices Paper
                                TOPIC due        Perry, Ch. 6-11
                                before class
                                                 On Canvas:
                                                 Perry, B. (2002). Childhood Experience and
                                                 the Expression of Genetic Potential: What
                                                 Childhood Neglect Tells Us About Nature and
                                                 Nurture. 3, 79-100.
                                                 In announcements:
                                                 Perry video
Mon  Zoom                       --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017;
6/29 Depressive Disorders                        Ch. 4 – Cognitive-Behavioral Treatment for
     Suicide Prevention                          Adolescent Depression
     *Media Monday*                              Ch. 5 – Treating Adolescent Depression Using
                                                 Interpersonal Psychotherapy
                                                 On Canvas:
                                                 Nebhinani, N. & Singhai, K. (2019). Suicide
                                                 prevention strategies for adolescents and youth:
                                                 Where are we missing? J. Indian Assoc. Child
                                                 Adolesc. Ment. Health. 15(2), 1-12.
                                                                                                 9


Wed  On your own time          Reflection Paper Weisz & Kazdin, 2017;
7/1  Anxiety                   #2 due           Ch. 2 – Child Focused Treatment for Anxiety
     Obsessive Compulsive                       Ch. 3 – Treating Pediatric Obsessive-
     Disorder                                   Compulsive Disorder in Children: Using
                                                Exposure Based Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy
Mon  Zoom
7/6  Group Presentations: The  Group Paper      --
     Boy Who Was Raised as a   DUE: The Boy
     Dog                       Who Was Raised
     *Media Monday*            as a Dog
Wed  Zoom                      --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017;
7/8  Disruptive Disorders                       Ch. 6 – The Evolution of the Oregon Model of
                                                Parent Management training: An Intervention
                                                for Antisocial Behavior in Children and
                                                Adolescents
                                                Ch. 7 – Parent-Child Interaction Therapy and
                                                the Treatment of Disruptive Behavior
                                                Disorders
                                                Ch. 8 – The Incredible Years Parents, Teachers,
                                                and Children Training Series: A Multifaceted
                                                Treatment Approach for Young Children and
                                                Conduct Problems
                                                Ch. 12 – Treatin Serious Antisocial Behavior
                                                Using Multisystemic Therapy
Mon  Zoom                      --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017;
7/13 Autism Spectrum Disorders                  Ch. 17 – Pivotal Response Treatment for
     *Media Monday*                             Individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder
                                                In announcements: The Horse Boy by Rupert
                                                Isaacson (documentary)
Wed  Zoom                      Reflection Paper Weisz & Kazdin, 2017;
7/15 School Based Approaches   #3 due           Ch. 13 – Summer Treatment Programs for
     ADHD                                       Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
Mon  Zoom                      --               Weisz & Kazdin, 2017;
7/20 Child Welfare                              Ch. 11 – Treatment Foster Care Oregon for
     *Media Monday*                             Adolescents: Research and Implementation
                                                On Canvas:
                                                Henry, D.; (2005). The 3-5-7 Model: Preparing
                                                Youth for Permanency. Children and Youth
                                                Services Review, 27(2), 197-212.
Wed  On your own time          --               Work on your Promising Practices
7/22                                            Paper/Presentation on your own time
                                                                                             10


 Mon        Zoom                        Promising         --
 7/27       Last Day of Class           Practices Paper
            Promising Practices In-     Due by the End of
            Class Presentations         the Day
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ahmetoglu, E. (2019). The contributions of familial and environmental factors to children’s
connection with nature and outdoor activities. 189 (2), 233-243.
Charry-Sánchez, J.D. (2018). Effectiveness of animal-assisted therapy in the pediatric
population: Systematic review and meta-analysis of controlled studies. 39(7), 580-590.
Nebhinani, N. & Singhai, K. (2019). Suicide prevention strategies for adolescents and youth:
Where are we missing? J. Indian Assoc. Child Adolesc. Ment. Health. 15(2), 1-12.
Eren, B. (2018). Teaching the Skill of Reading Facial Expressions to a Child with Autism Using
Musical Activities: A Case Study. 7 (6), 156-164.
Henry, D.; (2005). The 3-5-7 Model: Preparing Youth for Permanency. Children and Youth
Services Review, 27(2), 197-212.
Parra‐Cardona, R., López‐Zerón, G.; Leija, S. G.; Maas, M. K.; Villa, M.; Zamudio, E.;
Arredondo, M.; Yeh, H. H.; & Domenech Rodríguez, M. M. (2019). A Culturally Adapted
Intervention for Mexican‐Origin Parents of Adolescents: The Need to Overtly Address Culture
and Discrimination in Evidence‐Based Practice. Family Process. Vol. 58 Issue 2, p334-352.
Perry, B. (2002). Childhood Experience and the Expression of Genetic Potential: What
Childhood Neglect Tells Us About Nature and Nurture. 3, 79-100.
Perry, B. & Szalavitz, M. (2006). The Boy Who Was Raised as a Dog: And Other Stories From a
Child Psychiatrist’s Notebook. Philadelphia, PA: Basic Books.
Prochaska, J. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2002). Transtheoretical model with guidelines for families
with child abuse and neglect. In A. R. Roberts & G. J. Greene (Eds.), Social Workers’ Desk
Reference (pp. 379-384). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
van der Kolk, B. (2014). The Body Keeps the Score: Brain, Mind, and Body in the Healing of
Trauma. New York NY: Penguin Random House.
Weisz, J. R. & Kazdin, A. E., (Eds.) (2017). Evidence-based psychotherapies for children and
adolescents, 3rd edition. New York, NY: The Guilford Press.
                                                                                              11
