                                  History of West Africa
                                  Instructor: Toyin Falola
                                     Office: GAR 2.142
               Office Hours: Tuesday & Thursday (Strictly by appointment)
                           E-mail: toyinfalola@austin.utexas.edu
               Class Venue: UTC 3.134, Tuesday & Thursday 11.00-12:30
Course Description
This course examines the history of West Africa from around ca. AD 1000 to the present.
The approach focuses on key themes within a chronological framework. The syllabus is
divided into four major eras: States and State Formations till 1800; the Nineteenth
Century; Colonial period; and the Post-colonial. The course emphasizes key regional
innovations generated by women, farmers, political leaders, and others. As many of the
events took place in the concept of a "global world", the connections between West
Africa and other parts of Africa, Europe and the Americas are woven into the weekly
lectures. West Africa operated at the regional level, but also as part of a larger African
continent and the Atlantic World. Local and regional events are treated in relation to
global events and their consequences.
 Course Objectives:
1. To learn how to assess historical materials (their relevance to a given interpretative
    problem, their reliability and their importance) and to determine the biases present
    within particular scholarship. These include not only historical documents, but
    literature and films as well.
2. To identify and discuss the main themes in West African history.
3. To recognize the dynamic nature of African history and culture, and to apply new
    knowledge of the different agencies that have impacted upon the region.
4. Lectures will not cover all the topics in the recommended text.
Required Texts:
Eugene L. Mendonsa, West Africa: An Introduction to Its History, Civilization, and
         Contemporary Situation (Durham: Carolina Academic Press, 2002) Paper ISBN
         0-89089-649-6
Toyin Falola, Counting the Tigers Teeth (Ann Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan
         Press, 2014) paper ISBN 978-0-472-03656-1
                                              1


                       TEACHING AND READING SCHEDULE
January 22-24: Geography, Environment, and Language
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 1
January 29-31: Precolonial Formations
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 8
February 5-7: Kinship and Kingship
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 2
February 12: Film screening
Lost Kingdoms of Africa 4
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QW_kaUuUg8Y
February 14: Religions
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 3
February 19-21: Islam and Its Impact
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 9
February 26-28: Economy
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 4
March 5: Film Screening
The manuscripts of Timbuktu
http://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/record=b8288613~S29
March 7: Film Screening
Yoruba Pilgrimage
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FDpC8XihetE
March 12: Politics
                                           2


Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 5
March 14: Mid term exam in class.
March 18-23: Spring Break
March 28: Conference Trade-off
April 2: Art
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 6
April 4: Music
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 7
April 9-11: European Contacts
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapters 10, 12, 13
April 16-18: Colonial Rule and Its Impact
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 14
April 23-25: Decolonization
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter, Chapter 15
April 30: Postcolonialism
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 16
May 2: Development
Reading: Mendosa, West Africa, Chapter 18
May 7: Decoloniality: Discussion on Change and Continuity
May 9: Final Exam in class.
Grading and Assignments
Final Grade Breakdown
Assignment                            Due Date            Grade
Class Attendance                                           10%
Book Review                           March 7              20%
Submit hardcopy
Mid-Term Exam                        March 14               20%
                                          3


Conference Review/Presentation            April 4                                       20%
Submit hardcopy
Final Exam                                May 9                                         30%
Overall semester averages will earn the following letter grades:
93-100: A       90-92: A-
87-89: B+       83-86: B        80-82: B-
77-79: C+       73-76: C        70-72: C-
67-69: D+       63-66: D        60-62: D-       0-59: F
Evaluation and Points: (No extra credit will be awarded, and the course is not
graded on curve) The weight is distributed to ensure success for all students, balancing
the various needs to participate, interact, engage, think critically, and write well. Not all
students seek an A or B grade, but those who do should expect to do the maximum
required. Always read before the class so that you can understand the lectures and ask
questions.
Class Rules:
    1) All assignments must be submitted on due dates. 5 points per day are deducted
        thereafter.
    2) Except on medical ground or permission from the Dean’s office, there is no make-
        up examination.
    3) There is no option for additional credit.
    4) Failure to read the books, which will be detected in projects and examinations,
        will be treated as lack of preparation.
    5) Attendance is necessary to make sense of the lectures. It is expected that lectures
        and class discussions will be reflected in all projects. The Instructor will not use
        office hours to repeat class lectures but to clarify points. Also, the Instructor and
        the TA will not give lecture notes to those who miss classes. Class lectures will
        not be posted on Canvas.
Mid-Term Exam:
The examination consists of two essay questions. Students are expected to answer both
questions, writing at least three pages on each. Essay questions will be drawn from a pool
of questions submitted through Canvas. Students who integrate materials from textbooks,
lecture notes, and films will be rewarded.
Book Review:
All students are required to review the following book.
Toyin Falola, Counting the Tigers Teeth, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2014.
                                              4


The book review should be no less than 3 pages typed and double-spaced. Book review
should be analytical, and not just a retelling of the narrative. The best way to do this is by
synthesizing the narrative in your own mind and then critically examining such things as
the historical content, style and the overall impression the book made on you. You will
probably want to assess how the book fits in with particular topics or themes we are
developing in the course. Feel free to express your own opinion, but do so clearly.
Organize and develop the main points you wish to make and re-emphasize them in a
conclusion. Proofread your review before submitting it. Late submission will be
penalized. Book review is due in class on March 7, 2019.
Conference Review/Conference Presentation:
All students must endeavor to attend the 2019 Africa Conference to be held from March
29-31, 2019. (Additional information will be announced in class).
For information and panels, visit the link below:
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/africa-conference/conference-schedule1/conference-
schedule.php
The conference is part of the attempt to provide students with new knowledge about
Africa. The conference participation assignment comes with two options:
    1) Attend a minimum of two panels (not two presenters!) of your choice and the
        Conference Keynote and write a report on them, minimum of 5 pages. A panel
        consists of a set of presenters. Participation in the conference is part of the class
        and it is mandatory. There is no substitute assignment unless on medical grounds,
        mandatory official duties or religious holidays. During the presentations, students
        will be allowed to ask respective presenters questions on issues pertaining to the
        lecture. For the review, students will be expected to fulfill a two-fold task: first,
        summarize the lecture in no more than 2 page (roughly 500 words); secondly,
        offer an analysis of the presentations in 2 page (roughly 500 words); thirdly, give
        your opinion of the lecture in no less than 1 page (roughly 300 words). Report
        will be due in class on April 4, 2019.
    2) Alternatively, students can utilize the Africa Conference as an opportunity to
        enhance their skills in public speaking and academic presentation. As part of this
        option, students will be asked to present a paper in the Africa Conference written
        by a scholar who is unable to attend. If you present then you will write the
        conference review based on the keynote and only one panel. In other words, you
        are exempted from writing about two panels. In this case, your paper should be 3
        pages instead of 5. (If you want to take up this option, please discuss this with
        me ahead of time so that I can make available to you the paper you will
        present.)
                                               5


Final Examination:
The examination consists of two essay questions. Students are expected to answer both
questions, writing at least three pages on each. Essay questions will be drawn from a pool
of questions submitted through Canvas. Students who integrate materials from textbooks,
lecture notes, and films will be rewarded.
Make-up policy: Make-ups will be granted only in the case of medical illness or
university-related conflict. Such conflicts will require signed documentation from the
Dean’s Office explaining the reason for absence.
Attendance policy:
The class attendance will be counted from the 24th of January 2019. It will be counted
based on the total of 27 classes. For each absence, students will lose approximately 0.37
points from the final grade. Absences will be excused if a student provides
documentation of emergency health situation, death in family, job interviews, etc.
However, without documentation no excuses will be granted.
University Regulations
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Any student found
guilty of scholastic dishonesty may receive an “F” in the course and be remanded to the
appropriate University of Texas authorities for disciplinary action. For more information,
view Student Judicial Services at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Use of Class Materials: No material presented in lecture may be directly or indirectly
published, posted to the Internet, or rewritten for publication or distribution in any
medium. Neither these materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer
except for personal and non-commercial use. All information derived from the internet
must be adequately cited.
Student Privacy: The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) require that
student privacy be preserved. Thus the posting of grades, even by the last four digits of
the social security number, is forbidden. All communication will remain between the
instructor and the student, and the instructor will not be able to share details of the
student’s performance with parents, spouses, or any others.
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon
request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For
                                              6


more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone).
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence
at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is
acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas
Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit:
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students: E-mail is recognized as an
official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading
your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You
should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum
twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating
your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of
the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of
the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one
you used when you entered the building.
If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department,
or the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions.
Q Drop Policy: Texas law limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six.
Senate Bill 1231 says: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of
higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another
institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
than that number.
                                              7
