     MUS 319D – AET 305, Section I & II Foundations of Digital Sound and Music
                                              22150 - 20565
                                    8:00 – 9:20am, M–W, DFA 4.126
                                              22155 - 20570
                                   9:30 – 10:50am, M–W, DFA 4.126
                                                Spring 2019
Instructor: Nathan Nokes – nathan.nokes@gmail.com
Office Hours: TBA | EMS Studios MRH 4.176 (EMS III)
Teaching Assistant: Rita Yung – ysnrita@gmail.com
Description
Students enrolled this class will focus on learning the basic concepts behind digital audio and recording.
The course will cover foundational material for dealing with recording, editing, sequencing, and mixing
inside a Digital Audio Workstation. The primary objective of this course is to provide a functional
understanding of digital audio systems and recording techniques that can be utilized in various fields
including, but not limited to: audio production, film scoring, game music, and sound design.
By the end of this course, students will:
         •    Have an understanding of principles of sound (both acoustic and digital)
         •    Work with manipulation, entry and sequencing of MIDI data and instruments to create
              synthesized, and sampled sounds - This includes editing techniques and learning about
              various forms of processing such as reverberation, filtering, audio compression and other
              special effects.
         •    Gain experience editing, manipulating and processing audio recordings
         •    Create a stand-alone piece of music or sound design project demonstrating the knowledge
              gained throughout the semester
Class Format:
This course will be split between lectures and lab work. Some days will be dedicated to lecturing,
answering questions, and demonstrating concepts. As the semester continues the lectures will begin to
be split with hands-on lab work in the multimedia lab, using the tools demonstrated in class. Students will
also be expected to complete projects and assignments according to the topics discussed.
Materials
Logic X Pro - Available in the classroom. Optional Purchase (Pro Apps Bundle for Education discount
available from Apple).
Decent flat response closed or semi closed headphones (bring every class).
Optional
Serum (synthesizer), online download. Xfer Records. Available in the classroom. Optional Purchase.
Rumsey, Francis and Tim McCormick. Sound and Recording. Waltham, MA: Focal Press, 2009
Izhaki, Roey. Mixing Audio. Waltham, MA: Focal Press, 2012
Komplete 11 – Native Instruments.
Eastwest - Composer Cloud
                                                       !1


Prerequisites
For AET 305: Arts and Entertainment Technology 304 (AET304).
For MUS319D - None
Basic knowledge of music theory. (scales, chords, chord progression, rhythmic notation, etc.)
Future Study
For those wanting to continue courses in digital audio in the Fall after taking this course
consider MUS 329E Introduction to Electronic Media, and MUS 329J Introduction to Computer
Music.
Course outline
Subject to Change. Official communication with student will be either during class, or through
UT Canvas. It is student’s responsibility to check the class website regularly to be aware of
changes made to this outline, although I will do my best to make these announcements during
class.
     Date                      Main Topic(s)                     Readings             Assignments/
                                                                                     projects/quizzes
    Week 1      – Course Introduction – review syllabus,
     1/23          course overview.
                – Lecture: Music theory review
    Week 2     –   Lecture: Acoustics, fundamentals of       Logic Pro X User     Assignment 1
     1/28          sound, and psychoacoustics.               Guide
     1/30          Lab Work: Working in a DAW 1 (Intro to
                   Logic, signal flow, audio editing.)
               –   Lecture: Introduction to digital audio
    Week 3     –   Lab Work: Working in a DAW 2                                   Assignment 2
      2/4          (Bussing, routing, grouping,
      2/6          automation)
               –    Lecture: MIDI (history, use synthesis
                    and sampling)
    Week 4     –    Lab Work: Working in a DAW 3 (Midi                            Quiz (on content
     2/11           recording, editing. Project 1)                                from weeks 2, and
     2/13      –    Quiz # 1 (First 30 min of 2/14 class)                         3)
                                                                                  Project 1
    Week 5     Lab Work: Working on Project 1                                     Assignment 3
     2/10           – Lecture: Frequency processing
     2/21               (EQ, Filters, comb filters)
                    – Lab Work
    Week 6     Audio processing                                                   Assignment 4
     2/25           – Lecture: Time processing (delay,
     2/27               flanger, chorus)
                    – Lab Work
                                                     !2


     Week 7        Audio processing                                                    Assignment 5
       3/4              – Lecture: Specialization (panning,
       3/6                  reverb)
                        – Lecture: Dynamic processing
                            (compressor, limiter, gate, ducker)
                        – Lab Work
     Week 8        Midterm Project (both days)                                         Midterm Project
       3/11
      3/13
    SPRING
    BREAK
     Week 9        –   Lecture: Basic subtractive synthesis     Serum User guide       Assignment 6
      3/25             (Serum)
      3/28         –   Lab Work/Possible field trip
    Week 10        –   Lecture: Samplers and step               Kontakt User guide     Assignment 7
       4/1             sequencers (Kontakt, Eastwest,           Logic User guide
       4/3             Ultrabeat)
                   –   Lab Work
    Week 11        –   Lecture: Mixing/Mastering
       4/8         –   Microphones and Studio equipment
      4/10
    Week 12        –   TBA
      4/15         –   Quiz 2
      4/17
    Week 13        –   TBA                                                             Final Project
      4/22         –   Lab Work: Final Project
      4/24
    Week 14        –   TBA                                                             Final Project
      4/29         –   Lab Work: Final Project
       5/1
    Week 15                                                                            Final Project
       5/6                 Final Project Presentation
       5/8
Classroom policies
Students are expected to attend class daily. Students will have 2 excused absences (without doctor’s
note/notification). Each absence beyond 2 (without a doctor’s note/notification) will result in a reduction of
5 points off the final (assignments) point total in the course.
All students are expected to participate in class discussion, and are expected to respect the opinions and
statements of their classmates during discussion and classroom activities.
Contacting Teacher or TA(s)
For basic questions concerning assignments or lectures, email the the TAs and CC me. In addition feel
free to stop by during my office hours.
Note about email: Most weekdays I typically check my email early morning and in the evening. Please
allow adequate time for responses.
                                                         !3


Grading
Projects and homework will be submitted online via Canvas.
Make-up work will be accepted under special circumstances only. There will be no make-up exams,
except in emergency circumstances (please see me for additional details).
Assignments should be turned in on time. Late assignments will be accepted up to 1 week after the due
date, with a 5% deduction for each day late.
                 The final grade is calculated from:
                 45% – Assignments/quizzes/projects
                 15% – Midterm
                 30% – Final project
                 10% – Attendance
Grading Policy
To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage.
Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not
recognize the grade of A+. Thus, the conversion from percentage value to letter grade is as
follows:
                 A = 94 – 100
                 A- = 90 – 93.999…
                 B+ = 87 – 89.999…
                 B = 84 – 86.999…
                 B- = 80 – 83.999…
                 C+ = 77 – 79.999…
                 C = 74 – 76.999…
                 C- = 70 – 73.999…
                 D+ = 67 – 69.999…
                 D = 64 – 66.999…
                 D- = 60 – 63.999…
                 F = 0 – 59.999…
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •   You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •   You have a right to respect.
     •   You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •   You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •   You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •   You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
         improve your learning environment.
     •   You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
         shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
         with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
         overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
         others.
                                                     !4


   •    Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
        bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
   •    You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
        someone is excluded.
   •    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each
        other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
    Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals
    and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation,
    gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with
    the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate
    name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that
    I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
    Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor
    Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
    values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very
    seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that
    you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be
    guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
    the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
    University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address: http://
    deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Drop Policy
    If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
    the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
    law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
    institution. For more information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/
    adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
    Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because
    we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or
    exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to
    meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of
    resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
    This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
    there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you
    have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
    arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
    committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do
    so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
                                                  !5


     confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
     Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video
     phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising,
     avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
     help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
     helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is
     learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings
     like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://
     www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger
     Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are
     welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
     specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in
     15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
     or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
     If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
     Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call
     can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
     instincts and share your concerns.
     The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
     Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
     evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
     requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
     Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
     building.
 •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
     first week of class.
 •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
                                                  !6


  re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
  University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
  be found at:
  www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                              !7
