                                        SOC 344: Racial and Ethnic Relations
                                                  Unique Course ID: 82374
                                                            Summer 2020
Class Meets
          WHEN: Tuesday and Thursday 1pm-2:30pm
          WHERE: Zoom
  Professor: Dr. Robert L. Reece
  Office: XXXXXXXX                                               Office hours:
  Email: Robert.L.Reece@gmail.com                                Online by appointment
  Phone: XXXXXXXXX
  Teaching Assistant:
  XXXXXXXXX
Course Description
This course will introduce students to the sociological study of race and ethnicity. It is designed to help students understand and learn
to interrogate the origins and social production of race and racial inequality and how both continue to shape the world that we all live
in. Topics will range from the multiplicative origins of the idea of race and racial classification to the breadth and depth of racial
inequality and how even racial inequality is stratified further by skin shade to theories and speculations about the future of racial
demographic change. This is an upper division course that has been designed to be collaborative and student led. Although I offer a
scaffolding for the course and will serve as a guide and moderator, the specific directions of the learning will rely heavily on student
input.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. The purpose of the Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag is
for students to explore in depth the shared practices and beliefs of one or more underrepresented cultural groups subject to
persistent marginalization. In addition to learning about these diverse groups in relation to their specific contexts, students should
engage in an active process of critical reflection. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one underrepresented cultural group in the U.S.
You must have completed 60 hours of coursework to enroll in this course.
Attendance Policy
I encourage you all to attend class each day. I do not track attendance; however, studies show that class attendance is highly
correlated with grades so it is in your best interest to log on every day.
Course Materials
I will provide all of your readings through Canvas. Please pay attention to page numbers!
Videos listed on the syllabus are available online through the library website with your UT login.
 SYLLABUS SUBJECT TO CHANGE WITH FAIR NOTICE
                                                                 Page 1 of 7


Assignments and Grading (all assignments will have a Canvas submission portal; please do not email them to us)
Summary of Recommended Readings (once per semester) – 10%
You will each be assigned one week where you are responsible for reading and writing a 300 word summary of one of the
recommended readings of your choice for that week. Your summary is due at the beginning of Tuesday’s class for that
week. You will then also give a quick verbal summary to the class and field their questions.
Discussion Questions – 25%
Every week you will be responsible for completing a two part assignment worth a total of 100 points. 50 points will be
based on your submission of three discussion questions by midnight on Tuesday. The questions should demonstrate your
knowledge of that week’s material or ask for a deeper discussion of one of the week’s topics. Avoid generic questions
that do not apply specifically to the course material. For example, you may ask which of the social theories we discussed
that week seem more relevant to a current event or how that week’s topic ties in with a previous week. We will use these
questions to guide class on Thursday. The remaining 50 points depend on your attendance and participation in Thursday’s
class. You must submit the questions and participate in class to earn full credit for the week.
Weekly Quizzes – 25%
Each Friday you will be given a quiz consisting of five short answer questions. We will post the quiz to Canvas Friday
morning and you will have until midnight to complete it. You are welcome to use your readings and notes to answer the
questions.
Policy Proposal and Presentation – 40% (due date and presentations on July 10)
A substantial portion of your grade will come from a policy proposal and presentation that you will complete in assigned
groups. While you will need to complete a fair amount of work for this project outside of class, we will also carve out
class time for you to work on it. This will allow us to offer guidance and answer questions as you work. The parameters of
the project are as follows. Refer to the rubric at the end of the syllabus for specific grading criteria.
Stage One – Identify a COVID-19 race related problem
          •Examples here include racial disparities in fatalities, harassment of Asian Americans, infections of incarcerated people, etc.
Stage Two – Identify relevant data and research to describe the scope of the problem
          •Peer reviewed data may not be available yet, but look for policy reports, investigative reporting, data from organizations
like the CDC and World Health Organization, etc.
          •Write 400 words describing the scope of the problem; provide relevant data, examples, sources.
                   •Use a citation style of your choice
Stage Three – Identify the historical and contemporary factors that set the stage for this problem
          •A virus doesn’t express biases so describe the social forces that led to a racialized problem
          •Write 500 words explaining these factors; this should include more peer reviewed sources
                   •Use a citation style of your choice
Stage Four – Develop policy solutions
          •What should the government do to fix this problem?
          •How can those solutions be implemented?
          •Write 500 words explaining your policy and plan for implementation
State Five – Presentation
          •Prepare a 10 minute presentation using PowerPoint to highlight the main points of your proposal
          •Use clean, legible slides and graphics, tables, and images where relevant
                                                                 Page 2 of 7


Late Work and Makeup Policy
I understand that sometimes things happen, particularly in the middle of a global pandemic. If you need to makeup an assignment,
contact us as soon as possible and we will try to make accommodations.
Grading Scale
    A   94%
    A-  90%
    B+  87%
    B   84%
    B-  80%
    C+  77%
    C   74%
    C-  70%
    D   65%
    F<  65%
Course Schedule
Week 1 – June 4 – Introduction and Syllabus
Week 2 – June 9, 11 – What is Race? Racial Categories
Required Readings
Smedley – Race in North America – ch.1
Strimic-Pawl et al 2018 – Race Counts
Recommended Readings
Gross 1998 – Litigating Whiteness
Roth 2016 – Multiple Dimensions of Race
Roth 2018 – Establishing the Denominator
Hochschild and Powell – Racial Recognition and the United States Census
Robbin 2000 – Administrative Policy as Symbol System
Week 3 – June 15, 18 – What is Race? Race and Biology
Required Readings
Roberts – Fatal Invention – ch. 2
VIDEO: Race: the Power of an Illusion part 1
Braun et al 2007 – Racial Categories in Medical Practice
Recommended Readings
Roth and Ivemark 2018 – Genetic Options
Smedley and Smedley 2005 – Race as Biology is Fiction, Racism as a Social Problem is Real
Strings 2015 – Obese Black Women as Social Dead Weight
Bonham et al 2005 – Race and Ethnicity in the Genome Era
                                                             Page 3 of 7


Week 4 – June 23, 25 – Racial Inequality
Required Readings
State of Black America 2018 – Black-White Index
State of Black America 2018 – Hispanic-White Index
VIDEO: Race: the Power of an Illusion part 2
Recommended Readings
Bonilla-Silva 1997 – Rethinking Racism
Kawai 2005 – Stereotyping Asian Americans
Martin 2010 – Slavery’s Invisible Engine
Baptist 2016 – Towards a Political Economy of Slave Labor
Week 5 – June 30, July 2 – Colorism
Required Readings
VIDEO: A Question of Color
Reece 2017 – By the Numbers
Hunter 1997 – The Persistent Problem of Colorism
Recommended Readings
Washington 2011 – Hypodescent pp. 2-124
Reece 2018 – Color Crit
Jones 2000 – Shades of Brown
Hannon 2015 – White Colorism
Margolis 2019 – Color as a Batson Class in California
Week 6 – July 7, 9 – The Future of Race
Required Readings
Darity 2019 – Running the Numbers
Alba 2018 – What Majority-Minority Society
Bergman 2019 – When Environmental Racism and Climate Change Collide
Recommended Readings
Bonilla-Silva – Racism Without Racists ch.11
Bell 1992 – Racial Realism
Ray and Seamster 2016 – Rethinking Racial Progress
Darity et al 2010 – Reparations for African Americans as a Transfer Problem
Policy Proposal Due Date and Presentations: July 10
                                                              Page 4 of 7


Appendices and Policies
Student Rights & Responsibilities
                 • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
                 • You have a right to respect.
                 • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
                 • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
                 • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
                 • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
                     environment.
                 • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded
                     or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team and with
          others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. Your experience with this
          course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’
          experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards, and holding
          the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race,
culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor
with the student’s legal name. We will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please
advise us of this preference early in the semester so that we may make appropriate changes to our records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at
Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web
address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of
this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies
to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our
learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
                                                                 Page 5 of 7


environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep
and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and
an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often
helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly
encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their
academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share
your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated.
Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
                                                                Page 6 of 7


COVID-19 Policy Proposal Grading Guidelines
           STAGE 1 – IDENTIFY STAGE 2 – DESCRIBE THE        STAGE 3 – CONTEXTUALIZE          STAGE 4 – DEVELOP POLICY       STAGE 5 - PRESENTATION
           A PROBLEM          SCOPE OF THE PROBLEM          THE PROBLEM                      SOLUTIONS
 20 POINTS Identify a race    • Meets word count            • Meets word count              • Meets word count             • Meets time expectations
           related COVID-19   • Minimal grammatical errors  • Minimal grammatical errors    • Minimal grammatical          • Addresses all sections of the
           problem            • Triangulate the problem     • Describe context from           errors                         proposal
                                from multiple sources (4-5)   multiple sources (4-5)        • Describes how policy fixes   • Clear, legible presentation
                                                            • Makes clear, coherent           the problem                    slides
                                                              historical and contextual     • Describes how policy         • Appropriate and creative use
                                                              connections                     should be implemented          of graphics/tables/images
                                                                                                                           • Clear, coherent explanations
 15 POINTS N/A                • Meets word count            • Meets word count              • Meets word count             • Meets time expectations
                              • Moderate grammatical        • Moderate grammatical errors   • Moderate grammatical         • Addresses all sections of the
                                errors                      • Describe context from a few     errors                         proposal
                              • Triangulate the problem       sources (2-3)                 • Describes how policy fixes • Slightly cluttered but legible
                                from a few sources (2-3)    • Makes clear, coherent           the problem                    presentation slides
                                                              historical and contextual     • Describes how policy         • Disconnected or few
                                                              connections                     should be implemented          graphics/tables/images
                                                                                                                           • Mostly clear, coherent
                                                                                                                             explanations
 10 POINTS N/A                • Doesn’t meet word count     • Doesn’t meet word count       • Doesn’t meet word count      • Fails to meet time expectations
                              • Heavy grammatical errors    • Heavy grammatical errors      • Heavy grammatical errors     • Disproportionate focus on one
                              • Relies on minimal sources   • Relies on minimal sources (1- • Describes how policy fixes     or two sections of the proposal
                                (1-2)                         2)                              the problem                  • Cluttered, barely legible
                                                            • Struggles to make coherent    • Fails to describe how policy   presentation slides
                                                              historical and contextual       should be implemented        • Unrelated
                                                              connections                                                    graphics/tables/images
                                                                                                                           • Struggles to explain
 5 POINTS  N/A                • Doesn’t meet word count     • Doesn’t meet work count       • Doesn’t meet word count      • Fails to meet time expectations
                              • Extreme grammatical errors  • Extreme grammatical errors    • Extreme grammatical          • Completely omits one or more
                              • No sources or unreliable    • No sources or unreliable        errors                         sections of the proposal
                                sources (blogs, conspiracy    sources (blogs, conspiracy    • Fails to describe how policy • Illegible presentations slides
                                sites, etc)                   sites, etc)                     fixes the problem            • No graphics/tables/images
                                                            • History and context           • Fails to describe how policy • Confusing, unclear
                                                              completely disconnected         should be implemented          explanations
                                                              from the problem
 0 POINTS  No work            No work                       No work                          No work                        No work
                                                                      Page 7 of 7
