Linguistics 344k, Summer 2020
                     Phonetics: Production and Perception of Speech Sounds
                      Linguistics 344k, Summer 2020, Unique Number 81155
                 Asynchronous Lectures: Monday, Wednesday, Friday 10:00-11:30
                 Synchronous Class Meetings: Tuesday and Thursday 10:00-11:30
Instructor:     Laura R. Faircloth                      Office Hours: MWF 10:30-11:30
                lrfaircloth@utexas.edu                                  subject to change
                                                                        (and by appointment)
Rationale: This class focuses on the sounds of speech in human spoken languages. We will
examine three main domains: the articulation of speech sounds, the acoustics of speech sounds,
and the perception of speech sounds. Then, we will discuss how the field of phonetics impacts
other areas of linguistics, such as dialect variation. This course is also focused on understanding
the scientific method and how it is used in linguistics.
Format: This course is a combination of lectures, discussion, and in-class labs. Lectures will be
delivered asynchronously through Canvas on Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays. Each day will
have a module consisting of video lectures with graded practice problems and questions. The
instructor will be available for assistance as well. Synchronous labs and discussions will be held
via Zoom on Tuesdays and Thursdays. Students are expected to attend these meetings to enhance
their learning of the topics from the lectures. Students will be evaluated through a midterm test,
homework assignments, in-class labs, and a final project. There are no prerequisites.
Textbook: There are two required textbooks (listed below). There will also be supplementary
readings posted on canvas. Complete the reading by the class specified in the syllabus.
Ladefoged, Peter, and Sarah Ferrari Disner. Vowels and Consonants. 3rd ed. Malden, MA:
        Wiley-Blackwell, 2012.
Reetz, Henning, and Allard Jongman. Phonetics: Transcription, Production, Acoustics, and
        Perception. Blackwell Textbooks in Linguistics 22. Oxford, United Kingdom: Blackwell
        Publishing, 2009.
                                         Course Procedures
        Attendance and Participation Policy: Students must attend all synchronous discussions
and labs as well as completing all asynchronous lectures and activities. You will learn the most
by participating in both, and you are responsible for the material in the lectures and in the
readings. If you miss a class, you are responsible for getting the material from classmates.
        Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence
and the date of observance of a religious holy day as far in advance as possible. If you must miss
a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I
will give you an opportunity to complete missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
        Classroom Behavior: Observe normal classroom etiquette during Zoom meetings. This
includes managing your environment and avoiding distractions for you and your classmates.
        Canvas: Asynchronous lectures and synchronous Zoom meetings are all run through
canvas. Additionally, I use Canvas to post lectures, assignments, grades, and readings. I will use
the Canvas announcement system to communicate with the class- make sure that you check these
regularly. (You can change the settings in Canvas to send you an email when announcements are
posted) URL: http://canvas.utexas.edu
                                                                                                    1


Linguistics 344k, Summer 2020
        Email: You must regularly check your university email, ideally at least once a day. Please
use my email address, listed on the top of the syllabus, to contact me instead of the Canvas email
system, which is unreliable. I answer emails in a timely fashion (24 hours during the week, 48
hours on the weekends), but do not expect an immediate response.
                                             Assignments
Grading Procedures: Grades are based on participation in the course, homework assignments,
in-class lab assignments, one exam, and a final project. When a grade is posted on Canvas,
questions about the grade must be asked within one week. After that time, I will discuss the
material on the assignment but not the grade itself.
        Participation (discussions and module quizzes): 6%
        Homework: 10% (4 total, 2.5% each)
        Labs: 10% (5 total, 1.66% each)
        Article Worksheets: 4% (4 total, 1% each)
        Midterm Exam: 10%
        Final Project: 60% (divided, see project handout)
Final Grades: Your letter grade will be determined by your overall final grade. This course
grades on a +/- scale.
 A      93-100              B     83- 86.99          C       73-76.99          D     63-66.99
 A-     90-92.99            B-    80-82.99           C-      70-72.99          D-    60-62.99
 B+     87-89.99            C+    77 -79.99          D+      67-69.99          F     0-59.99
Late work: Late work will not be accepted except under extenuating circumstances. In such
events, you must contact me before the due date to make alternative arrangements. Late
discussion worksheets will not be accepted under any circumstances because they will be
discussed in class.
        Participation: The online modules will include short quiz questions to help you engage
with the material. These are worth 3% of your grade, and are due before the next class session.
Participating in the in-class discussions is worth 3%.
        Homework: There will be four homework assignments that will be posted on Canvas.
You will submit a typed, pdf document via canvas by midnight on the day the assignment is due.
An incomplete assignment is better than none.
        In-Class Labs: There will be a total of five in-class lab assignments. These will be
conducted during class time in small groups. Write-ups are due at midnight the day of the lab.
        Article Worksheets: For each in-class discussion, you will read an academic article and
complete a short worksheet that guides you through the paper and prepares you for the
discussion. These are graded on completion and are due before class on the day of the discussion.
        Midterm Test: This class has one midterm test that focuses on technical skills developed
during the first half of the course. You will have 24 hours to complete the test.
        Final Project: This course has a final project in lieu of a final exam. The project has
several stages that will be completed throughout the course. Late work will not be accepted
except in extenuating circumstances.
                                                                                                 2


Linguistics 344k, Summer 2020
                                         Tentative Course Schedule
This syllabus represents current plans and objectives, which may need to change slightly during
the semester. Such changes, communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
L = Ladefoged’s “Vowels and Consonants”, R&J = Reetz and Jongman’s “Phonetics”
HW = Homework Assignment, WS = Article Worksheet, Italics = Final Project
 Date                   Topic                        Readings                    Assignments
 Week 1                 Th: Procedures,              Th: L Ch. 1                 Th: HW 0
 June 4 -5th
        th
                        introductions                F: R&J Ch. 7
                        F: Sound
 Week 2                 M: Sound, Speech             M: R&J Ch. 2, 5, 6          M: HW 1
 June 8 -12
        th       th
                        Production                       L Ch. 12                T: Lab 1
                        T: Lab 1                     W: R&J 3.1, 3.4             Th: Article WS 1
                        W: Consonant Articulation        4.1-4.2, 4.4            F: HW 2
                        Th: Discussion 1                 L 6, 11
                        F: Consonant Acoustics       Th: Article(s)
                                                     F: R&J ch 8, 9, 10
                                                     L 14
 Week 3                 M: Consonants                W: R&J Ch. 3.2, 3.3, 3.4.2, M: Topic
 June 15 -19
           th       th
                        T: Lab 2                     4.3                         Selection
                        W: Vowel Production          L Ch. 15                    T: Lab 2
                        Th: Discussion 2             Th: Article(s)              Th: Article WS 2
                        F: Vowel Acoustics           F: L Ch. 4, 5                   Full Proposal
                                                                                 F: HW 3
 Week 4                 M: Project meetings,         W: R&J CH. 12               M: Midterm
 June 22 -26
           nd        th
                        midterm                      Th: Article(s)              Exam
                        T: Lab 3                     F: R&J 13                   T: Lab 3
                        W: Hearing                                               W: Materials
                        Th: Discussion 3                                         Th: Article WS 3
                        F: Perception
 Week 5                 M: Speech in context         M: L Ch. 16                 M: Experimental
 June 29 -July
           th
                        T: Lab 4                     F: Ohala 1993?                  Results
 3 rd
                        W: Psycholinguistics                                     T: Lab 4
                        Th: Lab 5                                                Th: Lab 5
                        F: Language change                                           Analysis
 Week 6                 M: Dialect Variation         T: Article(s)               M: Discussion
 July 6 -9
       th     th
                        T: Discussion 4                                          T: Article WS 4
                        W: Language Acquisition                                  W: Peer
                        Th: Project Presentations                                Feedback
                                                                                 Th: Presentations
                                                                                 F: Final Project
                                                                                                   3


Linguistics 344k, Summer 2020
University Notices and Policies:
         Academic Integrity: Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of
Texas Honor Code. Work submitted by a student must be the student's own work. You are
encouraged to discuss the course material outside of class with your classmates, however, your
assignment must be written up separately. Cite your classmates by listing the names of the
people you worked with on the top right of your assignment (this helps distinguish assignments
that are similar because of cheating from those that are similar because the students worked
together). Avoid discussing your homework online as well, since your assignments will end up
sounding similar. If you have questions about academic integrity, please ask the instructor. You
may not receive or give help during exams. Any academic dishonesty will be handled following
the guidelines from Student Judicial Services. University of Texas Honor Code “The core
values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
If you see someone engaging in academic dishonesty, you should report it to the instructor.
         Documented Disability Statement: If you have accommodations, request a letter from
SSD and submit them to the instructor as soon as possible. Instructors are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please notify me as
quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g., instructional
videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
etc.). Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
         Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss your concerns about
another individual’s behavior. Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
         Q Drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course
drops for academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall
2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student
a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more
than that number.”
         Emergency Evacuation Policy: Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is
made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    * Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. The nearest
         exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
    * If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week.
    * In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
    * Do not re-enter a building without instructions from the Austin Fire Department, the UT
         Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                                                                    4
