                            Department of Accounting
                        ACC 364 -- Fundamentals of Taxation
                                        Fall, 2019 Syllabus
Instructor:                           Megan Allen
E-mail:                               Megan.Allen@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office:                               GSB 5.126A
Office Hours:                         M/W 1:00-2:00 pm
Teaching Assistant:                   Nicole Vu
E-mail:                               nvu3069@gmail.com
TA Office & Office Hours:             TBD
                                      Email questions to either Ms. Allen or Ms. Vu are also
                                      encouraged and office appointments can be set up via email.
Class time and location:              Unique #02595 M/W 2:00-3:30 pm GSB 3.106
Required Materials and Equipment:
       Textbook: Principles of Taxation for Business and Investment Planning, 2020 Edition
        (23e), by Jones, (ISBN: 9781260936483). This is a customized version packaged with
        Connect access.
                    On-Line Homework Manager: McGraw Hill Connect, packaged with the
                       textbook. Follow this link once you have purchased the textbook:
                       http://connect.mheducation.com/class/m-allen-fall-2019
        You can purchase the required text and Connect access in one of two ways:
        1. A hard copy is available at the Co-op. This must be purchased new to get the
            Connect access. The Co-op has loose-leaf books with Connect access cards for $145.
        2. Digital Connect access which includes an e-book can be purchased during the
            Connect registration process for $115. Registration instructions are on Canvas.
       Calculator: A financial calculator is needed for this course. A financial calculator is
        one that has dedicated keys for convenience in working problems involving the time-
        value of money. The keys typically are labeled N (number of periods), I/Yr (required
        interest rate per period), PV (present value), PMT (payment per period), and FV (single
        future payment amount). If you already have such a calculator, you do not need to buy a
        new one. However, if you do not already have such a calculator, you should buy an HP
        10bII+. This calculator is recommended by both the accounting and finance faculty of
        the McCombs School of Business.
       Note: You may NOT use calculators that have text memory (e.g. for programs) or cell-
        phone calculators on quizzes or examinations. Examples of PROHIBITED


        CALCULATORS are the TI-83, 84, 86 and 89. You may use simple 4-function
        calculators if an exam or quiz does not require TVM calculations.
Supplements
       Instructor PowerPoint Slides and/or Notes (will be made available on Canvas)
       In Class Handouts With Solutions (will be made available on Canvas)
       Solutions to non-graded homework Application Problems (will be made available on
        Canvas)
       Canvas Website
Course Objectives:
       Gain an understanding of the theory and “language” of taxation.
       Learn how taxes impact our lives and influence society. This knowledge will make you a
        more informed business person, citizen, and voter.
       After successfully completing this course, students will have an understanding of:
             The fundamentals of tax planning as a part of business decision making.
             How tax, accounting, and financial outcomes can vary depending on the tax
                treatment that applies.
             The ability to apply basic tax rules and regulations to compute the taxable income
                and federal tax liability for individual and corporate taxpayers.
Course Routine
    I will conduct the course by giving lectures, facilitating solutions to in-class exercises and
    conducting discussions in a manner that encourages class participation by students,
    consistent with the objectives of the course and the time available. Students are expected
    to study the chapter readings before topics are introduced in class and do assigned
    homework questions, exercises and problems to reinforce what they learn (you can’t
    effectively learn accounting without doing exercises and problems). Students are
    encouraged to ask questions and to request that particular points be explained in more detail
    if they remain confused or uncertain about items discussed or if concepts remain unclear.
Academic Standards
    A high academic level will be maintained with respect to (a) the quality of the course and (b)
    grading. Semester grades will be determined using the following factors and relative
    weights:
                Graded homework                                                  15%
                Two tax return projects (individual and corporate)               10%
                Quizzes, handouts, and other assignments                          5%
                Two (non-cumulative) Midterms:
                   Lower Midterm                                                 15%
                   Higher Midterm                                                25%
                Final Exam (comprehensive)                                       30%
                                                                               100%
                                                    2


    The ACC 364 faculty has adopted the University’s plus/minus grading as the standard for all
    sections of the course.1 The faculty believes that plus/minus grading permits us to better
    distinguish gradations in performance and provides better feedback to students on their
    performance.
    Course grades will be such that the class average will be in the range of 3.2 – 3.4. Grades
    will be based on the total points earned in the course (as shown above). You may assess your
    performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-, 80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% =
    D-, and below 60% = F. It is possible, but not guaranteed, that I will curve grades at the end
    of the course. No individual exam grades will be curved during the semester.
    Incompletes will be given only in the RAREST of circumstances and only in accordance with
    university policy. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing “extra
    credit” work during or after the end of the semester—that would violate University policy.
Homework
     Textbook Homework
     Textbook homework is assigned from the chapters we cover. As the name implies,
     homework is meant to be completed outside of class. Graded homework must be completed
     individually; however, you are permitted to collaborate with classmates on figuring out how
     to structure the solution to assigned questions. Graded homework is due on the date/time
     listed in the course calendar (available on Canvas), and late homework will not be
     accepted. The textbook homework is due by 11:59 pm on the dates shown in the calendar.
     If you have difficulty using Connect or encounter a problem, please first try to resolve the
     problem with Connect Customer Support: 800.331.5094. If you have questions about how
     to solve the exercises or problems, please see your instructor or TA (listed above).
Tax Return Projects
     There will be two tax return projects to be completed outside of class. One will give you the
     opportunity to prepare a federal individual income tax return (Form 1040) and the necessary
     accompanying schedules. All essential information needed to prepare the required return
     and schedules will be provided to you.
     The second project will give you the opportunity to prepare a corporate federal income tax
     return (Form 1120).
     The actual tax forms are available at www.irs.gov. The use of tax preparation software is
     NOT permitted.
     These are group projects. I will assign groups that you will use for both projects.
1
  Under the traditional grading system an undergraduate student needs a D or better to receive credit for a course;
under the plus/minus system an undergraduate student needs a D- or better to receive credit.
                                                         3


Quizzes, Handouts, and Other Assignments
   This may include, announced or unannounced quizzes (in or out of class), handouts,
   participation, extra homework, or group projects.
    You will be able to drop your lowest quiz grade. If you miss a quiz you will receive a
       zero for that quiz. There are no make-up quizzes. If the quiz is an in-class quiz and you
       leave class after taking the quiz but before the end of class, I reserve the right to discard
       any quizzes for students not in attendance for the entire class period. I do not return
       graded quizzes, but they are kept in my office and you may come and examine yours and
       ask questions.
    Group sharing and problem solving will be an integral part of your in-class experience.
       You contribute to the class learning environment by helping classmates solve problems,
       expressing your opinion in class discussions, volunteering answers to problems worked in
       class, and asking questions during class.
    Not all other assignments will have the same point value.
Exams
   There will be two midterm examinations and a comprehensive final examination.
   The midterm exams will be a combination of multiple-choice questions, short essay
   questions, and problems. The final exam will be all multiple choice.
   One 4-inch x 6-inch notecard full of notes (both front and back) will be allowed for each
   midterm exam. One 8.5-inch x 11-inch piece of paper (both front and back) will be allowed
   for the final. I will check the notecards before the exam and ask you to hand in the notecards
   with your exam. The notecards may be typed or handwritten. I will provide any MACRS or
   tax rate information needed to solve problems on the exam. You will not be allowed to use
   your book or any other notes on the exam.
   Examinations are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. Calculators that
   can store text are not allowed.
   Unexcused absence from any examination will result in a score of zero. If you miss an exam
   due to an illness or other emergency reason, you should notify me as soon as possible and
   provide me with written documentation (e.g., a note from the attending physician) after you
   return. I have final authority to determine if your absence should be excused and if I can
   give you a make-up exam. If you have an excused absence from a mid-term exam and I
   cannot give you a make-up exam, you will receive extra weight on your final to compensate
   for the missed examination.
   Only students with conflicts with other UT classes or UT exams, medical or other
   documented emergencies, and special needs will be given the final exams at a time other than
   the uniform exam. If you have a job or extra-curricular activities at the time of the exams
   this is notice that you are responsible to be excused, miss, or work around those other
   activities. Individual makeup exams must be taken within 72 hours of the original exam.
                                                  4


   If you need to make early travel reservations for the end of the semester, you should make
   them for travel after finals are over—because we will not know until well into the semester
   exactly when our examination will be scheduled by the University. If you make non-
   refundable (or non-cancelable) arrangements for travel before our final exam, they will not
   be an acceptable reason for taking the final exam early.
Grading Questions or Appeals
   Do not wait until the end of the semester to question or appeal grade components other than
   the final examination.
   If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the grade components, or if you feel you
   need to bring to the attention of our Teaching Assistant or me other facts or circumstances
   that might affect the grade for that item, you will have ONE WEEK from the date the grade
   is posted on Canvas to take such action and have the matter resolved.
Classroom Professionalism Policy
   The highest professional standards are expected of all member of the McCombs community.
   The classroom experience is enhanced when:
    Students arrive on time and stay for the entire class. If for some reason you are running
        late or need to leave early, do not feel you should skip class. Please come in or leave
        quietly and take a seat at the side or in the rear of the classroom.
    If you need to miss a class or other required activity, including an examination, for any
        reason, please inform me as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that I can
        approve the absence as excused and arrangements can be made to complete any missed
        work within a reasonable time after the absence.
    Students display their name cards every day. I will call on students to maximize
        engagement.
    Hold overly specific questions until outside of class. Expect that some of your question
        may require additional research.
    Provide constructive feedback- I am open to suggestions
    Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues and participate in making sure
        all views are included.
Diversity and Inclusion
   It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by
   this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed, and that the diversity that students
   bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength, and
   benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.
Personal Electronic Equipment Policy
   The University delegates to individual faculty members responsibility for and authority over
   classroom procedure and decorum. You may not use a laptop, tablet, cell phone, or any
   other such equipment during class time (unless it is an accommodation specified by the
   Office of Services for Students with Disabilities). All such equipment should be turned off
   and put away. You are encouraged to bring a calculator to class and have it ready to use.
                                                    5


E-mail and Canvas
   The use of email and Canvas is required for this course. I will frequently communicate with
   the class with announcements and guidance and I will answer questions via email. I check
   my e-mail at frequent intervals during weekdays and somewhat less regularly over weekends.
   I will use the email addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas. They are the email
   addresses that you have given the University for directory purposes. If you need to update
   your email address with the University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal
   info/all my addresses, change your email address. Before each class, I will post on Canvas
   any PowerPoint slides I intend to use. I suggest printing them out in handout style to bring to
   class and include note-taking space. I will also post handouts to Canvas. You are expected
   to print these handouts and bring them to class on the days that we cover those chapters. The
   handouts will sometimes be taken up for grades. It is your responsibility to regularly check
   both your e-mail and the class website on Canvas. When looking for class material in
   Canvas, please use the Modules- the material for the semester will be organized there.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
   A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must
   inform students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster:
   Since Fall 2001, web-based, password-protected class sites have been available for all
   accredited courses taught at The University. Class e-mail rosters are a component of the
   sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must
   restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room
   1. For information on restricting directory information see:
   http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html
   Privacy in Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be
   aware that I will use a merged Canvas site for all sections of the course that I am teaching
   this semester. This will allow students in other sections to see that you are enrolled in the
   course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your
   email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any
   concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from
   view of other students.
Religious Holy Days
   By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
   prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
   examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
   will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
   absence.
Dropping the Course
   Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who stops
   attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a grade of F. Consult the
   Academic Calendar on the Registrar’s website (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for
   specific deadlines.
                                                  6


Students with Disabilities
    Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
    Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
    512-471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
    The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
    responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
    described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
    http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed
    to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have
    agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the
    Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it
    is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on
    scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure
    in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual,
    all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on
    scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial
    Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official
    University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on
    what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
    Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by
    the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
         evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
         requires exiting and assembling outside.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
         building.
     Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing
         during the first week of class.
     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
         Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
         Services office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Caveat- This syllabus includes policies and plans for the course that may require adjustment as
the course progresses. I reserve the right to make changes at any time during the semester with
notice to the class.
                                                    7
