                      Introduction to Biological Anthropology (Honors)
                                              ANT 301 Fall 2018
                                                Unique 30850
Course Meets Tu, Th 12:30 – 2:00 in the biological anthropology teaching laboratory SAC 5.172
Instructor Dr. Denné Reed
office hours: Tu 2-3; Wed 3-5 or by appointment
office: SAC 4.148
e-mail: reedd@austin.utexas.edu
phone: (512) 471-7529
Course Description This course introduces students to the study of the human condition from a
biological perspective, starting with a review of modern principles of evolution, especially as they apply
to humans, and moving on to behavioral and ecological comparisons of humans with our closest living
relatives among the primates. The course concludes with a survey of the human fossil and
archaeological record over the past eight million years, including modern human variation. This course
engages a scientific approach to human origins and students are challenged to consider their place in
nature and society as well as their shared humanity.
Main Learning Objectives
     •   The fundamental of principles of biological evolution and how they have shaped human
          adaptation and behavior.
     •   Primate (including human) diversity, behavior and ecology.
     •   The material evidence underlying human evolution and prehistory.
     •   Scientific principles of knowledge production and critical thinking.
     •   The social and ethical implications of human evolution.
Expected Learning Outcomes
     1.   Articulate the principles, processes and patterns associated with biological evolution.
     2.   Understand and illustrate where primates and especially humans fit in the larger tree of life.
     3.   Articulate the main ecological, behavioral and life history patterns in primates and how they
          inform our understanding of human evolution, variation and adaptation.
     4.   Adumbrate the human fossil and archaeological record across space and geological time.
     5.   Articulate the ethical and social issues that have surrounded human evolution and the study of
          human variation.
     6.   Understand the fundamentals of scientific reasoning, testing and knowledge production.
Course Structure This course is organized into lecture and laboratory sections. Lectures meet twice a
week for one hour and labs meet once a week for two hours. Lectures sessions will include spoken
lectures, presentations, interactive exercises, and full class discussions. Lab sessions are limited to ca
20 students and include presentations, discussions, hands-on activities, problem solving tasks and skill
development exercises.
Course Prerequisites This is an introductory course with no prerequisites.
Required Materials and Texts Boyd, R and Silk J. (2006) How Humans Evolved. Eighth Ed. New
ANT 301 Fall 2019                                        1                                            REED


York: Norton. The field of human origins and evolution is advancing at a rapid rate and therefore it is
imperative students have the most recent addition of the textbook. Earlier editions are inadequate.
Classroom Protocol. Civil and courteous behavior is expected during lectures and labs (It’s a good
idea outside of class too). Cell phone ringers must be turned off prior to the beginning of class.
Attendance Students are expected to attend all class sessions. Excused absences require appropriate
WRITTEN documentation (e.g. doctor’s note). Students are expected to bring printed copies of lab
materials with them to class. Lab assignments are available in pdf format from the course website
under the assignments section.
Assignments This course is organized into three sections: 1) Principles of Evolution 2) Comparative
Primate Studies 3) Paleoanthropology (the fossil and archaeological record) and human variation.
Each section features a set of lab assignments and an exam. Lab assignments include a short quiz at
the start of each lab based on the assigned lab readings and a lab exercise conducted during lab.
Exams are delivered at the end of each section. In total the course has 3 exams, 10 lab quizzes and 10
graded lab exercises.
Section 1 Principles of Evolution
Lab 1 Scientific Method and Skeletal Anatomy
Lab 2 Genetics
Lab 3 Systematics
Exam 1 – Assesses students’ progress in learning the principles of evolution including the main
mechanisms of evolution, the core elements of natural selection, the genetic foundations of inheritance,
the mathematical foundations for population ecology, the forces that promote variation in populations,
the processes that constrain evolution and the manner in which evolutionary processes are expressed
over long time periods to produce the tree of life.
Section 2 Comparative Primate Studies
Lab 4 Primate Behavior
Lab 5 Primate Functional Morphology
Lab 6 Primate Dietary Ecology
Exam 2 – Assesses students’ knowledge of primate biodiversity, including familiarity with the major
taxonomic groups of primates. This exam further assesses knowledge of basic primate ecology and
behavior including how it compares and informs our understanding of human ecology and behavior.
Section 3 Paleoanthropology and human variation
Lab 7 Primate Evolution
Lab 8 The Fossil Record of Australopiths
Lab 9 Fossil Record of Homo
Lab 10 Paleolithic Archaeology
Exam 3 – Assesses student knowledge and familiarity with the human fossil and archaeological record,
including the ability to recall the major taxonomic groups in the lineage leading to humans, the
sequence, timing and evidence for the origin of major adaptation in our lineage and the general history
of human material culture and technological advancement during the stone age.
ANT 301 Fall 2019                                     2                                            REED


Grading Grades in this course are based on three in class exams (20% each x 3 = 60%), and the best
8 out of 9 lab grades. Each lab grade includes a quiz administered at the start of the lab section that
assess the student’s understanding of the assigned reading and a graded lab exercise conducted
during the lab. In total each lab assignment is worth 5% points, 2% for the quiz and 3% for the
assignment (5% each x 8 = 40%).
How to get an A in Intro Biological Anthropology The secret formula for a good grade in this course
is:
Read assignments before class + participate in classes + complete all assignments = A
This course synthesizes a broad range of material and it is very difficult to memorize and understand it
all at the last minute. The best strategy for getting the most from this course is to read material before
lecture (1st encounter), attend classes (2nd encounter), and review after each class session (3rd
encounter). In this way material is learned gradually, and only limited effort should be required to
prepare for exams.
Students are encouraged to form study groups with their peers to review materials weekly. Explaining
material to another student is one of the best ways to learn it yourself and its more fun! Students are
always welcome to visit the professor during office hours for additional help, and we are always open to
scheduling appointments outside established office hours as needed.
Learning Success Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations
because we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or
exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both
your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student
resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a
person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policy Final course grades are assigned as follows: A = 94-100; A- = 90-93; B+ = 87-89; B =
83-86; B- = 80-82; C+ = 77-79; C = 73-76; C- = 70-72; D+ = 67-69; D = 63-66; D- = 60-62; F < 59. Note
that the division of grades in the A category is different from that in the other letter grades.
Religious Holidays If you will not be able to attend class due to religious services, let me know at least
a week ahead of time. We will make every effort to help you keep up with course assignments in such
situations.
Canvas In this class we use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-
protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu—to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys.
You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m.
to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students. E-mail is recognized as an official mode of
university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your e-mail for university and
course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed
about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—we
ANT 301 Fall 2019                                       3                                            REED


recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions
for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
Academic Integrity Please pursue rigorous honesty in everything you do, including your work for this
class. It will serve you well in life, and in this class as well since we report all cases of suspected
academic dishonest to the dean of students. Each student in the course is expected to abide by the
University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the
core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at
UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Dishonesty will result at least in a failed grade for the assignment and perhaps also for the course. For
more info, see http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism. You are
encouraged to work together in study groups and often in lab exercises, however the work you submit
(unless otherwise indicated) must be your work.
Q drop Policy. Texas law limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six. Senate Bill
1231 says: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.”
Important Dates (2018)
•   3 Sep. - Fourth class day; Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in
    registration may require the approval of the department chair and usually the student's dean.
•   13 Sep. - Twelfth class day; Last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare
    and extenuating circumstances. Last day to drop a class for a possible refund.
•   24-25, 28-30 Oct. - Academic advising for continuing and readmitted students for the spring
    semester.
•   31 Oct. - Last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval, withdraw from the
    University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons. Last day an
    undergraduate student may change registration in a class to or from the pass/fail basis.
Disability Services Students with documented disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
with Disabilities, 471-6259. Please let me know about any arrangements we can make that will assist
you in your learning.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL). If you are worried about someone who is acting differently,
you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
ANT 301 Fall 2019                                         4                                             REED


http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin. The University of Texas has numerous resources for
students to provide assistance and support for your learning.
•   Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
•   Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
•   Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
•   Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
•   Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free
from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:
             1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2.   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
                  or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu
Emergency Evacuation Policy. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to
evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be
aware of the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the
classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first
week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
ANT 301 Fall 2019                                         5                                          REED


Course  Schedule  
Week 1
Aug. 29        Course Introduction
Week 2
Sep. 3-5       Introduction to Evolution           Boyd & Silk: Chap. 1 pp. 1-25 (26 p)
               Mendelian Genetics                  Boyd & Silk: Chap. 2 pp. 25-37 (13 p)
               LAB 1 - Scientific Method and Skeletal Anatomy
Week 3
Sep. 10-12     Molecular Genetics                  Boyd & Silk: Chap. 2 pp. 37-50 (14 p)
               Population Genetics, Mod. Synth.    Boyd & Silk: Chap. 3 pp. 53-65 (13 p)
               LAB 2 - Genetics
Week 4
Sep. 17-19     Behavior & Evol. Constraints        Boyd & Silk: Chap. 3 pp. 65-77 (13 p)
               Species and Speciation              Boyd & Silk: Chap. 4 pp. 81-91 (11 p)
               LAB 3 - Systematics
Week 5
Sep. 24-26     Tree of Life and Phylogenies        Boyd & Silk: Chap. 4 pp. 91-105 (11 p)
               Primate Diversity                   Boyd & Silk: Chap. 5 pp. 109-125 (16 p)
               EXAM REVIEW
Week 6
Oct. 1-3       Exam 1
               Primate Ecology                     Boyd & Silk: Chap. 5 pp. 126-144(15 p)
               LAB 4 - Primate Behavior
Week 7
Oct. 8-10      Female Reproductive Strategies      Boyd & Silk: Chap. 6 pp. 145-155 (11 p)
               Male Reproductive Strategies        Boyd & Silk: Chap. 6 pp. 155-166 (12 p)
               LAB 5 - Functional Morphology
Week 8
Oct. 15 -17    Cooperation                         Boyd & Silk: Chap. 7 169-188 (21 p)
               Primate Life History                Boyd & Silk: Chap. 8 pp. 189-203 (12 p)
               LAB 6 - Diet
Week 9
Oct. 22-24     Introduction to Paleobiology        Boyd & Silk: Chap. 9 pp. 207-218 (11 p)
               Primate Evolution                   Boyd & Silk: Chap. 9 pp. 219-230 (20 p)
               EXAM REVIEW
ANT 301 Fall 2019                                 6                                        REED


Week 10
Oct. 29-31     Exam 2
               Early Hominins                       Boyd & Silk: Chap. 10 pp. 233-243 (10 p)
               LAB 7 - Primate Evolution
Week 11
Nov. 5-7       Early Australopiths                  Boyd & Silk: Chap. 10 pp. 244-259 (15 p)
               Dikika and Mille-Logya
               LAB 8 - Fossil Record of Australopithecus
Week 12
Nov. 12-14     Early Homo                           Boyd & Silk: Chap. 11 pp. 260-275 (16 p)
               Complex Foraging                     Boyd & Silk: Chap. 11 pp. 275-296 (20 p)
               LAB 9 - Fossil Record of Homo
Week 13
Nov. 19-21     Neanderthals                         Boyd & Silk: Chap. 12 pp. 297-321 (25 p)
               Thanksgiving
Week 14
Nov. 26-28     Modern Humans                        Boyd & Silk: Chap. 13 pp. 323-353 (30 p)
               EXAM REVIEW
Week 15
Dec. 3-5       Human Variation                      Boyd & Silk Chap. 14 pp. 355 – 385 (30 p)
               Exam 3
ANT 301 Fall 2019                                   7                                         REED
