                            ALD 328 Applied Human Learning, Cohort J
                                               09520
                                            Spring 2020
Course Information
Class meets: ​9:00am-12:00pm, Tuesdays, SZB 240
Instructor​: Heather Dunham                           Office Location​: SZB 334D
Pronouns​: she/her/hers                               Office Hours​: by appointment
Email​: hdunham@utexas.edu
Phone​: 404-775-4338 (texts okay)
TA​: Chris Pan                                        Office Location​: ITO SZB 5th Floor
Pronouns​: he/him/his                                 Office Hours​: by appointment
Email​: panzl89@utexas.edu
Phone​: 706-540-7095
Land Acknowledgment
We begin this syllabus by recognizing that we stand on the shared lands and waters of the
Comanche and Tonkawa. We express our respect for the three federally-recognized nations:
Alabama-Coushatta, the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, and the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo,
within the state as well as other Indigenous peoples and nations such as the Karankawa, Caddo,
Lipan Apache, Comanche, Wichita, Coahuiltecan, Neches, Comecrudo, and Mission Indians that
have historic ties to these homelands. We also acknowledge the multiple ways the State of
Texas and the residents of this Land have benefitted from the forced and systematic removal of
Native peoples from Texas. Land acknowledgements are a small step toward correcting the
stories and practices that erase Indigenous histories and the ongoing presence of Indigenous
peoples today. As teacher educators and researchers, many of us are complicit in this erasure,
and it is imperative that we recognize, support, and advocate for the sovereignty of Native
nations in our work.
                                      Course Description
University Catalog Course Description
Development, cognition, language, and sociocultural influences in learning contexts; child
assessment, identification of learning styles, and tests and measurements. Fieldwork to provide
a theoretical basis for professional assessment, referral, and placement.
Objectives and Outcomes
What knowledge, skills, and experiences will be offered in this course​?
     ● Connect human learning theories to effective instructional design.
     ● Develop a reflective and inquiry-based orientation towards teaching.
     ● Inquire into student learning from an anti-deficit perspective.
                                                                                               1


Learning Outcomes:
    1. Apply cognitive, sociocultural, and critical theories of human learning to the elementary
        school classroom context.
    2. Analyze instructional design and teaching methods that address the needs and
        experiences of diverse learners and integrate those methods into your own teaching
        practice.
    3. Reflect on, refine, and articulate your beliefs about teaching and learning as well as your
        emerging identity as a teacher.
TExES Pedagogy and Professional Responsibilities EC-12
Domain I—Designing Instruction and Assessment to Promote Student Learning
    ● Competency 001: ​The teacher understands human developmental processes and applies
        this knowledge to plan instruction and ongoing assessment that motivate students and
        are responsive to their developmental characteristics and needs.
    ● Competency 002: ​The teacher understands student diversity and knows how to plan
        learning experiences and design assessments that are responsive to differences among
        students and that promote all students’ learning.
    ● Competency 003: ​The teacher understands procedures for designing effective and
        coherent instruction and assessment based on appropriate learning goals and objectives.
    ● Competency 004: ​The teacher understands learning processes and factors that impact
        student learning and demonstrates this knowledge by planning effective, engaging
        instruction and appropriate assessments.
How will we work toward meeting course objectives?
Students will achieve the learning goals of this course through weekly readings, extensive
writing with feedback from peers and the instructor, classroom observations, reflections on
teaching practices, and inquiry-based research.
Course Prerequisites
Admission to the professional development sequence of the Bachelor of Science in Applied
Learning and Development degree program.​ Through this course, the understandings you have
developed through your earlier ALD work (e.g., ALD 320: Cognition, Learning and Motivation;
ALD 322: Individual Differences; ALD 327: Cultural Influences; ALD 329: Language Acquisition)
will be applied to classroom teaching.
How can I succeed in this course?
Come to class prepared to engage in discussions, be open to other’s perspectives, and assume
positive intent.
                                                                                                 2


Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing
Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board.
Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is considered
plagiarism, a serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe penalties. Copying
someone else’s work, buying a paper and submitting it as your own, copying and pasting text
(even with changes), or borrowing images from an online source, are some examples of
plagiarism. Even if you plagiarize accidentally, you can be held responsible and penalized.
Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional. When
you are unsure about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor (who is already an
expert in the discipline) what is appropriate in the context of your assignment. Consultants at
The ​University Writing Center​ can also help you determine whether you are citing sources
correctly—and they have helpful guides online for using ​direct quotations​ and ​paraphrasing​.
Reviewing those skills will help you feel confident that you are handling sources professionally
in your writing.
You can read the University’s definition of plagiarism and other forms of academic dishonesty
in Sec. 11–402 of the ​Student Conduct Code​. For more information, visit the ​Dean of Students’
site​.
Online Behavioral Management Certificate - TBSI
You will complete an online module, called the Texas Behavior Support Initiative (TBSI) through
Region 4 that will fulfill a Texas legislative requirement. You will be introduced to the website in
class, but you will have to complete the module on your own, which takes about 2 hours. Full
instructions about how to access the module are in the assignment on Canvas. You will not get
credit for ALD 328 until you have uploaded a PDF copy of your certificate of completion to
Canvas. ​Your certificate is due on the last day of class by midnight.
                                                                                                   3


                                          Course Requirements
Required Materials
Ayers, W., & Alexander-Tanner, R. (2010). ​To teach: the journey, in comics. N        ​ ew York: Teachers
College Press.
Required Devices
While not required, if you bring a laptop or iPad, it should be used for class purposes only.
Please silence and put away your cell phones and other devices that will not be used for the
class. Your course participation grade is influenced by your mindful use of technology for class
purposes only (i.e. not for emailing, texting or non-related search activities).
Classroom Expectations
As teachers, you will need to address concerns in a professional manner with colleagues,
parents, and administrators. Please approach your work in this class in a similar way. If you
have a concern, please address it directly with Heather and Chris. When writing electronic
communications, adopt an appropriate tone that demonstrates your identity as a teacher.
Assignments
1.   ​Activity Configuration & Applied Theory Paper​ ​(Learning Outcomes #1, #2)
        This paper will consist of multiple components that will bridge the process of lesson planning and
        theories of human learning. First, you will conduct a purposeful observation of your CT around a
        small portion of the day (morning meeting, phonics instruction, read alouds, writer’s workshop,
        math tasks, etc.). Then, you will create an activity configuration from this lesson that consists of
        the products, critical components, and variations. Last, you will connect each part of the activity
        configuration to a specific learning theory from the course. The hope is that this process will help
        you gain a deeper understanding of how theories of learning are connected to aspects of
        instructional design. (20% of grade)
2.    ​School Study Project​ ​(Learning Outcomes #2, #3)
        In small groups, you will study an elementary school (perhaps your field placement school) to
        explore the complicated ways that its leadership, organization, and ethos affect teachers,
        students, families, and learning. Through an inquiry process, your group will conduct your own
        research and ground your analysis in the course readings. The purpose of this project is to both
        apply learning theories to a specific context and to recognize how teaching and learning do not
        happen in a vacuum. (10% of grade)
3.     ​Classroom Observation Reflections​ ​(Learning Outcome #2)
        Towards the beginning of the semester, you will complete two classroom observations for your
        field placement to turn into Kelly. We will use these two observations to complete an analysis of
        the educational theories in our class and previous learnings from Individual Differences, Cultural
        Influences, and Language Acquisition. For each paper you will choose two themes or theories
                                                                                                            4


       from class and describe their roles in the classroom and the impact of them on your identity as a
       teacher. (20% of grade)
4. ​Teaching & Learning Statement​ (​ Learning Outcome #3)
       Your teaching and learning statement is meant to communicate your personal philosophy on
       teaching and learning and is meant to be both a summary and critique of what you have learned
       this semester. In this paper, you should present your beliefs about teaching and learning, your
       teaching goals, and what teaching practices you will use to facilitate your goals. You should use
       the information you learned in the course this semester to shape the beliefs, goals, and practices
       you describe in your statement. (10% of grade)
5.  ​Reading Responses & Discussion Lead​ ​(Learning Outcome #1)
       One of the major goals for the class is to help you move from thinking like a student (e.g., “How will
       it affect my grade?”) to thinking like a teacher (“What can I learn from this?). ​Read the assignments
       through the eyes of a teacher. As you read, note particular questions, comments, or personal
       connections with the text using annotations in the margins or using post-its or electronic
       comments in your readings. Think about how you can use this new knowledge to extend or
       challenge what you already know about students, teaching, and literacy. You are required to
       respond to all assigned readings on Canvas so that I have an opportunity to read your thinking.
       Responses are due every ​Sunday at 11:59pm.
       You will have the opportunity to lead a discussion of the readings with a partner once during the
       semester. You will need to submit your discussion plan the ​Monday at 11:59pm before your
       presentation. (20% of grade)
6.   ​Quick-Writes​ ​(Learning Outcome #3)
       As a writing flag course, we will engage with a quick-write in class for a majority of the weeks.
       Prompts will be given to help you begin thinking about your teaching identity and making sense of
       the readings, field experiences, and projects we complete in class. These quick-writes will serve as
       a scaffold for your Teaching and Learning Statement due at the end of the semester. (10% of grade)
7.    ​Attendance & Participation​ ​(Learning Outcome #3)
       Your class participation grade is based on active participation, including sharing your thoughts and
       questions as well as listening to the thoughts and questions of others. This is the expectation in
       every class. (10% of grade)
       As we meet only once weekly, your class participation grade is based on these specific questions:
               ● Did my presence in class make the class better today?
               ● Did I actively engage with class community?
               ● Did I conduct myself in a way to ensure I learned?
               ● Did I help my colleagues learn?
               ● Did I take advantage of what was offered?
                                                                                                           5


Grading for this Course
    Assignments                                                   Points Possible           Percent of Total Grade
    1. Activity Configuration & Applied Theory Paper                      20                          20%
    2. School Study Project                                               10                          10%
    3. Classroom Observation Reflections                                  20                          20%
    4. Teaching & Learning Statement                                      10                          10%
    5. Reading Responses & Discussion Lead                                20                          20%
    6. Quick-Writes                                                       10                          10%
    7. Attendance & Participation                                         10                          10%
                                          Total Points:                  100
Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas
website at ​https://utexas.instructure.com​.​ ​Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions
about the course schedule.
Changes​ ​to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that
you receive the changes with as much advance notice as possible).
 Week Date            Class Topic         Out of Class Assignments                              Assignments Due
 1          1/21      Introduction        ● Ayers, Introduction & Ch. 1
 Unit 1: Educational Theory
 2          1/28      Developmenta        ● Theories of Childhood, Second Edition : An          Reading Response
                      l Theories            Introduction to Dewey, Montessori, Erikson,
                                            Piaget & Vygotsky (Ebook)
 3          2/4       Cultural            ● Neito, S. & Banks, J.A. (2010). Culture and         Reading Response
                      Learning              Learning. In ​The light in their eyes: Creating
                                            multicultural learning communities (​ 77-100).
                                            New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
 4          2/11      Constructivism      ● Colburn, A. (2007). Constructivism and              Reading Response
                                            conceptual change, part I. ​The Science
                                            Teacher, 7​ 4(7), 10.
                                          ● Colburn, A. (2007). Constructivism and
                                                                                                                   6


                                       conceptual change, part II. ​The Science
                                       Teacher,​ 74(8), 14.
                                     ● Reznitskaya, A. & Wilkinson, I. (2017). Truth
                                       matters: Teaching young children to search
                                       for the most reasonable answer. ​Phi Delta
                                       Kappan,​ 99(4), 33-38.
                                     ● Guccione, L. (2011). In a world of mandates,
                                       making space for inquiry. ​The Reading
                                       Teacher, 6 ​ 4(7), 515-519.
5         2/18      Motivation       ● Ayers, Ch. 5                                      Reading Response
                                     ● Gardiner, S. (2014). Stop the pay, stop the
                                       play. ​Phi Delta Kappan,​ 95(8), 39-42.           Classroom
                                     ● Parker, F., Novak, J. & Bartell, T. (2017). To    Observation #1
                                       engage students, give them meaningful
                                       choices in the classroom. ​Phi Delta Kappan,​
                                       99(2), 37-41.
6         2/25      Mindfulness      ● Rechtschaffen, D. & Rechtschaffen, T. (2015).     Reading Response
                                       The 5 literacies of mindful learning.
                                       Educational Leadership, 7   ​ 3(2), 58-62.
                                     ● Buchanan, T. (2017). Mindfulness and
                                       meditation in education. ​Young Children​,
                                       72(3), 69-74.
7         3/3       Trauma-          ● Ayers, Ch. 2                                      Reading Response
                    Informed         ● Craig, S. (2016). The trauma-sensitive teacher.
                                       Educational Leadership​,​ 7​ 4(1), 28-32.         Classroom
                    Teaching         ● AUDIO PODCAST: Watson, A. (2018, October          Observation #2
                                       14). A crash course on trauma-informed
                                       teaching [Audio blog post]. Retrieved January
                                       3, 2020 from
                                       https://thecornerstoneforteachers.com/truth-for-t
                                       eachers-podcast/trauma-informed-teaching/
Unit 2: Teaching Identity & Pedagogy
8         3/10      Culturally       ● Ayers, Ch. 7                                      Reading Response
                    Sustaining       ● Alim, H. S. & Paris, D. (2017). What is
                                       culturally sustaining pedagogy? In D. Paris &
                    Pedagogy           H. S. Alim (Eds.), ​Culturally sustaining
                                       pedagogies: Teaching and learning for justice
                                       in a changing world (​ 1-17). New York, NY:
                                       Teachers College Press.
                                     ● AUDIO PODCAST: Ferlazzo, L. & Paris, D. The
                                       look and feel of culturally sustaining
                                       instruction. [Audio blog post]. Retrieved
                                       January 15, 2020 from
                                       https://www.bamradionetwork.com/track/th
                                       e-look-and-feel-of-culturally-responsive-instr
                                       uction/
9         3/17                       SPRING BREAK
                                                                                                          7


 10        3/24     Teacher             ● Ayers, Ch. 4                             Reading Response
                    Language            ● Choice Words, Ch. 1
                                        ● Choice Words, Ch. 4
 11        3/31     Universal           ● Ayers, Ch. 3                             Reading Response
                    Design for          ● Ayers, Ch. 6
                                        ● Minor, Ch. 5
                    Learning &
                    Digital Literacy
 Unit 3: Place-Based Inquiry
 12        4/7      Teacher             ● Ballenger, Ch. 1                         Reading Response
                    Inquiry             ● Ballenger, Ch. 4
                                                                                   Activity
                                                                                   Configuration Paper
 13        4/14     History of AISD ● Cuban Introduction                           Reading Response
                                        ● Cuban Ch. 1 & Ch. 2 (Jigsaw)
 14        4/21     Local School        ● Articles                                 Reading Response
                    Inquiry
 15        4/28     TBD                 TBD                                        Reading Response
                                                                                   School Study Project
 16        5/5      Presentations       ● Ayers, Ch. 8                             Teaching & Learning
                                                                                   Statement
                                                                                   Online Behavioral
                                                                                   Management
                                                                                   Certificate due
                                                   Policies
Course Policies
Statement on Learning Success
    Your success in this class is important to us. We will all need accommodations because we
    all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or
    exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to
    meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. We also encourage you to reach
    out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am
    happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
    Flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. I intend to
    work with you with support if you miss an assignment, but final grades are firm.
                                                                                                        8


 Grade          Cutoff            Points          Grade            Cutoff          Points
                                  needed                                           needed
 A              94%               94              C+               77%              77
 A-             90%               90              C                74%              74
 B+             87%               87              C-               70%              70
 B              84%               84              D                65%              65
 B-             80%               80              F                <65%             <65
*Please note that continuation in the PDS requires a ​minimum grade of “C” in each of the PDS
courses.
Cross Cutting Themes and Professionalism
    Students in this course are held to professionalism standards in line with the Cross Cutting
    Themes of the College of Education (see p. 9-10 of this syllabus). As a representative of UT
    and a future educator, please practice the standards of professionalism you would in a
    school or other educational setting, whether this course is or is not field-based. We are
    building dispositions of the profession, which include those professional attitudes, values,
    and beliefs expected of an education professional. When we learn in schools and other
    educational spaces, we enter with humility, open to what we can learn in the setting and
    from the students, teachers and other community members. We also practice reciprocity,
    considering how we can contribute to the places where we are fortunate to learn.
    University classrooms are places to engage in these practices of open learning and
    reciprocity. Students should be open to new perspectives and work collegially with others,
    including instructors.
Attendance Policy
    PDS Policy: The ​recommended​ PDS policy for attendance is as follows: Attendance is
    mandatory and arriving on time and staying the full length of the class is required.
            • There are no unexcused absences.
            • You are allowed one excused absence for the semester (see below).
            • Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor
            • Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of ¾ letter grade in your final
            grade.
            • More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing
            grade for the class.
            [Insert your policy about students contacting you, providing letters from doctors,
            make up work, etc.]
            • A pattern of tardiness or early departures will affect your grade.
            • Excessive tardies or early departures (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused
            absence.
                                                                                                 9


            Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of religious
            holidays that fall on our scheduled class day; please give me advance notice of
            these absences (see below for more detailed info).
    Excused Absence​:​ ​The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious
    holidays or extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due
    to observance of a religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You
    will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be responsible for any work
    you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
    If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely​. Ask your classmates to get a run-down
    and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you
    were gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a
    meeting to discuss. Email specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the
    most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.
Student Rights and Responsibilities
           ● You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical
               wellness.
           ● You have a right to respect.
           ● You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
           ● You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
           ● You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
           ● You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
               improve your learning environment.
           ● You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No
               student shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
           ● You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
               communicating with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out
               of control or overwhelming.
           ● You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always
               respectful of others.
           ● Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy
               that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’
               experiences.
           ● You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up
               when someone is excluded.
           ● You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding
               each other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as
               well.
                                                                                                10


Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
     Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals
     and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation,
     gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with
     the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and
     Sexuality Center.
     http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/​). I will gladly
     honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the
     official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, ​etc). Please advise me
     of any changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my
     records.
University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
     This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
     there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you
     have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
     arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
     committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only
     do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
     confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who
     requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
     at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
     official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit
     http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/​.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising,
     avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will
     help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
     helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is
     learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings
     like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
     http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger
     Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are
     welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
     specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in
                                                                                                   11


     15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc​ or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Other Resources
     Undergraduate Writing Center:​ h      ​ ttp://uwc.utexas.edu/
     Libraries:​ ​ ​http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     ITS:​ ​http://www.utexas.edu/its/
     Student Emergency Services​:​ ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
     BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have
     the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the
     power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help
     to build a culture of care on campus, go to:​ ​wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal​.
Important Safety Information
     If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
     Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call
     can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
     instincts and share your concerns.
     The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
     Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,​ ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
     evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
     requires exiting and assembling outside.
              ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
                    may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you
                    used when entering the building.
              ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in
                    writing during the first week of class.
              ● In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
                    instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the
                    following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
                    Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
              ● Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
                    procedures can be found at: ​www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
     Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
     harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
     federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning
     and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
     misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
                                                                                                 12


                 1. ​Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
                 2. ​Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have
                 experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
                 3. ​Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s​ ​relevant policies​.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
     “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX
     to the Title IX Coordinator.​ I am a Responsible Employee and​ ​must report any Title IX
     related incidents​ that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking
     with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to
     ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for
     support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
     advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
     visit​ ​titleix.utexas.edu​ or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor
     Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
     values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” ​Plagiarism is taken very
     seriously at UT.​ ​Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that
     you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be
     guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
     the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
     University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop
     before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester.
     Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public
     Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Cross-Cutting Themes and Creed
The teacher preparation program at The University of Texas at Austin is committed to creating
a society that is more just, caring, inclusive, and democratic through transformation of
educational practices. Too often, universities and schools have engaged in racist and other
oppressive practices that replicate and perpetuate the status quo in our society, rather than
working against inequities. We believe there is a more powerful path. Following The University
of Texas motto, “What starts here changes the world,” we teach to change the world.
Schools, districts and universities are located within oppressive social, economic and political
systems. Teachers must recognize the oppressive conditions that many families and
communities experience related to their identities—racial, ethnic, linguistic, social class,
                                                                                                     13


religious, gender, sexual orientation, immigrant status, abilities, and other positions in society.
At the same time, teachers must recognize the cultural and linguistic wealth that exists in these
communities, along with their histories of resilience and resistance in the pursuit of justice.
Understanding these critical perspectives on society, culture and schooling is critical for
teachers’ development and enactment of curricular and pedagogical knowledge across school
subjects, such as reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics.
We practice vision, courage, and determination because these stances and practices require a
lifelong commitment and ongoing, critical inquiries in our personal and professional lives. As
teachers, we serve our students well by cultivating in them these same commitments and
capacities.
As educators we are committed to educational change that allows us to enact our vision for
teacher preparation. Identities, Values, and Practices serve as our guide, as we are always in
process. While listed separately the themes are deeply connected, so to work on one is to work
on many.
               Theme Statement                                    Creed Statement
  Who are      We are continuously examining how our              I am self-aware. ​I recognize
  we?          identities​1 ​sometimes afford us privileges and   who I am and who I am
  Identities   other times, result in oppression. We              becoming in terms of my
               recognize that our personal identities are         multiple identities.
               deeply connected to our professional
               identities, and contribute to how we work
               with our students, communities and
               colleagues.
               We research and inquire to better understand       I am a learner. ​I will grow my
               our students, curriculum and teaching across       teaching into more powerful
               school subjects​2​, and our own dispositions       practices and share them with
               and practices as teachers. We continue to          others.
               grow our professional identities to support
               our work of building inclusive and
               anti-oppressive classrooms, schools, and local
               and global communities.
  What do      We value educational justice, inclusiveness        I value courage and
  we value?    and continuous learning, and we are                determination. ​I will view all
  Values       committed to being teachers who take on the        challenges that confront me as
               challenges and risks associated with teaching      opportunities to grow and
               in service of these values.                        change.
                                                                                                  14


                  We value the multiple cultures, languages,           I value learners’ differences as
                  knowledges, and experiences of our students          strengths. ​I will respect and
                  and the communities we work alongside, and           engage with differences and
                  we see these as essential to a healthy and           will craft my teaching to build
                  productive society.                                  upon and sustain the abilities,
                                                                       cultures and languages my
                                                                       students bring to school.
                  We value shared responsibility over individual       I value shared responsibility. ​I
                  accountability within educational systems. As        will hold myself responsible for
                  teachers, we are committed to working                all my teaching and will share in
                  collaboratively with our students, teacher           this responsibility with others to
                  colleagues, families, and communities in the         build a community that
                  pursuit of our collective growth and                 contributes to the growth and
                  well-being.                                          well-being of students.
   What do        We continuously reflect on how our diverse           I practice reflection on action. ​I
   we             perspectives and identities​1​ matter when           will build humanizing practices
   practice?      working with others, including students,             and trusting relationships
   Practice       families and colleagues. This continual              through my ongoing critical
                  reflection allows us to build trusting               reflection.
                  relationships and engage in humanizing
                  practices.
                  We recognize students’ identities​1 ​and             I practice imaginative change. ​I
                  strengths and honor the resources they bring.        will imagine the possibilities of
                  We question the materials, curriculum, and           a student-centered curriculum
                  instructional methods that are in place. We          that is transformative for
                  continually adapt and redesign our teaching          students and our collective
                  practices in response to changing                    communities.
                  opportunities and demands in our
                  transnational society. We dream of
                  possibilities for students’ educational futures.
We will be the teachers who, working with families, communities and our colleagues, teach to
change the world.
1​
   racial, ethnic, linguistic, religious, gender, sexual orientation, social class, immigrant status,
abilities, and other positions in society.
2​
   reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics anchored in critical
perspectives on society, culture and schooling
                                                                                                         15
