BIM MODELING/REPRESENTATION                                        ARC s327R/s386M /LAR s388                               1
Instructor:          Marla Smith marlasmith@utexas.edu
                     Office Hours:   TU, TH 11:30-12:30 GOL 2.206
Hannah Griffiths S2017                      Ann Staniford F2018     Allie Alford F2018                Kenneth Sneed S2018
 https://roundme.com/tour/325414/view/1071959/                                  https://roundme.com/tour/333810/view/1108520/
Prerequisites:
                     Restricted to Architecture and Engineering students. Open to other majors with instructor’s
                     consent.
Description: In this class you will explore the creation, iteration, representation and visualization of Building
                     Information Models with the option of utilizing various software platforms and representation
                     methods including: Revit, Dynamo, Enscape3D, RoundMe, Video Editing and digital presentation
                     tools. You will be representing your project through digital presentations including rendering,
                     panoramas, video and virtual reality walk through. The class will use various modeling and
                     presentations programs with a focus on BIM Modeling in Revit and representation through
                     Enscape3D.
                     Week 1: Introduction to BIM Modeling techniques using Revit. We will be covering site creation,
                     system families, and best modeling practices. This model will be the base for further explorations.
                     We will be using Enscape3D to evaluate the project in real time as well as produce renderings
                     and panoramas while utilizing various presentation modes.
                     Week 2: Parametric form and component creation. Creation of parametric forms and surfaces
                     used to produce divided curves and surfaces. Creation of adaptive components and iteration
                     over divided curves and surfaces. We will be covering Panoramas in both Enscape3D and Revit,
                     video creation in Enscape3D and exploring digital and immersive presentation options.
                     Week 3: Continue to develop model, form and components. Peer review of projects using the
                     HTC Vive to make presentation and design decisions. Introduction to Dynamo.
                     Week 4: Final iteration/development of models, graphs, and presentation techniques. Digital
                     presentation strategy should be finalized during this week. Video Creation and editing.
                     Week 5: Production and evaluation of final presentations.
.
Hardware: You should have a laptop capable of running at the minimum Revit 2019 and if possible
                     Enscape3D.
                     You should acquire a Google Cardboard or similar for Panorama viewing.
Software:            Download and install the lab versions of Revit and Enscape3D on to your own computer. Sign up
                     for a RoundMe account. These programs are available from Autodesk and Enscape3D to
                     students at no charge. We may use Rhino and or Grasshopper on a limited basis and they are
                     not required.


BIM MODELING/REPRESENTATION                                  ARC s327R/s386M /LAR s388                         2
Evaluation:
Attendance: Two unexcused absences will result in the lowering of your grade by one letter.
             Three unexcused absences will result in a grade no higher than a C and my recommendation
             that you drop the course. Five unexcused absences = F.
             Use mobile phones for class related assignments. If you need to use your phone for non-class
             related reasons, inform the teacher beforehand and leave the room.
             Work on class related assignments during class. Complete other non-class related items outside
             of class.
Progress:    Everyone is starting out at differing levels of proficiency therefore your grade will be based on
             relative progress.
Assignments: There will be two projects. You should complete the projects by the beginning of class on the
             due date.
Grades:
             X       Excused Incomplete - Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family
                     emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning
                     this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans' offices
                     and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before
                     the second week of the next semester in which you are enrolling, according to the
                     School of Architecture policy.
             F       Fail - Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
                     acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when you have excessive unexcused
                     absences.
             C-, D   Poor - Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
                     presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required
                     competence and knowledge base.
             C+/C Average - Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not
                     pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
             B-/B/B+ Above Average - Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
                     completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort
                     to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential
                     for excellence.
             A/A-    Excellent - Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness,
                     visual language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
                     concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
                     complete on all levels.


BIM MODELING/REPRESENTATION                                  ARC s327R/s386M /LAR s388                      3
Resources:
            Linked In Learning https://www.linkedin.com/learning/me?u=36306084
            Video Tutorials included in assignments
            Autodesk Design Academy, https://academy.autodesk.com/software/revit
Accommodations:
            At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need special accommodations
            should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with
            Disabilities Office. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be provided,
            students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
            Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
            including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
            dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
            scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
            Feric Fevolution                             290 Mulberry, New York, ShOP Architects
