                 ANT353E (31800)-WF ARCHAEOLOGICAL LAB ANALYSIS
Instructor: Dr. Maria Franklin
Course Description:
          This is a lab-based course that carries the Writing Flag, and students will both work with
artifacts and report on what they potentially reveal about the past. The artifacts were recovered
from a historic site in central Texas once occupied by African Americans. The assemblage largely
consists of a wide spectrum of household-related artifacts including ceramics, container glass,
decorative objects, architectural remains, personal effects, and so on. Two major course goals are
to train students in basic archaeological lab methods and preliminary artifact analysis. These are
foundational skill sets applicable to all practices of archaeology. A third important goal, since this
course carries the Writing Flag, is to develop writing skills in archaeology. In this class, you can
expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise your
writing assignments, and will be expected to review and comment on the work of your peers. A
substantial portion of your grade (60%) will be based on your written work. Writing Flag classes
meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
          Individuals who are interested in material culture studies, history, and archaeology may
find this course of interest and useful to pursuing further study in these related fields. Students
who are looking for opportunities to learn a subject through a more active, “hands on” approach
where working independently is encouraged and required may also find this course a good fit.
Students will discover that the course will test – and help them to develop – their organizational
skills, attention to detail, competence in problem solving, and their ability to describe, categorize,
and synthesize data in order to arrive at interpretations of the past.
Course Objectives:
By the end of the semester, students should be able to demonstrate…:
     -        …proficiency in identification and dating of historic artifacts from circa 1900 to the
              1960s. Students should have the ability to distinguish between major artifact
              categories, identify common diagnostic traits, and know which sources to seek out in
              order to accurately identify and date various artifact types.
     -        …the proper procedures for cataloging artifacts for curation by filling out lab forms
              and labels accurately, and entering data into Excel.
     -        …how to employ Excel to create artifact tables and graphics.
     -        …the process for synthesizing archaeological data to conduct a preliminary
              descriptive analysis of historic artifacts.
     -        …basic skills in technical report writing in archaeology.
     -        …the ability to assess various artifact types in terms of their potential to address
              different research questions (e.g., site dating, site transformation processes,
              household economy, etc.).
                                                                                                     1


Course Requirements:
1. Attendance is required. You are allowed three absences (this includes those for which you
have a legitimate excuse). Each additional absence will result in 3 points deducted from your final
grade. If you miss 10 classes – including the allowed absences – the highest final grade you can
earn is a “C”. There are no “make up” classes/lab times.
Attendance is taken at the beginning of class. If you’re not there, you’re marked absent for the
day.
2. Exams (15 points each; 30 points total). There are three exams, and the lowest score will be
thrown out. The exams will largely consist of identifying and dating various artifacts that will be
assembled specifically for each exam.
3. Reading Summaries (RS1-RS5) (2 points each; 10 points total). You will be required to
submit responses to questions regarding specific assigned readings (see schedule below). The
questions are posed along with the link to each reading in Canvas. Please note that, although each
reading summary is weighted equally, some will require a short essay while others only ask for
brief responses. The readings will familiarize you with the history of Antioch Colony and its
community, and assist you with artifact identification and dating.
         There will be additional required readings for this course posted on Canvas. These will
largely be interpretive works illustrating how archaeologists rely on historic artifacts to address
various research questions about the past. Although reading summaries are not required for these,
for most there will be a set of questions to help guide you through the articles.
4. Artifact Reports (2 reports = 15 pts each; 30 points total). You’ll submit a report of your glass
artifacts, followed by your ceramics. A different handout of guidelines for each paper will be
provided.
In order to earn a grade for each report, the artifacts need to be cataloged properly. All
forms, bags, data entry into Excel, and artifact labels for each assigned lot will be checked to
ensure that there is a form for every bag, ID #s are in consecutive order, etc. You are required to
construct your tables and graphs using Excel and will need to submit your Excel file with your
final tables/graphs along with each report.
5. Final Research Report (a list of topics to choose from will be provided; 30 points total). Your
final assignment for the course will be an 8-page (single-spaced; page count does not include
graphics or tables) report on artifacts from the Antioch Colony site. Specific instructions on what
needs to be included in the report (e.g., tables and figures, references cited) will be provided.
IMPORTANT NOTE: In order to earn a grade for any of the 3 papers, the following requirements
must be met:
     a. Artifact tables and figures are created in Excel using the pivot table tool.
     b. Individual meetings with me will be scheduled for your first and final reports. This is to
         ensure that you’re on the right track, and to give you any assistance needed.
     c. Drafts of each report are submitted by their due dates; the goal here is to provide you
         with timely and constructive feedback for revisions.
     d. Provide peer reviews on the first two reports in order to receive grades for your own.
                                                                                                    2


6. Peer Reviews (2; 0 points). See “5.d.” above. As a writing-intensive course, the peer review
process is important as it provides you and your classmates with the opportunity to learn from one
another and to refine and strengthen your own work. Everyone will be responsible for peer
reviewing a classmate’s first two reports.
7. Reference Sheet (0 points). You’ll have a huge learning curve as you become acquainted with
historic artifacts. While I’ll pass around handouts to help with artifact identification and dating,
one good practice for lab work in archaeology is to start keeping notes of your own. You’re
allowed to use a 1-2 page document for exams as long as it’s of your own notes (unless specified,
no class handouts or readings will be allowed). Please note: your reference sheet may be revised
for each exam, but you are only allowed to use one of these. Examples of these are posted on
Canvas (see the “Assignments and Exam Reviews” page).
8. Excel Pivot Table Exercise (0 points). Artifact tables are required for all of the reports, and
these must be constructed using Excel. Proficiency in Excel is an important objective of this
course as it will help you immensely with organizing your artifact data for report presentation,
and preliminary data analysis. This exercise will help you learn the basics needed to create tables
for reports. The instructions and files for this assignment are posted on Canvas on the “Excel”
page. While this exercise will not be graded, it will be checked for accuracy. Please keep in mind
that if you are running into problems and need some one-on-one instruction, come speak with me
or your TA or send us an email. We are happy to help.
Late work policy: an assignment submitted past its due date must have the prior approval of the
instructor and is subject to a reduction of 50% of the grade earned on the late assignment. No
more than one late assignment will be accepted.
Grading Scale: 93.5-100 = A; 89.5-93.4 = A-; 86.5-89.4 = B+; 83.5-86.4 = B; 79.5-83.4 = B-;
76.5-79.4 = C+; 73.5-76.4 = C; 69.5-73.4 = C-; 66.5-69.4 = D+; 63.5-66.4 = D; 59.5-63.4 = D-;
59.0 and below = F
Canvas: Grades, readings, and assignment handouts are all accessible through Canvas
(canvas.utexas.edu). There is a “Resources and Lectures” page on Canvas where you can access
lectures and source materials on various artifacts. For cataloging glass, see especially the
“Container Glass ID” Powerpoint.
Supplies: You will need to have two items. These include a 3-ring binder for your artifact forms,
class handouts, and notes, and Microsoft Excel (which is available with MS-Office 2016 via the
Campus Computer Store). The current price as of August 2017 for MS-Office is $19.99 for
students. Be sure to purchase the 2016 edition of the software.
Academic Integrity:
Scholastic dishonesty will not be tolerated, and will be reported to the Dean of Students. If
anyone is caught falsifying excuses in order to make-up a required assignment or plagiarizing, the
case will be submitted to SJS for arbitration. Please refer to the Student Judicial Services web site
for more information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations is strongly
encouraged to contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-
                                                                                                     3


6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations.
Observance of Religious Holy Days
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may
not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University
policy requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as
possible so that arrangements can be made.
                                             COURSE SCHEDULE
 *All readings are posted on the “Readings” page in Canvas.
 *Readings should be completed by the beginning of class on the day they are listed below.
    Date               Lecture Topics, Readings, & Lab Work                   Assignments Due & Exam
                                                                              Dates
 8/30 Th       Course Introduction
               The Antioch Colony Project
               Readings (RS1): Lindsey (2017), SHA
               “Glassmaking…”; Lindsey (2016)
 9/4 T         Glass Artifacts                                                Summary 1 due
               Cataloging: glass
 9/6 Th        Excel data entry
               Cataloging: glass
               Reading (RS2): Lindsey, SHA “Bottle finishes…”
 9/11 T        Artifact Categories in Historical Archaeology                  Summary 2 due
               Cataloging: glass
               Reading (RS3): Sitton & Conrad; Myers pp. 57-94
 9/13 Th       Excel Pivot Tables                                             Summary 3 due
               Cataloging: glass
               Reading: Hinson
 9/18 T        Dating with Artifacts                                          Excel Pivot Table Ex. due.
               Cataloging: glass
               Reading (RS4): Miller et al.; Feit and Jones pp 116-127
 9/20 Th       Writing Reports                                                Summary 4 due
               Cataloging: glass
               Reading: Norment & Boyd (choose sections to read)
 9/25 T        EXAM 1                                                         Bring your reference sheet to
               Cataloging: glass                                              class.
 9/27 Th       Cataloging: glass (wrapping up)
                                                                                                     4


Date             Lecture Topics, Readings, & Lab Work      Assignments Due & Exam
                                                           Dates
10/2 T   Intro to Historic Ceramics
         Reading (RS5): Stelle; Samford & Miller
10/4 Th  Cataloging: ceramics                              Summary 5 due
10/9 T   Excel Graphs                                      Report draft due: glass
         Cataloging: ceramics                              artifacts
         Reading: Greer
10/11 Th Cataloging: ceramics                              Peer review of glass report due
         Peer review workshop                              on Monday 10/15.
         Individual meetings re: glass report.
         Reading: Carlson
10/16 T  Archaeology technical or “site” reports
         Cataloging: ceramics (wrapping up)
         Ideas for final paper topics
         Reading: Franklin
10/18 Th Cataloging: metals                                Final report due: glass
         Reading: Gutman                                   artifacts.
10/23 T  Cataloging: metals
         Reading: Mullins
10/25 Th Cataloging: metals                                Report draft due: ceramics.
         Meet at PCL
10/30 T  Cataloging: metals                                Peer review of ceramics report
         Readings: Pool                                    due.
11/1 Th  Cataloging: metals
         Reading: Gibbs
11/6 T   EXAM 2                                            Bring your reference sheet to
         Cataloging: metals                                class.
11/8 Th  Cataloging: metals (wrapping up)                  Final report due: ceramics.
11/13 T  Cataloging: 2nd assemblage (material will vary by
         student); ceramic labeling
         Reading: Feit and Jones, pp 171-180
11/15 Th Cataloging: 2nd assemblage                        Research report draft due.
11/20 T  Cataloging: 2nd assemblage
         Individual meetings re: report.
11/22 Th Thanksgiving break
11/27 T  Cataloging: 2nd assemblage; ceramic labeling
11/29 Th EXAM 3                                            Bring your reference sheet to
         Cataloging: 2nd assemblage; ceramic labeling      class.
                                                           Final submission of artifacts
                                                           and related materials.
12/4 T   All artifacts curated and stored.
12/6 Th  Last class day                                    Submit final report on 12/10
                                                                                   5
