Fall 2018: Garrison Studio
“The confluence between design and technology”
                                               ARC 561C COMPREHENSIVE STUDIO MWF 1pm-6pm Instructor: Michael
                                               Garrison Office Hours: Thursday 11:00am-12:00 noon, in Gol 4.104, or by
                                               appointment mgarrison@utexas.edu | 512-632-1972 PREREQUISITES Fall
                                               2018: ARC 520E (formerly 520L) and ARC 520G (formerly 530T) with a grade of
                                               at least C in each; registration for ARC 335M; and satisfactory completion of third-
                                               year portfolio review
Energy Center by ZGF Architects, Palo Alto, CA
GARRISON STUDIO OBJECTIVES
The  objective  of  this  studio  is  to  introduce  advanced  design  level  students  to  a  process  that  describes  the  
confluence  between  design  and  technology.  This  studio  will  concentrate  on  the  ways  in  which  the  nature  of  
building   systems   affects   and   inform   architectural   design.   Knowledge   acquired   in   previous   technology  
courses  will  be  developed  and  applied  to  a  mixed-­use  building  project  that  will  emphasize  design  and  the  
preparation  of  construction  documents.  
    
The  course  also  introduces  students  to  an  expanding  understanding  of  the  use  of  materials  and  methods  
of   construction   and   their   application   to   details.   A   major   dimension   of   the   project   will   be   to   integrate   the  
design   of   tectonic   systems,   materials,   assemblies,   environmental   control   systems,   building   codes,  
envelopes,  and      industry  standards,  that  deploy  renewable  energy  -­  and  to  connect  various  technologies  -­
building,   computational,   service,   and   other   emerging   technologies   as   a   part   of   the   design   and   technical  
design  presentation  process.  
  
The studio will also address issues of building performance and respond to environmental conditions. Each student
will identify environmental challenges for the design on the site, and in turn demonstrate how their design tracks and
responds to this condition from the scale of the building’s massing down to individual details.
COMPREHENSIVE STUDIO DESCRIPTION
The comprehensive Studio emphasizes architecture as a tectonic expression. Projects are expected to address the
full range of potential issues embodied in an architectural design; however, aspects that directly impact how projects
exist in the physical environment, including site relationships and materiality/construction, w  


ill be a particular concentration. Therefore, the studio will have a strong focus on the design implications of technical
issues, particularly their potential for design generation and as a repository of meaning. In addition, the thoughtful
design and craftsmanship of presentation documents at all phases and scales will be emphasized.
Issues of construction and assemblies are framed within a set of concerns that are present in any type of construction,
such as expansion & contraction, moisture infiltration and evacuation, ventilation, primary and secondary structure,
logic of connections, differential settlement, etc. Particular attention will be given to the nature of detail drawings and
the final product produced by the students will result in a presentation package that will be comprehensive in content
and scale.
METHODOLOGY
The primary subjects of the studio are the design potentials of techniques of building and siting. While students will be
expected to produce exquisitely crafted documents of their design proposals at the site, building, and detail scales.
General material and format considerations will be suggested by the instructor throughout the course, however,
investigation and experimentation are strongly encouraged at all stages of production and design. In addition to digital
production methods, portions of the studio process will include hand sketches and drawings as well as physical models;
students should equip their studio workspace appropriately.
PROJECT PROGRAM: Austin Green Building Program design center
Students will work in teams of two on the design of a new 25,000-square foot Austin Green Building Program (AGBP)
design center at the Muller Development in Austin, that will include, offices for the AGBP, exhibition galleries,
classrooms, auditorium and building laboratories, along with shop, storage, and support spaces. The building design
problem will investigate the evolution from thin skin buildings to thick skin buildings emphasizing responsive building
envelopes and intestinal envelope spaces. The building should be pedagogical, demonstrating best building design
ideas in green building, water harvesting, on site-waste management, embodied energy and interior air quality/The
spatial and formal configuration of the building should celebrate, identify, and describe how you demonstrates the best
ideas of enhancing building operational performance, sustainable design and aesthetic design.
View of proposed site, looking south on McBee Street, Mueller Neighborhood, Austin Texas


Site master plans should propose organizing development plans, locating critical facilities, building adjacencies and
opportunities in responses to Muller urban design district planning and site characteristics such as soil, topography,
vegetation, microclimates, transportation links, service requirements and watershed assessment.
Primary goals
                a.   Analyze site conditions (including existing buildings)
                b.   Respond to site characteristics such as soil, topography, vegetation, and watershed in the
                     development of project design
                c.   Understand principles of environmental systems such as passive heating and cooling, daylighting,
                     solar orientation, and acoustics
References (See Box for Studio Readings)
     1.   A Case for Why Green Design Must Be Beautiful: https://www.fastcompany.com/1672322/for-green-design-
          to-hava-chance-it-should-be-beautiful
     2.   The Shape of Green: Aesthetics, Ecology & Design by Lance Hosey:
          http://181.198.63.90:8081/DOCISDI/LE/LE-400/LE-400.pdf
     3.   Thomas Herzog, Roland Krippner, and Werner Lang: Façade Construction Manual,
     4.   Christian Schittich, Werner Lang, and Roland Krippner: Building Skins,
     5.   Muller Green Resources Guide 2012: https://utexas.app.box.com/file/156809623328
     6.   AEGB 2016 Commercial Guidebook pdf: https://utexas.app.box.com/file/137702456517
  
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will focus on developing abilities in the following learning outcomes, with emphasis on architecture as a
tectonic expression: structural systems, construction methods and materiality, assembly, and spatial and formal
compositions.
          Design + Composition
          Students develop the ability to prepare a comprehensive program for the project while assessing both client
          and user needs. The program analysis, along with critical thinking skills developed in previous studios should
          inform the spatial and formal compositions of the project. The design should respond to analysis and reviews
          of site, relevant laws and standards.
          Sustainability
          Ability to design projects that optimize, conserve, or reuse natural and built resources, provide healthful
          environments for occupants and users, and reduce the environmental impacts of building construction.
          Respond to site characteristics such as soil, vegetation, and topography.
          Systems
          The design should address environmental systems, structural systems, building envelope, building materials
          and assemblies.
                •   Environmental Systems – solar orientation, active and passive heating and cooling, daylighting and
                     artificial illumination, indoor air quality


                •   Structural Systems – understanding of forces on a building, appropriate selection and application of
                      structural system.
                •   Building Envelope – appropriate application of building envelope systems and associated assemblies
                      relative to thermal transfer, moisture, performance, and aesthetics.
                •   Service Systems – understanding of basic principles of plumbing, electrical and vertical
                      transportation systems
                •   Building Materials and Assemblies – appropriate selection of construction materials, products,
                      components and assemblies.
           Life Safety
           Ability to apply basic life safety principles to design, including egress requirements.
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning encourages dialogue,
collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio offers an environment where students can
come together to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty,
visiting professionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty
members and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and spatial and material
sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project-based learning becomes the
foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness,
interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental mission: to
improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the design conversations taken
place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc). Students are encouraged to participate and be
engaged. Students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (three per semester by lead practitioners
from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio that follow are important for the holistic
education of intellectually engaged students and participation will have an impact on students’ grades (see below).
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is derived
from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to deductions
for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
      Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
           •   The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of inquiry
           •   The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
                models, etc.) in the development of the design
           •   Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is asked;
                direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
      Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in companion
      courses.


         •   A strong and clearly stated design objective
         •   Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements –
              and sectional development
         •   Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through
              creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and environmental
              system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design
              objective
         •   Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and
              assembly
    Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final
    design presentation.
         •   Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
              displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
    Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of
Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-            Excellent
                Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
                conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above
                and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-         Above Average
                Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues
                ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is
                complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C            Average
                Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with dedication
                and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-      Poor
                Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
                appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F               Fail
                Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this
                grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X               Excused Incomplete
                Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
                on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after consultation
                with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be
                completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to
                the School of Architecture policy.


ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With four (4) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter
grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with
written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing work missed
due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (45 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused absence.
Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students must notify
instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this
subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be
made.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student
Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integrity:
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-
university/#universitycodeofconduct
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges
or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling
emotionally and/or academically.
BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from
the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY
for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the
beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND THE STUDIO
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the
needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is
a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do
not leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your studio
mates accountable for the security of your shared space.
