                      GOV 374N: POLITICAL INTERNSHIPS
                                     Summer 2020
                             Department of Government
                          The University of Texas at Austin
                                     Unique: 80685
INSTRUCTOR: Joseph Cozza
OFFICE HOURS: Tuesday 1:00-2:30 and Wednesday 10:00-11:30; login via
Canvas Zoom
EMAIL joseph.f.cozza@gmail.com (please use email rather than Canvas
messaging)
COURSE DESCRIPTION – SUMMER 2020
The Government Department internship program provides students an
opportunity to combine work experience in government and politics with
academic coursework. This course emphasizes guiding students through the
design and execution of a carefully defined small-scale research project, and an
analysis of their research that can be communicated intelligibly to a public
audience using evidence-based argument. The coursework is designed to
sharpen students’ ability to use basic academic research skills as tools in a
professional environment, and to convey the results of their research in ways that
contribute to public discourse about politics, policy, and government.
Most of students’ time will be directed toward performing the duties of their
internships in a manner that reflects positively on them and on The University of
Texas at Austin. A solid performance as an intern provides a rich learning
experience, the possibility of future intellectual and professional opportunities,
and also reflects well on the program, paving the way for future students to have
the same opportunities current interns enjoy.
However, interns should be clear about the nature of this course. Students are
not receiving credit from the Government Department primarily for fulfilling their
internships. Students receive grades and credit for completing the internships in
conjunction with guided course work. Supervisor evaluations are taken into
account in assigning grades per the grading criteria below, but 75% of your
course grade is based on assessment of academic work completed for the
course.
COURSE HOME ON THE WEB
Documents and notices will be posted using the Canvas site for the class. You
can log in here: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1279540


                                                                                    2
TEXTBOOKS
None.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
    • Completion of 4 assignments connected to research project
    • Completion of 6 ungraded exercises related to the research project.
    • Work hours: at least 17 hours per week, beginning first week of semester,
       concluding the last week of the semester. The minimum total hours
       worked should be 150 hours. How you track this is up to you and your
       supervisor/employer, but it should be verifiable if necessary. If you want to
       work more hours, this is at your discretion. Summer students note: the
       calendar for the summer session has mid-week start and end dates.
       Summer internships also vary a great deal in terms of hours worked per
       week – some work more hours per week for fewer weeks. The minimum is
       to accumulate the 150-hour minimum within the 9 weeks between the first
       week of class and finals week.
    • Two evaluations by internship supervisor
NOTE: all requirements must be fulfilled to receive credit and a passing
grade for the course.
PANDEMIC CONSIDERATIONS
Interns are strongly encouraged to find internships that allow for remote work. All
in-person internship hosts/employers should practice all applicable
recommended measures aimed at protecting student interns’ health and safety,
and should be compliant with applicable public health policies in force throughout
the period of the internship.
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to
an internet-enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are
not supported. Your computer should have enough battery life to last an entire
class period and meet the following requirements:
           ●   Laptop or desktop computer
           ●   Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
           ●   Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox
           ●   5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
           ●   Ensure your microphone and webcam work properly if your course
requires them
Tips for the best class experience:
    •   Close all unnecessary browser windows and tabs and programs


                                                                                3
           o   Streaming music (Pandora, Spotify, etc.)
           o   Social media sites
           o   Youtube or other video sites
           o   Online/Offline Gaming
   •    Clear the browser's cache before class (here's how)
   •    Check your computer is free of viruses, malware, and spyware (UT
       recommendations)
Need additional help?
    •   Look for "Online Course Tech Support" in the left navigation menu of your
        Canvas course.
GRADE CALCULATION
        Course component                            Percent of
                                                    final grade
        Project assignment #1: Proposal             15%
        Project assignment #2: Data Graphic         15%
        Prototype
        Project assignment #3: Text Draft           15%
        Project assignment #4: Final Research       25%
        Project
        Practice assignment exercises               5%
        Mid-term supervisor evaluation              10%
        Final supervisor evaluation                 15%
       Grade scale for final grades:
       A 94-100%
       A- 90-93%
       B+ 87-89%
       B 84-86%
       B- 80-83%
       C+ 77-79%
       C 74-76%
       C- 70-73%
       D+ 67-69%
       D 64-66%
       D- 60-63%
       F 59 and below
Again: Students must complete all of the assignments in order to receive a
passing grade for the course. Decimal points will be rounded.


                                                                                      4
CONTACT POLICY
When it comes to electronic communication, I prefer being contacted via email
rather than through the messaging system in Canvas. I will try to answer emails
sent during ordinary working hours (9 am to 5 pm on weekdays) as soon as
possible. Messages received after 5 pm may not receive a response until the
next business day. If you have a brief question that you think could be answered
in a few sentences, then it is appropriate to ask over email. If it is something that
requires a more extended explanation, please come to office hours, or email me
to schedule a time to meet outside my regular office hours. Please do not wait
until the last minute to ask a question about an assignment. During my office
hours, my students are my number-one priority. I am invested in helping all of
you perform to your highest capability.
OFFICE HOURS
Tuesday 1:00-3:30 and Wednesday 10:00-11:30; login via Canvas Zoom
SUMMER 2020 SCHEDULE / IMPORTANT DATES*
   June 4              First day of 9-week session   Your internship should be set up and
                                                     you should start working this week if
                                                     you haven’t already.
   June 10             Submit internship             Submit using Qualtrics form in
                       supervisor contact info       Canvas.
   June 19             RESEARCH ASSIGNMENT           Submit via Canvas
                       #1 DUE
   July 2              Midterm supervisor            Use Google Form (link in Canvas).
                       evaluation due
   July 6              RESEARCH ASSIGNMENT           Submit via Canvas
                       #2 DUE
   July 19             RESEARCH ASSIGNMENT           Submit via Canvas
                       #3 DUE
   July 28             RESEARCH ASSIGNMENT           Post to web, submit URL to Canvas
                       #4 DUE
   July 30             Final supervisor evaluation   Use Google Form (link in Canvas).
                       due                                 Be sure your supervisor is
                                                            aware of this deadline and
                                                            provided with the appropriate
                                                            form, as there will be little
                                                            margin for late evaluations
                                                            given grade submission
                                                            deadlines.
* All assignments within a module must be submitted by 11:59 pm CDT on the
due date. No exceptions.


                                                                                     5
RESEARCH PROJECT
This project is designed to sharpen students’ abilities to research and analyze
questions related to politics and government using primary data, and to present
the results of your research in a way that is both informative and accessible to
a public audience. The final product of the research assignment should
incorporate original text and graphic presentation of data presented in a webpage
or other digital document posted on a publicly accessible location on the Internet.
The default media for producing the final product will be the public publishing
platform Medium, at Medium.com, unless students request and receive instructor
approval to use another platform that meets the requirements of the assignment.
Your project will focus on a question related to politics and/or government in
Texas. The final product of the project will combine polished textual explanation
accompanied by research-based digital graphics. The final product should
convey your interpretation of your research in a way that would be of interest to
readers in the general public.
The project is organized into a series of assignments. Each assignment will
generate feedback for proceeding to the next stage of the project. The
descriptions below provide an overview of the assignments and their point
values. All stages of the assignment are graded on a 100-point scale, then
weighed as indicated in your final grade. Specific rubrics used to grade
submissions can be found in each assignment’s module in Canvas.
Description of Required Assignments
Due dates for each assignment may be found in the course schedule and in
Canvas. Log into Canvas to find the specific assignment page and grading
rubrics for each assignment.
Research Assignment #1: Project proposal
 Value: 15% of final grade                      Length: 250-500 words
Assignment #1 is a written description of the specific question your research
addresses, and how you will go about answering that question. The proposal
should indicate what question you seek to answer, why it is relevant to Texas
government and politics, and specific identification and justification of your
primary data sources. You will need to identify a very specific question to
address – remember, your final product will not be a major research project.
Rather, it will be a relatively short exploration of a relevant problem that you use
relevant data to explain to a general audience – not an academic audience. Your
justification should avoid partisan advocacy. Stay focused on why the question
you are answering is relevant for policy, government, or the political system. You
should list both primary and secondary sources with your proposal, whether you
quote them directly or not. Reports based on other people's analysis of
primary source data are not sufficient primary sources, even though other


                                                                                        6
people’s work should provide the context for the work you are doing.
Overreliance on these sources will result in a penalty equivalent to one
letter grade at each stage of the project. This project is supposed to push
students to engage with raw data, not summarize analysis published by
others. Please clarify with the instructor if you have questions about what
counts as raw data.
Research Assignment #2: Data and graphics
 Value: 15% of final grade
Assignment #2 requires students to compile data you have gathered for a
secondary analysis in a spreadsheet, and to produce initial versions of graphics
that may be used to present data in your final published version in Medium. This
should include presenting your data in tabular form (e.g. a spreadsheet in Excel
or Google Spreadsheets) and an initial attempt at graphical presentation of all of
your data (i.e. plot, chart, etc.). You should not reproduce numbers, averages, or
percentages from a single report based on someone else's analysis, even if you
can put it in tabular form yourself. The best assignments will find raw data from
governmental or research sources and compile a spreadsheet out of the data. In
some cases, students may need to compile spreadsheets using multiple sources
which may include reports as well as tabular data from official sources. In the
latter cases, over-reliance on data compiled by others will be evaluated as less
satisfactory than compilation of raw data. Product should be in digital form - you
can upload either an Excel spreadsheet with graphics created in the file, or link to
a Google Spreadsheet using your UT Google account. You MUST include a
verifiable source -- via citation and when possible URL -- for all data presented.
All graphics should be clearly and comprehensively labeled.
Research Assignment #3: Text Draft
 Value: 15% of final grade                      Length: 500-1000 words
Description: A first, edited draft of the textual explanation of your data. At this
stage of the project, you want to move from thinking about your work as
research, and move toward composing a short article that is engaging to a what
you should think about as an interested general reader rather than an academic
audience or someone giving you a grade. You need to write an article that tells
your reader something interesting through an evidence-based discussion of
policy or politics. Don’t write like this is a student paper; rather, write as if were an
article for public consumption – which, when you post the final version to the
web, is what it will be. However, you must follow rules of attribution: cite all
sources you use for both background information and the data in your analysis.
Any thought that did not originate in your mind or in your analysis should be cited
with a relevant source.


                                                                                    7
Overall, keep in mind the role of this assignment in the overall arc of the research
project. The project has been broken down into discrete stages designed to
structure your research and thinking. The objective of this stage is to think about
the product of the research stage, especially the data and graphics submitted for
the previous assignment, and assemble a written analysis based on the data
you’ve gathered, how you are thinking about it, and the text you will present in
your final public project.
The four key goals of this assignment form the basis of the grading rubric.
1. Refinement of the scope of your project.
2. Understanding the result of your research and analysis.
3. Providing context for the subject of your research, especially the political or
policy debate surrounding the topic you are discussing.
4. The production of a finished draft that meets the requirements textual
component of the final digital media project.
Be sure to remember that you need to be clear about the sources of your data
and interpretations. Using hyperlinks is a good way to do this given the format of
this assignment.
Research Assignment #4: Final digital project
 Value: 25% of final grade                    Length: 500-1000 words
Description: A final draft that combines your textual analysis with a visualization
of your data based on your data graphic prototype, which reflects further
refinement in your research and thinking, as well as the feedback you received
on both. The final project should be constructed in Medium.com, a publishing
platform. You may use another platform if you have a good reason to do so – it
must be approved in advance by the instructor and it must be readable via a
common web browser (Chrome, Firefox, Safari).
LATE PENALTIES: For all assignments, late submissions (after 11:59 PM
CDT on due date) are subject to a 10 percent reduction on points assigned
per day and/or fraction of a day late. No exceptions.
GRADING RUBRIC EXERCISES
The course modules in Canvas include short exercises designed to familiarize
you with the expectations of your work during the first three assignments in your
research project. You will download a document and use the grading rubric to
assign the assignment a grade based on the rubric. These assignments are
interwoven into video discussions at each stage. You are required to submit the


                                                                                    8
rubric, but the work is credit/no credit. Completing and submitting all of the
rubrics is worth 5% of your final grade in the course.
INTERNSHIP SUPERVISOR CONTACT FORM
Complete and submit a brief online form in Qualtrics (link in Canvas modules)
that provides information about your internship and contact information for your
supervisor. This is mandatory and should be submitted no later than June 10.
SUPERVISOR EVALUATIONS
Supervisors must evaluate interns twice, at mid-semester and at the semester’s
end. You should share the Google Form links for each evaluation with your
supervisor, and ask them to fill out and submit the form online by the due date.
These evaluations are due July 3 and July 31.
Interns should provide supervisors with plenty of lead-time, and make sure
forms are available to them.
POLICY ON ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is
highly valued and seriously regarded at The University of Texas at Austin. More
specifically, you and other students are expected to maintain absolute integrity
and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the
University. This is a very basic expectation that is further reinforced by the
University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments
and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
    •   acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
    •   complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to
        seek or obtain assistance in preparing them;
    •   follow instructions for assignments, and observe the standards of your
        academic discipline; and
    •   avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself
        or another student.
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and / or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will
be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and


                                                                        9
Academic Integrity website
at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
NOTICE: students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
