                     Blacks and Asians: Race and Social Movements
                    AAS 330 (32095) / AFR 374D (30740) / ANT 324 L (31690)
Instructor: Dr. Aarti Bhalodia
Course Description
Asian Americans are the fastest-growing racial group in the United States making up 6% of the
American population. With Asians as the largest share of recent immigrants it is important to
study the Asian American experience, including Asian interactions with other minority groups.
While a majority of Asians are immigrants, people from Asia have a long history in the U.S. The
course begins with an overview of Asian and Black history in the U.S. through the lens of critical
race theory. We will trace the historical roots of Asian and Black relations in the U.S. and
examine past and present racialization of Asian Americans and African Americans. We will
examine key points of collaboration and conflict between Asians and Blacks in American
society.
This course carries the Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag. The purpose of the Cultural
Diversity in the United States Flag is for students to explore in depth the shared practices and
beliefs of one or more underrepresented cultural groups subject to persistent marginalization. In
addition to learning about these diverse groups in relation to their specific contexts, students
should engage in an active process of critical reflection. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one underrepresented cultural group in the U.S.
https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about
Course Objectives
Through this course students will have a better understanding of Asian and Black relations in the
United States. We will examine similarities between racialization of Asian Americans and
African Americans. We will also consider differences that separate people of Color and discuss
how to effectively bridge the gap.
Reading Assignments
Book chapters and articles on Canvas. The course is listed as AAS 330 for all students.
Deepa Iyer, We Too Sing America: South Asian, Arab, Muslim, and Sikh Immigrants Shape our
Multiracial Future (New York: The New Press, 2015).
Vijay Prashad, The Karma of Brown Folk (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2000).
	                                                1	  


The following books are available in a digital format (“electronic resource”) through the
UT libraries. You can download relevant chapters in PDF format. Use the following link to
do a title search.
http://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/search/t
Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Color Blindness
(New York: The New Press, 2012).
Scott Kurashige, The Shifting Grounds of Race: Black and Japanese Americans in the Making of
Multiethnic Los Angeles (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2008).
Gary Y. Okihiro, Margins and Mainstreams: Asians in American History and Culture (Seattle:
University of Washington Press, 2014).
Assignments and Grading
Attendance and class participation: 10%
In-class written assignments (three): 30%
Exams (two): 30%
Research paper description and bibliography: 5%
Research paper presentation: 5%
Research paper: 20%
           Grade         Cutoff
           A             93%
           A-            90%
           B+            87%
           B             83%
           B-            80%
           C+            77%
           C             73%
           C-            70%
           D+            67%
           D             63%
           D-            60%
           F             <60%
Attendance: You are required to attend all class meetings. I expect to be informed before the start
of class if you are unable to attend. More than two unexcused absences will affect your grade.
Class participation: You are responsible for completing all assigned readings before each class
meeting. Participation in class activities is crucial and a component of your final grade. We will
	                                                 2	  


have regular class discussions based on required readings in which you are expected to
participate. If I am not satisfied with class participation I will give a pop quiz.
Class etiquette: Students are not permitted to use laptops, tablets or phones while class is in
session. During lectures you should be listening attentively to the instructor and taking notes. All
PowerPoint slides will be posted on Canvas. During class discussions all students are required to
treat each other with respect. Students who are repeatedly disruptive will receive a poor class
participation grade. Disruptive behavior includes showing up to class late, leaving early, talking
to a neighbor while class is in session, talking/texting on a phone, checking email/playing
computer games and sleeping.
Written assignments: In-class written assignments will be based on assigned reading, lectures
and other relevant course material.
Exams: You are responsible for completing two non-cumulative exams, each worth 15% of the
overall grade. Both will be in-class exams consisting of short answer and short essay questions.
Bring an unused blue book and pen to class on the day of the scheduled exams.
Research Paper: The essay is a 8 page (double spaced) research paper due on the last day of
class. I will discuss ways in which one researches and writes a successful paper. You can also
find research essay guides on Canvas. A research description (350 words) along with a
preliminary bibliography is due in class on the assigned date.
You will also get an opportunity to share your work. In the final weeks of the semester all
students will give a 10 minute oral presentation. You need to present on the day you signed up
for. If you are absent on your chosen date, you will lose all points for this assignment.
	  
Deadlines: Hardcopy of written assignments are due at the beginning of class on the due date.
For every day your assignment is late you will lose one letter grade.
If you are having trouble in class or are dissatisfied with your assignment grade/s come see me
promptly. Don’t wait until the end of the semester to seek my guidance on how to improve your
standing in the course.
Academic Integrity
As per University policy, those who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Refer to http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php for more
information on academic integrity, plagiarism, and consequences of academic dishonesty.
	                                                  3	  


Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
http://sites.utexas.edu/disability/
If you have a disability you need to notify me during the first two weeks of the semester and
provide appropriate documentation from SSD (Services for Students with Disabilities).
Emergency Situation
Please familiarize yourself with recommendations from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security (512-471-5767) on what to do in the event of an emergency.
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: utexas.edu/emergency.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-­‐
concerns-­‐advice-­‐line
The instructor reserves the right to change the syllabus. All changes will be announced in
class and on Canvas.
                                          Class Schedule
Reading assigned for each day should be completed before class meeting on that day.
Jan 22 W         Introduction
Part I           Understanding Race
Jan 24 F         Howard Winant, The Theoretical Status of the Concept of Race. Canvas.
Jan 27 M         Howard Winant, Racism. Canvas.
Jan 29 W         Gary Okihiro, Margins and Mainstreams, chapter 1, p. 3-30. E-Book.
Jan 31 F         Angelo N. Ancheta, Neither Black Nor White. Canvas.
Feb 3 M          Vijay Prashad, The Karma of Brown Folk, p. 85-108. Canvas.
Feb 5 W          In-class written assignment # 1
Feb 7 F          Robert G. Lee, The Cold War Origins of the Model Minority Myth. Canvas.
Feb 10 M         Prashad, Karma of Brown Folk, p. 69-83. Canvas.
	                                                4	  


Feb 12 W      Patricia Hill Collins, Mammies, Matriarchs and Other Controlling Images.
              Canvas.
Feb 14 F      No reading
Feb 17 M      No Class
Feb 19 W      In-class written assignment # 2
Feb 21 F      Okihiro, Margins and Mainstreams, Chapter 2, p. 31-63. E-Book.
Feb 24 M       Lisa Yun, Chinese Freedom Fighters in Cuba. Canvas.
Feb 26 W       Vivek Bald, Bengali Harlem, p. 160-88. Canvas.
Feb 28 F      Vivek Bald, 'Lost' in the City: Spaces and Stories of South Asian New York, 1917-
              1965. Canvas.
              “Jumping Ship”. Canvas.
Mar 2 M       Exam review
Mar 4 W       Exam 1
Part II       Interracial Solidarity and Conflicts
Mar 6 F       No reading
Mar 9 M       Laura Pulido, “The Politicization of the Third World Left” in Black, Brown,
              Yellow, and Left, p. 36-54. Canvas.
Mar 11 W      Glenn Omatsu, The Four Prisons and the Movements of Liberation. Canvas.
Mar 13 F      No reading
March 16 – 20         Spring Break – No Class
Mar 23 M      American Revolutionary: The Story of Grace Lee Boggs – Documentary
              Screening in Class.
Mar 25 W      Scott Kurashige, The Shifting Grounds of Race: Black and Japanese Americans in
              the Making of Multiethnic Los Angeles, chapter 9, p. 205-233. E-Book.
Mar 27 F      Kurashige, The Shifting Grounds of Race, chapter 11, p. 259-85. E-Book.
Mar 30 M      In-class written assignment # 3
	                                              5	  


Apr 1 W     Breathin’ The Eddy Zheng Story – Documentary Screening in Class.
Apr 3 F     Michelle Alexander, The New Jim Crow: Mass Incarceration in the Age of Color
            Blindness, p. 1-19. E-Book.
Apr 6 M     Alexander, The New Jim Crow, chapter 5, p. 173-208. E-Book.
Apr 8 W     Alexander, The New Jim Crow, chapter 6, p. 209-248. E-Book.
Apr 10 F    Elaine Kim, Home is Where the Han is: A Korean American Perspective on the
            Los Angeles Upheavals. Canvas.
            Karen Umemoto, “Blacks and Koreans in Los Angeles” in Blacks, Latinos and
            Asians in Urban America. Canvas.
Apr 13 M    Deepa Iyer, “Disruptors and Bridge Builders” and “Ferguson is Everywhere” in
            We Too Sing America. Canvas.
            Prashad, Karma of Brown Folk, p. 185-203. Canvas.
Research paper description and bibliography due at the beginning of class on April 13.
Print Copy.
Apr 15 W    Manning Marable, “Building Coalitions among Communities of Color: Beyond
            Racial Identity Politics” in Blacks, Latinos and Asians in Urban America. Canvas.
Apr 17 F    Exam 2 review
Apr 20 M    Exam 2
Apr 22 W    No reading
Apr 24 F    Affirmative action – articles on Canvas.
Apr 27 M    Research paper presentations
Apr 29 W    Research paper presentations
May 1 F     Research paper presentations
May 4 M     Research paper presentations
May 6 W     Research paper presentations
May 8 F     Course wrap up
Research paper due at the beginning of class on May 8. Print copy.
	                                            6	  
