                              Gender and Labor in Global Asia
                                   ANT 324P - Unique 31700
                                    WGS 340 - Unique 45073
                                  ANS 379-12 – Unique 32310
                         University of Texas at Austin – Spring 2020
                                            GAR 1.134
                                           Tu/Th 2-3:30
                                        Heather Hindman
                    Office: WCH (Will C. Hogg) 4.104C– Phone: 471-1667
                    E-mail: h.hindman@mail.utexas.edu (preferred contact)
                    Office Hours: Tu/Th 1-2 -- Other times by appointment
Course Description
         In the Global North, we are vaguely aware that most of our goods are made
overseas, often in Asia, often by young women, often in less than ideal working
conditions. This situation makes possible inexpensive good and quick changes of
fashion. While this story of the “nimble fingers” of Asian factory workers is a well-
known, if repressed, story, there is much more to the intersection of gender and labor in
Asia than merely fast fashion and Iphones. In this class, we will try to get beyond the
known stories to explore how the global character of contemporary labor is transforming
gender relations and look at some unexpected shifts in roles brought about by new forms
of labor. Students in the class will be expected to write a final research paper on a topic
of their choosing that they will work on throughout the course through smaller
assignments.
Texts and Readings
         This topic is extremely current and we are seeking to understand the trans-Asian
aspects of these phenomena, thus there are few books that will give us a complete
overview. As a result, many of our readings are on-line. A packet of those readings will
be available from Paradigm books after the first week of class - the initial readings are on
Canvas. Many of our readings are also from e-books held by the UT library. That said, a
blank desk often leads to a blank mind and it is very helpful to have a few notes from the
days’ readings in front of you. We will also be watching several films in class – I
consider these texts as well. I recommend you take notes on them and you should feel
free to discuss them in your response papers – visual material is intellectual material too!
         Readings listed for a given class day should be completed BEFORE coming to
class to enable your active participation in discussion. If you are not able to do the
readings, come to class anyway – but I anticipate this will only happen once or twice
during the semester. (If student preparation becomes a problem, I reserve the right to
introduce in-class quizzes as an enforcement mechanism.)
Assignments
There are four components to how your performance in this class will be evaluated. NOTE: On
the syllabus all assignments are listed in Bold. The listed assignments must be turned in by the
beginning of the noted class on Canvas.
                                                                                                 1


(#1) Class participation in this course is highly valued. Perhaps needless to say, attendance is an
element of this – participating in class is difficult if you are not in class. Attendance is thus also a
significant part of your participation grade. Participation is more than ‘talking a lot’ – instead it is
being an enthusiastic, prepared and considerate member of a learning community. If you would
prefer your “participation” to take a written form, please contribute to the forums available on
Canvas.
In this class we will be talking about divisive, controversial and contemporary issues – sex,
religion, race, etc. – I expect students to show respect to themselves and other members of the
learning community in these discussions. Please be considerate of one another. All opinions are
welcome in the classroom, if presented with civility and scholarly rigor.
As a part of our discussions, we may have quizzes or in-class writing exercises if this becomes
necessary.
(#2) The book review is exactly what it sounds like. This 4-5 page paper should describe and
discuss some text you read outside of our assigned readings for the class that addresses issues of
gender and labor in Asia. This is an excellent opportunity to pursue particular interests you have
that are not be fully addressed in the class readings and that might contribute to your final paper.
On Canvas there is a list of potential books, but you may choose other books. You must check
your selection with me by one week before the assignment is due. The review should spend
50% or less of the time summarizing the text, most of your energy should be addressed to a
critical, intellectual evaluation. This does not mean “I liked it – I didn’t like it.”
(#3) Each student will sign up to present in class twice - although the presentations will be of very
different types. For presentation A you will be responsible for providing a brief refresher to
introduce the readings we are discussing that day. This should take about 7 or 8 minutes. I will
time this and cut people off at 10 minutes. The expectation is that all students will have done the
reading, thus all Presenter A is responsible for is reintroducing the main themes. Presentation
B is designed to kick off the discussion. This presenter will be responsible for having prepared 3-
5 questions about the text. These questions should be NON-factual, but instead inquire into
relations between the texts, how the argument is presented and investigations of methodology.
Presenter B will be guiding the discussion (with the professor’s frequent intervention). NOTE:
A and B are designed to be very different jobs - with B being more difficult. Students are often
good at summarizing, but find digging in to the nature of an argument more difficult.
(#4) The Final Paper is, well, a final paper. The length of this paper should be 10-15 pages, but
the assignment is less about the final product than the various assignments (proposal,
bibliography, outline, paper presentation) that contribute to this end goal. As with most papers, a
large part of the work consists in finding an interesting and researchable topic – and we will
devote a good deal of time to this, as well as to how to find sources, how to use sources and how
to present an argument. This will be a research-based paper and during the class will discuss the
various assignments that support the final paper in more detail. Related to this assignment, you
will be responsible for reviewing your colleagues’ papers - “peer review.”
                                                                                                       2


The numbers…
         Class Participation       15%
         Book Review               15%
         Reading Presentation A     5%
         Reading Presentation B    10%
         Proposal, outline, etc.   15%
         Peer review               10%
         Final paper               30%
An insight into the mind of your professor – I dislike the grading aspect of teaching and am far
more enthusiastic about talking about how you are doing in the course than in arguing over letters
and numbers. Having a conversation before an assignment is due about the learning process and
how each individual can improve has proven more useful for students seeking to do well in the
course than looking at “A”, “B” or “C” at the top of your paper. I do use plus/minus grading.
My Policies
         ABSENCES
         I expect students to come to class regularly, on time and prepared. If you do not do this,
not only will your grade be negatively affected, but it disrupts the learning process of your fellow
students as well as showing a lack of respect for the course. This is admittedly one of my pet
peeves. If you must miss a class, make arrangements with your fellow students to make up the
material. There are no ‘free absences’ in the class outside of legitimate and documented needs.
Attending class means showing up on time, prepared and ready to learn. If you are not prepared –
which I don’t anticipate will ever happen – come to class anyway. I do not require
documentation of medical absences, but please keep me informed, preferably in advance. Many
problems can be solved if you keep in contact with your professors.
         ACADEMIC HONESTY
         I expect students to conduct their research and writing honestly and to correctly reference
any sources consulted. Plagiarism is theft and a particular heinous crime to those whose life is
writing and research. Any dishonest academic practice will be referred to the administration for
investigation. Learning how to master a combination of direct citation, paraphrase and idea
acknowledgement takes time and practice. In the meantime, CITE EVERYTHING. If in doubt
about the ethics of a situation, contact me – do not guess.
         COMMUNICATION
         I enjoy meeting with students in office hours and exchanging email with students. BUT,
I do not check email every 10 minutes. I am very eager to answer student questions by email,
discuss points of the reading or relevant outside materials, but please think before you write.
Show respect in your communication with me and with one another. I rarely use my office
phone, you are more likely to get a response from me by email.
         MISCELLANEOUS
- Turn off your cell phone when you get to class.
- I DO NOT ALLOW LAPTOPS IN CLASS. Sorry, it has just become too much of a problem.
If you have a documented need to use a laptop please provide it. Recent studies suggest that
students remember things better if written down the old-fashion way, with paper and pen.
- You may eat and drink in class, if it is subtle and not distracting to you or other students. A cup
of coffee – great – a roast chicken dinner – wait until after class.
                                                                                                    3


University Notices and Policies
Global Cultures
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with
cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an
academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the
Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility,
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e- mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your disability
from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss
the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing
accommodations you will need. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss
by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
               Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
                exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
               If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
               In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
SYLLABUS POLICY SUMMARY – If in doubt - ask! I am much happier
discussing potential problems and concerns than dealing with problems that have
been allowed to grow over time.
                                                                                                                         4


Assignments
Readings are subject to change!
January 21 Welcome to the Class – Policies – Scale of Global Labor Mobility
January 23 Historical Impacts
       "”Migrant Workers” - DeParle
       “Tracking the Militarized Global Sneaker” - Enloe
January 28 Global Women
       "Introduction” - Global Women - Ehrenreich and Hochschild
       “Milk Teeth and Jet Plane” - Gamburd
       “Good Girls or Juki Girls” - Lynch
January 30 - Disciplining Gendered Labor
       “Global Cities and Survival Circuits” - Sassen
       "The Origin of the Family, Private Property, and the State" - Engels
OPT “Gender and Inequality in the Global Labor Force” - Mills
February 4 - Nature or Nurture or Culture
       “Is Female to Male as Nature Is to Culture?” - Ortner
       “Is Local:Global as Feminine:Masculine” - Freeman
February 6 - Intimate Industries
       “The Traffic in Women” - Rubin
       “Reproductive Labor at the Intersection of Three Intimate Industries” - Constable
February 11 “Intimate Encounters” Affective Labor in Call Centers” - Mankekar and
       Gupta
OPT “Intimate Industries” - Parrenas, Thai, Silvey
February 13 “What to Expect When You’re Expecting” - Rudrappa
February 18 - Beauty is Work
       “’What Does a Manicure Have to Do With Sex’” - Kang
       “Untangling the Hair Trade” - Doron and Jeffrey
       “Price of Nails” - Nir
February 20 Carework / Work of Care
       “Pedagogies of Affect” - Ameeriar
February 25 “Migrant Domestic Workers as ‘One of the Family’” - Parrenas
       FILM - Chain of Love
               Book Review Due
                                                                                        5


February 27- Money
        “Securitizing Women” - Kar
March 3 - “Empowerment Declined” - Radhakrishnan
March 5 “Revaluing Marital Immigrants” - Friedman
March 10 Sex
        “Dominating Men” - Allison
OPT - “The Commodification of Intimacy” - Constable
        Paper proposal Due
March 12 Library Day
SPRING BREAK
March 24 “Selling Fantasies of Rescue” - Choo
March 26 “Everyday articulations of prostitution” - Faier
March 31 - Where are the men?
        “Low-wage Vietnamese immigrants, social class and masculinity in the
homeland” - Thai
        “Timepass: Youth, class, and time among unemployed young men in India” -
Jeffrey
April 2 “Corruption, Masculinity, and Jianghu Ideology in the PRC” - Osburg
April 7 “Re-Engendering the ‘Chinese Soul’ in Shanghai” - Ong
April 9 “Breadwinning Wives and ‘Left-Behind” Husbands” - Hoang and Yeoh
        Annotated Bibliography Due
April 14 -Factories
        "The Making of a Global Dormitory Labour Regime" - Ngai
        “Gender and Class” - Ngai
April 16 Mardi Gras: Made in China
        Paper outline and abstract due
April 21 “The Production of Possession” - Ong
April 23 “Gender Dowry and the Migration System of Indian Information Technology
        Professionals” - Biao
                                                                                 6


April 28 “A ‘World-Class’ (Labor) Camp/us” - Ngai and Koo
       Drafts due to peer reviewers
April 30 Peer Review
May 5 Peer Review (last class)
May 12th Papers Due
                                                          7
