                LAT 507: First-Year Latin II Syllabus (Summer 2019)
UT Instructor: Janette Eggiman
Email: janette.eggiman@utexas.edu
Office Hours: M & F 11am-12pm
UEX Instructor: Dr. Steven Lundy (pronouns: he/him/his)
Email: steven.lundy@utexas.edu
Office Hours: TBD
Required Course Materials (available at Amazon.com, etc.)
    •   Wheelock’s Latin, 7th edition
    •   Groton & May, Thirty-Eight Latin Stories Designed to Accompany Wheelock’s Latin
    •   War with Hannibal: Authentic Latin Prose for the Beginning Student, ed. Brian Beyer
    •   Email Account connected to Canvas: you are responsible for any announcements posted
        on Canvas.
    •   optional: if you want a review of the foundations of English grammar, a good book to
        purchase would be Goldman N.W., English Grammar for Students of Latin: The Study
        Guide for Those Learning Latin
    •   optional: a Latin dictionary, although many online resources (e.g. www.perseus.org,
        archimedes.fas.harvard.edu/pollux/) make paper dictionaries redundant
Course Description
Following the successful completion of First-Year Latin I (LAT 506 or equivalent) this online
course will continue to build the foundations of Latin vocabulary, grammar, and syntax, bringing
the student to an intermediate proficiency in the language. We will work our way through
Wheelock’s Latin (7th edition), chapters 26-40. We will accompany this work with regular
readings of texts relating to Roman history and historical myths, leading up to a reading of
authentic Latin (Eutropius' commentary of the war against Hannibal). Students will be graded
according to completion of online assignments, weekly review worksheets, and two midterm
exams.
This is a fully online course. Students are not required to attend class on campus at any time
during the semester except for midterms (which can be taken at a designated testing center with
instructor approval) Student will, however, have opportunities to interact with the instructor and
other students in collaborative online exercises and through Piazza (an online discussion board).
Students who achieve a C (not a C-) or higher in this course will have demonstrated sufficient
mastery of the Latin language to advance to Second-Year Latin (LAT 511K) or the equivalent at
other institutions.


   Course Assessment
a. Assessment Activities
     Midterms (exam 1: 20%; exam 2: 25%)            45%
     Online Module Quizzes                          30%
     Worksheet and Collaborative Exercises          20%
     Memrise Vocabulary                             5%
   All assessment activities will take place online, except midterms, which must be taken on the
   main UT campus or an approved testing center. All course assessments will be cumulative, i.e. it
   will assume and incorporate knowledge of earlier materials in the course.
b. Midterms (45%)
   Students will complete TWO two-hour midterms, which will emphasize translation and
   comprehension, as well as morphology and syntax. These will be held on campus, although
   students who are taking this course outside of the Austin area or are otherwise unavailable may
   seek permission from the instructor to take their midterm(s) at an approved testing center at their
   own expense. Students are advised to note the midterm dates ahead of time and anticipate any
   scheduling conflicts by discussing them with the instructor at the earliest opportunity. Make-up
   are only permitted in the instance of a medical or family emergency or religious holiday (on
   religious holidays, see below), of if there is a legitimate, documented time conflict.
   Midterm 1       Monday, August 5
   Midterm 2       Saturday, August 17 or Monday, August 19 (during finals period - date and time
   are TBD
c. Online Module Quizzes (30%)
   Modules will be released weekly and completed throughout the course of the semester. Each
   module is centered around a Latin reading passage. You will complete two modules per week,
   the first due on Wednesdays at 11:59pm and the second due on Saturdays at 11:59pm (except for
   week 1 where the first deadline will be due on Thursday at 11:59pm). (Please see course
   schedule below for more information on due dates). Each module contains two types of quizzes:
       •    Learning quiz
       •    Module quiz (also called a summary quiz)
   There will be several learning quizzes for each module. Learning quizzes do NOT have a time
   limit, so you can work at your own pace. However, you will only get TWO attempts to take these
   quizzes, and your score for each quiz will be the AVERAGE of your two attempts. Therefore,
   you should try your best at each attempt.
   There will be one module (or summary) quiz for each module. Module quizzes DO have a time
   limit and are meant to test your comprehension of material covered in the entire module. You


   will have THREE attempts at this quiz, but you will receive different questions with each
   attempt. The HIGHEST score that you receive out of the three attempts will count toward your
   overall quiz grade.
   (Note: after the module deadline has passed, access to all module content will remain available
   for students so that they can continue to review the material throughout the course of the
   semester. However, additional attempts at the quizzes taken after the deadline will not be
   considered for grading purposes. See below, “Late Work.”)
d. Worksheet and collaborative exercises (20%)
   For each module, students will collaborate on annotating and translating a passage of Latin. All
   of the reading passages will focus on the early history of Rome, so as you are learning Latin this
   semester, you will also be learning about how Romans viewed the origin of their people.
   Students will provide grammatical and syntactical annotations to the passages using the
   Hypothesis app and will collaborate on translating the passage on a Google doc, both of which
   will be shared with other class members. These collaborative assignments will be due on
   Wednesdays and Saturdays, coinciding with Module deadlines.
   Students will also submit a weekly worksheet assignment that reviews material from the entire
   week (i.e. covering material from two modules) and will require a translation of a portion of the
   week’s reading passages. Worksheets will be due each week on Sundays at 11:59pm.
e. Memrise Vocabulary (5%)
   Memrise is a language app that will help you work on vocabulary memorization. We will release
   new vocabulary courses on this app each week and you will have to complete at 85% or higher to
   get full credit for this part of your work. Deadlines for completing your Memrise assignment will
   be on Sundays at 11:59pm each week.
f. Grade reporting
   All scores will be reported on Canvas’ “Grades” function at the earliest opportunity after the
   return of the assessment item. In general, students are responsible for ensuring their scores are
   recorded correctly, and where necessary, informing the instructor if there is a discrepancy.
   Students will not be given extra credit or consideration on a case-by-case basis: don’t ask for it.
g. Late work
   Students may submit work late twice in the semester without penalty, as long as that work is
   submitted within 48 hours of the original deadline. Thereafter, all late work will be given a zero.
h. Grade allocations
   Your final percentage grade will be translated into a letter grade according to the following table.
   I round to the nearest full percentage (e.g. 92.5=93).


 100-93: A     76-73: C
 92-90: A-     72-70: C-
 89-87: B+     69-67: D+
 86-83: B      66-63: D
 82-80: B-     62-60: D-
 79-77: C+     Below 60: F
If you are taking this course on a credit/no credit option, you must earn at least a 60 to receive
credit for the course.
Contacting the instructor
The instructors will check email for this course during designated email hours (M-F, 8am-5pm).
Under normal circumstances, instructors will reply within 24 hours to emails that are received
during those times. Emails sent on weekend days may not receive an answer until Monday at the
earliest, but we will do our best to be responsive to urgent matters.
The instructors expect professional and proper format on all emails. Emails without
salutations/greetings (Dear…) or appropriate formatting (punctuation, complete sentences, etc.)
will not be answered.
Often, your queries can be best addressed by referring them to the class, where they will be most
helpful to other students. Therefore, if you have questions about course logistics (e.g. what is the
homework? when is the next assignment/midterm? what is going to be covered on the
midterm?), you are advised to follow this procedure:
    •   First, check the Canvas announcements page (and associated pages, like module
        instruction pages)
    •   If that doesn’t work, post your question on Piazza.
    •   If your question is not urgent, you can bring it to the instructor’s office hours. If you can’t
        make these sessions, you can contact your instructor and schedule an alternate meeting
        time or you can post the question to the Piazza discussion board to bring it to the
        instructor’s attention.
    •   If you still have a question after pursuing these avenues, or the question is more urgent,
        email the instructor; if your question can be answered by consulting Canvas, the course
        syllabus, etc., the instructor will direct you to those resources.
The online discussion board would also be a great place to discuss content-related issues, as well
as any other related course matters you may have discovered as you work through the course.
Since this is a fully-online course, technology-related issues can sometimes be a problem. We
invite students who are affected by technology-related issues to report them on the Piazza chat
room or by email. If these issues affect grade reporting, however, students should contact the
instructor directly.
Urgent and/or sensitive matters, including issues with grade reporting, should always be
addressed directly to the course instructor in the first instance.
Instructors will often use the Canvas announcements to inform students about upcoming
deadlines and exams, notify students when assignments have been graded and are ready to for


students to review, and provide other important information associated with the course. You are
responsible for all information contained in these announcements, so be sure that you read them
carefully and in a timely manner.
Other Course Policies
Conduct
Students are expected to behave in a civil and courteous manner towards other class members,
both in face-to-face and online environments.
To encourage this, we require that you agree to an etiquette policy, stating your willingness to
abide by these standards and awareness of the consequences of their transgression. If you are
found to be in violation of these standards, you will receive a written warning from the
instructor. If you continue to violate these standards, we will ban you from the platform in
question (e.g. Piazza), pending a disciplinary discussion with the instructional team. Further
issues will be reported to the relevant authorities (i.e. Student Judicial Services).
If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line (BCAL) to discuss your concerns by phone. This service is provided through a partnership
among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),
the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Academic Honesty
Academic dishonesty in any form will not be tolerated. Please familiarize yourself with the
University of Texas’s Honor Code:
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.”
Any student caught or facilitating cheating on any assignment will receive an F in the course and
immediately be referred to the Dean of Students. In cases where dishonesty is strongly suspected,
instructors reserve the right to re-examine the student(s). We will, however, assume absolute
integrity on your part until shown otherwise. If you are unsure what constitutes academic
dishonesty, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php. It is your responsibility to be
familiar with the contents of this website and to avoid any behavior that might be interpreted as
academic dishonesty.
Plagiarism
An important and complicated concern within Academic Honesty is plagiarism. Over time,
informal resources and study guides to our course texts have emerged on the web, and these are
of varying quality and invariably contain errors and misconceptions about the work. Nonetheless,
students are frequently tempted to copy these or other online resources and represent them as
their own work. This is plagiarism, and is expressly forbidden by UT's Honor Code. We have
developed sophisticated systems for detecting this, and any student caught plagiarizing will


receive a 0 for that assignment. A second offense will be considered cheating, and the student
will receive an F and referred to the Dean of Students.
Add/Drop Policies
Please familiarize yourself with the University of Texas Extension School’s official add/drop
policy. Any requests to drop the course will be handled in accordance with these rules.
Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information contact the Dean of Students at (512)
471-6259 or see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd. In order to receive accommodations, you
must be registered with the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). This office will
document your disability, inform instructors of your situation, and instruct them on the necessary
accommodations. If you choose not to register with SSD, we cannot make special
accommodations for you.
Religious Holidays
According to Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code, students shall be excused from
attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. If you will miss class (including exams) to
celebrate a religious holiday, you must notify me AT LEAST 14 days prior to the holiday so that
we can make arrangements for you to make up the assignment. All make-up work must be
completed no later than one week after the missed class.
                                          Class Schedule*
  Week            Module and reading                           Grammar topics and
                       assignments                          Wheelock chapters covered
            Orientation module                    Introduction to the course
            Module 1 (due Thursday, 7/18):        Review: Chapters 1-25)
 Week 1
  (7/15- Reading passage:
   7/21) Aeneas and Alba Longa
            Module 2 (due Saturday, 7/20):        Comparison of adjectives
                                                  (Chapters 26-27)
            Reading passage: Romulus &
            Remus                                 Review: noun declensions and participles
            Worksheet and Memrise                 Vocabulary from Chapters 26-27
            assignment (due Sunday, 7/21)


       Module 3 (due Wednesday,      Present subjunctive; jussive subjunctives;
       7/24):                        purpose clauses (Chapter 28)
       Reading passage: Romulus &    Review: verb conjugations and relative clauses
       Sabine Women
Week 2
(7/22- Module 4 (due Saturday, 7/27) Imperfect subjunctive; result clauses (Chapter
 7/28)                               29)
       Reading passage: The Kings of
       Rome                          Review: passive constructions
       Worksheet and Memrise         Vocabulary from Chapters 28-29
       assignment (due Sunday, 7/28)
       Module 5 (due Wednesday,      Perfect and pluperfect subjunctives (Chapter 30);
       7/31)                         irregular verb fero, ferre, tuli, latum (Chapter
                                     31)
Week 3 Reading passage: Tarquinius   Review: indirect statements
(7/29- Priscus
  8/4)
       Module 6 (due Saturday, 8/3)  Indirect questions (Chapter 30); deponent verbs
                                     (Chapter 34)
       Reading passage: Servius
       Tullius
       Worksheet and Memrise         Vocabulary from Chapters 30-31 and 34
       assignment (due Sunday, 8/4)
                        MIDTERM EXAM 1 (Monday, 8/5)
       Module 7 (due Wednesday, 8/8) Cum clauses (Chapter 31);
                                     adverbs and the irregular verbs volo, nolo, and
       Reading Passage: Tarquinius   malo (Chapter 32); irregular verb eo ire (Chapter
Week 4 Superbus                      37)
 (8/5-
 8/11) Module 8 (due Saturday, 8/10) Conditions (Chapter 33);
                                     dative with verbs(Chapter 35); jussive noun
       Reading passage: The          clauses (indirect commands) and the irregular
       Banishment of Tarquinius and  verb fio (Chapter 36)
       Horatius Cocles
       Worksheet and Memrise         Vocabulary from Chapters 32, 33 and 35
       assignment (due Sunday, 8/11)
       Module 9 (due Wednesday,      Relative clauses in the subjunctive (Chapter 38);
       8/14)                         gerunds and gerundives (Chapter 39)


 Week 5
  (8/12- Reading Passage: Eutropius’
   8/16) War with Hannibal, sections 7-
           14
           Module 10 (due Friday, 8/16)    Fear clauses; questions with ne, num, nonne
                                           (Chapter 40)
           Reading Passage: Eutropius’
           War with Hannibal, sections 15-
           19
           Worksheet and Memrise           Vocabulary from Chapters 38, 39 and 40
           assignment (due Sunday, 8/10)
               MIDTERM EXAM 2 (Saturday, 8/17 or Monday, 8/19 - TBD)
*subject to revision
