                                         EE 333T Syllabus
                                    Summer 2019 — Barcelona
Instructor:         Dr. Bill Fagelson (bfagelson@mail.utexas.edu)
TA:                 Leah Butterfield (l.butterfield10@gmail.com)
Classroom:          CIEE, Girona room
EE 333T teaches students about the communication process and its relationship to
professionalism and the practice of engineering design. The class presents writing and presenting
as iterative processes that require planning, drafting, revising, and outside input.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
Engineering Communication is based on a simple premise: all the technical knowledge and skill
that students acquire in their education will be wasted if they are not able to explain their work
and ideas to potential employers, colleagues, managers, and clients in writing and orally. The
goal of the course is for students to practice and improve their ability to do the following:
    Writing and Speaking
        • Generate written reports that conform to strict standards of content and format
        • Develop an effective and efficient communication writing and presentation style
        • Identify audiences for technical communication
        • Properly cite sources and understand what constitutes plagiarism
        • Appreciate writing and speaking as processes that require time and revision
    Career Development and Professionalism
        • Produce effective job-related documentation, including resumes and cover letters
        • Communicate effectively with potential employers at career fairs, in interviews, and in
           other contexts
        • Demonstrate effective self-management (including time-management)
        • Take initiative in problem-solving
        • Accept responsibility for understanding and following course policies
        • Adopt a professional tone and etiquette when communicating with others
    Engineering Design
        • Describe emerging engineering technologies and issues
        • Understand the need for, and limitations of, standards related to engineering
        • Understand engineering design as an iterative process
        • Recognize the role of problem-solving and critical thinking in the design process


    Ethics, Leadership, and Collaboration
        • Demonstrate knowledge of professional codes of ethics and understand the role of
           professional societies
        • Recognize existence of ethical issues in case studies
        • Consider the ethical implications of an engineering career
        • Work effectively with people bringing different skills, expertise, and perspectives
        • Participate in team building and develop effective methods for team management
        • Sustain a long-term design project on a multidisciplinary team
Writing Flag Course
This course carries the Writing Flag. It is designed to give students experience with writing in an
academic discipline. Expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
projects, and receive feedback to help you improve your writing. A substantial portion of your
grade comes from your written work. You will also have the opportunity to revise some
assignments and will read and discuss peers’ work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Ethics Flag Course
This course carries the Ethics Flag. It is designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for
making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the
process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations.
COURSE TEXTS
This course does not require you to purchase any traditional texts, but course materials include a
required (free) Grammarly subscription, two recommended texts (accessible free online), and
other readings available in Canvas.
Required Grammarly Registration
In order to maximize the feedback we can provide, we require all students to register for and use
Grammarly (www.grammarly.com), an automated proofreading system. This service is free;
although you are welcome to pay for the Premium version, all we require is the free version.
More information will be available in Canvas (also see submission policies below).
Recommended Reference Texts
On questions relating to formatting, mechanics, and usage not covered in the ECE Style Guide
(see below), defer to the standards for mechanics and spelling in the following:
    1. Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed)
    2. The Chicago Manual of Style (17th ed)
Both are available online (links in Canvas); however, they are valuable reference tools that
should be useful well beyond this class if you decide to purchase them once back in the U.S.
                                                 2


Readings in Canvas
Additional required readings (listed in the syllabus below and to be announced), as well as a
number of relevant recommended readings, will be available as pdfs or web links in Canvas
Modules. The course schedule lists assigned Module titles, and the Modules themselves indicate
required versus recommended readings.
ASSIGNMENTS
This session you will complete a series of Major Assignments, for which you will receive
substantial feedback, and several Action Items, smaller assignments that allow regular practice in
communication and that will receive less substantial feedback. You are expected to complete
all of these, but—as explained below in the assessment policies—completion may take more
than one attempt.
     Note: Unless individual assignment instructions state otherwise, all written assignments
            must follow the “ECE Style Guide,” available in Canvas. If you are unclear on
            assignment expectations or formatting expectations, it is your responsibility to seek
            clarification in class, during office hours, or via e-mail.
Major Assignments
Major assignments include individual and team assignments, and a combination of presentations
and written assignments A description of each major assignment, and associated material, will be
available in Canvas, and you will have opportunities to discuss assignments in class. Each
written Major Assignment has an accompanying rubric that the instructor or TA will use to
provide feedback.
Action Items
Action Items are smaller assignments meant to provide regular practice in communication and/or
reflection. Some are simply actions (e.g., submission of a draft). There are no rubrics associated
with Action Items, and those assignments will receive more limited (sometimes no) feedback. A
list of all Action Items is in Canvas, and descriptions appear in associated Canvas Assignments.
COURSE PARTICIPATION
Active and thoughtful participation is important to both your learning process and that of other
students, in that it contributes to a productive learning environment. In short, students learn by
doing, and the worst way to develop as a communicator—and as a student more generally—is to
be passive. In general, participation means engaging fully in the course—that is, more than
simply arriving on time and paying attention. There will be regular opportunities to participate,
but the following are common ways to engage fully in the course:
       1. Show up on time and prepared at the start of class
       2. Ask questions and speak up regularly in class, via Canvas, and by e-mail
       3. Be prepared to discuss assigned reading (with readings in hand)
       4. Bring requested materials to class
       5. Volunteer for class exercises and activities
       6. Use office hours appropriately to seek feedback, advice, or assistance
       7. Providing thoughtful feedback to peers and instructor
       8. Adhere to course policies, including those related to technology use
                                                   3


THE LEARNING RECORD
This course uses the Learning Record (LR) for assessment. You will help determine your course
grade by monitoring your progress against the grading criteria over the session, documenting
your development and achievements in a portfolio of work, frequent self-assessments and
observations, and a formal reflection at the beginning, middle, and end of the semester.
You will assess your work and progress within three Course Strands (broad-level goals that
cover a variety of skills): Written Communication, Public Speaking, and Professionalism. In the
LR, you will gauge your experience in those strands across five Dimensions of Learning
(measures that are common to many different learning experiences for many “kinds” of
learners): Confidence and Independence, Knowledge and Understanding, Skills and Strategies,
Use of Prior and Emerging Experience, and Reflection.
After reviewing your argument, I will either agree with or revise your self-assessment on the
basis of the evidence provided in your LR and in your performance and activity related to class.
If we are in disagreement after my review, we will discuss it individually until we come to an
agreement. You will submit your LR at the beginning, midterm, and end of the semester, but you
are welcome to meet with me to brainstorm strategies for success in the course.
Table 1 on the next page lists general criteria for the final grade assessments. These descriptions
are broad, and each individual’s performance will fall along a spectrum, with plus grades at the
high end of any category, and minus grades at the low end.
                                      Table 1. Grading Criteria
     A Excellent. Represents outstanding engagement in all course activities; all assigned work
          is completed, on time, with exceptionally high quality. There are no absences or late
          arrivals to class. There is evidence of significant development across the five dimensions
          of learning. The LR at this level demonstrates activity that goes significantly above and
          beyond the standard required coursework in one or more strands.
     B Above Average. Represents good engagement in all course activities; all assigned work
          is completed, most or all on time, with consistently high quality in coursework. There are
          few absences or late arrivals to class. There is evidence of marked development across
          the five dimensions of learning.
     C Average. Represents fair engagement in all course activities; all assigned work is
          completed, not always on time, with generally fair quality overall in coursework. There
          are several absences and/or numerous late arrivals. Evidence of some development
          across the five dimensions of learning.
     D Below Average/Requires Intervention. Represents uneven engagement in course
          activities; not all assigned work is completed, not all completed work is on time,
          excessive absences and late arrivals, and inconsistent quality in coursework. Evidence of
          development across the five dimensions of learning is partial or unclear.
     F Insufficient/Unacceptable. Represents minimal engagement in course activities, with
          serious gaps in assigned work completed, frequent late submissions, limited attendance,
          or very low quality in coursework. Evidence of meaningful development is not available.
    Note: Students must earn a C– or higher in EE 333T to continue to EE 364D/E
                                                  4


PROFESSIONALISM IN CLASS COMMUNICATION
Because this class is about professional skills more generally, and professionalism itself is one of
the course strands, you will find opportunities daily to practice maintaining a professional
environment in your classroom behavior as well as in your other informal communication (e-
mail, face-to-face communication.
Good participation includes maintaining a professional environment. Our class involves a
lot of risk-taking and self-revelation, so it is crucial that everyone respect and support each other.
One way to do this is to respect each other’s views. Debate is encouraged, but it is possible to
discuss contentious ideas without being rude or disrespectful. Another is to be a supportive,
attentive audience when someone is presenting. Whether arriving late to class, being distracted
by electronic devices (see technology policy below), or being a distraction yourself through
talking or other activity, be aware of the possible disruption your behavior can have on others,
particularly students who are presenting.
You should also strive to be professional in all of your course-related communication (with
instructors and with classmates), not just in structured assignments. Review the reading on e-
mailing professors (assigned for the start of the semester) as well as following the general
approaches to memos and other internal communication we discuss in class. Also be sure to read
the policies below on e-mail in 333T. Remember that these guidelines for professionalism extend
to your communication with classmates, especially partners on team projects.
GENERAL COURSE POLICIES
We have developed policies for EE 333T to ensure that all students work according to the same
standards and to improve course management. Some may seem arbitrary, but each has a purpose.
Understanding and adhering to organization policies is also an important lesson in professional
development, one your manager will assume you have learned by the time you are in industry.
   Note: These policies are not designed to ask the impossible. Bear in mind the following:
       • If you foresee any trouble adhering to any policy below, speak to the instructor
           about reasonable accommodations.
       • If any policy below is unclear, you are responsible for seeking clarification in class,
           in office hours, or via e-mail. Otherwise, we assume they are clear.
       • If you do not have time to ask but feel you have good reason to violate a policy,
           use your common sense and judgment; however, be professional and acknowledge
           and explain that violation, promptly, when it occurs.
1. Attendance
    Regular attendance is absolutely mandatory and necessary if you wish to earn an A in
    the class. Much of the content of the course is conveyed through in-class discussions, which
    cannot be replicated online. Furthermore, work on assignments, exercises, and possible
    quizzes in class do factor into your final grade (via the LR) and cannot be made up at a later
    date. If you must miss class, let Dr. Fagelson know as soon as you know you will be absent.
    Lateness is also not acceptable.
                                                   5


   We will follow the CIEE policies for attendance, adapted to the use of the LR:
       Students are expected to attend all scheduled class sessions on time and prepared for the
       day’s class activities. CIEE does not distinguish between justified or unjustified absences,
       whether due to sickness, personal emergency, inevitable transport delay and/or other
       impediments. You are considered responsible of managing your own absences. Please
       keep in mind that exams, assignment submission dates, presentations and any other
       course work deadlines will not be changed.
       No academic penalty will be applied if students miss up to 2 class sessions. If students
       miss additional classes, the highest grade available for the final grade estimate will adjust
       downward. A student who misses 3 class sessions in total will not be able to earn
       anything higher than a B+, and a student who misses 4 class sessions in total will not be
       able to earn anything higher than a B. Students will automatically fail the course if
       they miss more than 20% of total class hours (i.e., if they exceed 4 absences).
       For students who miss up to 20% of the total course hours due to extenuating
       circumstances, the Faculty Leader/Academic Director may allow for exceptions to the
       local attendance policy based on documentation such as proof of bereavement, religious
       observances, hospitalization, etc.
       Students arriving more than 10 minutes late to class will be considered absent for the day.
2. Canvas
   This class uses Canvas to distribute course materials, communicate grades, and manage
   student submissions. Be aware of the following:
       • Prof. Fagelson and your TA often use Canvas to e-mail, so make sure the e-mail
           address listed for you in Canvas is correct and one you check regularly.
       • We use the Gradebook to report and record completion grades. Please let us know if
           you see something reported incorrectly there (i.e., it does not reflect what you have
           seen in hard copy or in conversation with us).
       • Some of our feedback in Canvas SpeedGrader appears as annotations on student
           submissions. These inline comments in SpeedGrader are not immediately visible, so
           students will need to click through to see them. (See Canvas for more.)
   We have done our best to make information accessible in Canvas; however, we are imperfect
   people, and Canvas is an imperfect technology. If you see a problem or missing content in
   Canvas, please let both Prof. Fagelson and the TA know immediately.
3. Assignment Submission
   Given the challenges of printing while abroad, most assignments will be due via Canvas
   only; however, some workshopping activities are best served with a hard copy. Printing is
   available in the CIEE offices, and Prof. Fagelson will indicate when hard copies are needed.
                                               6


   For soft copies submitted to Canvas. Please name files using your last name, or your team
   name, followed by the document type (e.g., “Fagelson_Resume.docx”). Doing so will make it
   much easier for Prof. Fagelson and the TA to manage submissions offline.
   In addition, written Major Assignments (except for any slide submissions) must be
   accompanied by a pdf of a Grammarly performance report (explanation and instructions
   available in Canvas). This is true for re-submissions as well.
   Timely submission of all assignments is necessary if you wish to earn an A in the class.
   You are almost always (see below) permitted to submit an assignment late and should not
   assume we do not want it just because it is late.
   Important: The start of class on Tuesday of the final week is the deadline for late
                 submission of assignments, including late resubmissions (see below).
4. Assessment of Assignments
   Major Assignments and Action Items will not receive a traditional letter grade but will
   receive a basic completion grade. A submission may receive an “incomplete” if it falls below
   acceptable standards and/or demonstrates insufficient effort. (Note: an unsubmitted
   assignment will not receive even an “incomplete”; rather, it will be left ungraded, to
   distinguish it from those “incompletes.”)
   On team assignments, the entire team will receive the same completion grade; however, we
   reserve the right to provide a separate “incomplete” to a student if it is clear that they did not
   contribute in any meaningful way to the assignment.
   You may revise any assignment (except for in-class presentations and the LR) up to one
   week after the return of feedback, subject to the following policies:
       a. Revised “Incomplete” assignments submitted after that deadline will be assessed
           fully but counted as late. Be aware that “incompletes” are by definition not completed
           assignments (akin to a missing assignment), so it is in your interest to revise them.
       b. Revised “Complete” assignments will be accepted only up until that one-week
           deadline for reassessment, though you are free to bring revised material into office
           hours to discuss the material in person beyond that one week.
       c. The Tuesday of the final week (see schedule) will be a hard deadline for any
           resubmission, or at the one-week deadline above, whichever comes first. Notice that
           some assignments may come too late for resubmission. You may wish to submit those
           assignments sufficiently early as a way of leaving time for a resubmission.
       d. You must provide an explanation via e-mail (to the person who provided the
           original feedback) of the revisions you have made for the resubmission, including a
           clear indication of the feedback to which you are responding.
   Note: We want you to discuss feedback on assignments with us, but you must wait until at
          least the next day to do so. This time allows you to digest our comments and to think
          about the questions they raise. Discuss the feedback from the TA with the TA first, but
          you may follow up with Prof. Fagelson if there are remaining questions.
                                               7


5. Office Hours
   Both Prof. Fagelson and the TA will arrange some office hours in CIEE, as opportunities for
   you to ask questions and to consult about your work. You are welcome to speak with either
   for any assignment. If you want to discuss feedback on a submission, it makes much more
   sense to visit the person who supplied that feedback and bring the feedback with you.
6. E-mail
   The best way to contact us outside of class is via e-mail. We try to be responsive but cannot
   always respond quickly. The earlier you contact us, the sooner we are likely to respond.
       NOTE: These policies concern class-related communication only. For program-related
                 concerns (e.g., illness, lost items, etc.), you should use WhatsApp to reach Prof.
                 Fagelson, or the TA, more quickly. By the same token, do not use WhatsApp to
                 ask questions about assignments or class policies.
   When you do contact Prof. Fagelson or your TA by e-mail, keep in mind the suggestions for
   sending e-mail, described in the course reading from the first day of class. Your e-mails are a
   chance to practice professionalism, and we may use our responses as an opportunity to
   provide feedback on e-mailing etiquette.
   Consider the following principles of good self-management (an element of professionalism):
       1. If you are e-mailing Prof. Fagelson or your TA, make sure any questions are those
           you cannot answer yourself. Some questions may be answered in the syllabus or on
           Canvas, so check there first. Ask classmates if you think they know the answer. It is
           not that we do not want to help, but unnecessary e-mails are not a good use of our
           time, given that we have a large number of students to serve.
       2. If you anticipate a problem (e.g., you will miss class or miss a deadline), contact
           Prof. Fagelson or your TA early. Withholding that information only makes the
           problem worse, often creating extra work for them. Nobody will be angry with you
           for absences or late submissions—there are policies to address those problems—but
           they will be upset if they need to take the time to track you down.
       3. If you are e-mailing about a problem, be a part of the solution. When possible, be
           clear how you plan to address the problem, think about what information Prof.
           Fagelson or your TA might need to help you, and make clear if there is anything you
           need from them to address the problem yourself.
       4. Apply those principles to problem-solving with classmates, especially partners on the
           team project.
7. Technology Use in Class
   We ask you to bring electronic devices (computer or tablet) to class for regular in-class work
   and exercises, and we will let you know when it is appropriate to use them. That said, part of
                                                 8


    being a present, respectful member of the class means abstaining from the use of
    electronic devices and other distractions during normal class discussions. If this becomes
    a pattern, we will have a conference. Keep in mind that
        • Research shows taking notes by hand produces greater retention versus on a computer.
        • Research also shows that devices are also a distraction to those around you.
        • Using electronic devices for other work or activities during class time renders you
            effectively absent from the class and is a sign of disrespect to others in the room.
        • It is particularly disrespectful to use them during student presentations, and we will
            ask you directly to turn your device off in those instances.
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS POLICIES
The University of Texas has its own policies, which both you and the department must adhere to.
Students With Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259
(http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/).
Accommodations for Religious Holidays
According to UT policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending absence at least 14 days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, work
assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Title IX
Prof. Fagelson and your TA are both Mandatory Reporters for Title IX concerns. We want you to
feel free to speak with us about any issues related to sexual harassment, sex discrimination,
exploitation, or intimidation, but be aware that both of us are required to report to the University
any information students share with us that may fall under a potential Title IX violation. The
University will not compel you to speak with them, but they will follow up with any respondents.
Academic Dishonesty
In this course, plagiarism is defined in its broadest sense, as any of the following, whether
committed intentionally or unintentionally:
    ● Representing as your own work any material obtained from another source, regardless
        how or where you acquired it.
    ● Using verbatim material (e.g., exact words) without proper attribution (or credit). Other
        types of material can be plagiarized as well, such as ideas or even sentence structure.
    ● Merely changing a few words or rearranging several words or sentences is plagiarism,
        not paraphrasing. Remember, too, that even a well-paraphrased idea must be cited.
    ● Collusion, or turning in individual assignments not completed by you. Collaboration on
        team assignments is not the same thing as collusion. Likewise, simply receiving feedback
        from others is also not the same thing as collusion.
In addition, it is your responsibility to be familiar with and abide by the UT Honor Code. Failure
to do so may mean a failing grade in the class and removal from the program
                                                 9


                                                              COURSE SCHEDULE
The schedule for EE 333T includes subjects/activities for class, assignment deadlines, materials to bring to class, and reading
assignments. It is subject to change, although deadlines will generally be moved only to a later date.
Notes on readings
    1. We direct you to read assignment instructions for specific class meetings, but we encourage you to read ahead. It is up to
         you to be sure you understand upcoming work and deadlines.
    2. Some modules may contain “Recommended Readings.” These items are not required, but they do provide information that
         will help you contribute to discussion or complete your assignments more effectively.
Complete each required reading before the class meeting for which it has been listed; we will use these readings for class
discussion and/or exercises
 Monday                                Tuesday                         Wednesday                          Thursday
 5/27                                  5/28                            5/29                               5/30
                                                                                                          Introduction
                                                                                                          Effective Communication
                                                                                                          The Writing Process
                                                                                                          DUE (start of class): LR Part A
                                                                                                          READ: Canvas Module
 6/3                                   6/4                             6/5                                6/6
 Speaking and Presenting               Expertise Presentations         The Revision Process               Ethics and Engineering
 Structure
 Reverse Outlining                     DUE (in class): Expertise       DUE (start of class): Presentation DUE (start of class): Expertise
                                         Presentation                    Self-Assessment (AI)               Presentation Peer Review (AI)
 DUE (start of class): Professional E-
   mail (AI)                                                           DUE (start of class): Article      DUE (end of class): Article
                                                                         Summary (draft)                    Summary
 BRING: Scholarly Article (see
   instructions for Article Summary)                                   READ: Canvas Module                READ: Canvas Module
 READ: Canvas Module


Monday                              Tuesday                              Wednesday                            Thursday
6/10                                6/11                                 6/12                                 6/13
                                    Collaboration                        Group Activity (TBA)                 Group Activity Presentations
          BANK HOLIDAY              Ethics and Design
                                                                         DUE (start of class): Ethical Design DUE (in class): Group Activity
         (class does not meet)                                             Memo (AI)                             Presentation (AI)
                                    READ: Canvas Module
6/17                                6/18                                 6/19                                 6/20
Project Management Tools            Research Methods                     Presenting Data                      Data Set Peer Reviews
Team Planning
Team Forming and Norming            DUE (end of class): Team Compact     DUE (start of class): LR Part B      DUE (end of class): Data Set
                                       (AI)
DUE: Team Proposal (AI): will write                                      READ: Canvas Module                  BRING: Data Set (draft)
    in class                        READ: Canvas Module
READ: Canvas Module
6/24                                6/25                                 6/26                                 6/27
                                    Using Graphics                       Designing Power Point                Style and Mechanics Refresher
          BANK HOLIDAY                                                                                        Peer Review: Proofreading
                                                                         DUE (start of class): Project Report
         (class does not meet)                                             (preliminary)                      DUE (in class): Technical
                                                                                                                  Presentation
                                                                         READ: Canvas Module
7/1                                 7/2                                  7/3                                  7/4
Ethics and the Job Search           Team Peer Reviews                    Team Time                            Team Presenting
READ: Canvas Module                 DUE (start of class): Project Report                                      DUE (end of class): Project Report
                                        (draft for peer review)                                                 (final)
7/8                                 7/9                                  7/10                                 7/11
                                    Team Project Time                    Project Presentations                Debrief and Decompress
Team Project Time
                                    DUE (start of class): Intercultural  DUE (in class): Project Presentation DUE (midnight): LR Part C
                                        Communication Memo (AI)
                                                                                                              READ: Canvas Module
