 ADV 318J: INTRODUCTION TO ADVERTISING & INTEGRATED BRAND PROMOTION
     2018 Fall Semester           Tue & Thu 12:30 – 2:00 pm             L. Theo Belmont Hall (BEL) 328
   Professor:                                                 Teaching Assistant:
   Anthony Dudo, Ph.D.                                        Nichole Bennett
   Office: BMC 4.364                                          E-mail: nichole.lynn.bennett@utexas.edu
   E-mail: through Canvas                                     Office: BMC Floor 4, Station 24
   Office Hours: T & TH 11 am -12 pm                          Office Hours: M 1pm-2pm, T 4pm-6pm
            “People DO judge a book by its cover. We may have the best products, the highest quality …
            etc. If we present them in a slipshod manner, they will be perceived as slipshod. If we present
            them in a creative, professional manner, we will impute desired qualities.”
                                                              Mike Markkula, Jr., former Apple executive
            “It has taken more than a hundred scientists two years to find out how to make the product
            in question; I have been given thirty days to create its personality and plan its launching. If
            I do my job well, I shall contribute as much as the hundred scientists to the success of this
            product.”
                                                                David Ogilvy, Ad icon
   REQUIRED TEXT & MATERIALS
                                                     th
1. Advertising and Integrated Brand Promotion, 8 Edition. O’Guinn, Allen, Semenik, & Close. Cengage
                                 th
   Learning, 2018. Must be 8 Edition.
2. The text is available for purchase at the University CO-OP.
3. Additional materials will be distributed during class, through email, or posted to our class Canvas website
   (http://courses.utexas.edu). These materials are mandatory unless specified otherwise.


DD318J Sd
                                                                                                               2
 COURSE DESCRIPTION
 Advertising represents an incredibly dynamic, fun, and challenging field. It’s hard to look anywhere
 today without seeing the influence of advertising—from the clothes you’re wearing right now to the
 media system that serves you unlimited information and entertainment. Advertising’s prolific role in
 society— which can be both beneficial and harmful—constantly changes and, as such, requires its
 practitioners to be creative, attentive, energetic, analytical, ethical, logical, and highly skilled. Perhaps
 more than any other traits, being successful in this field requires astute communication abilities and
 innovative thinking.
 The primary objective of the course is to help you cultivate your own basic understanding of the
 foundational concepts, skills, and perspectives in contemporary integrated brand promotion (IBP). We
 will examine IBP efforts as (1) an element in our social system, (2) a business function, (3) an art and
 communication form, and (4) a science. Your goal is to leave this class feeling equipped and excited to
 continue your education in this stimulating and rewarding field.
 NOTE: Read through this syllabus carefully. This document serves as a contract between you and me;
 it defines our mutual expectations and responsibilities as student and instructor. While I will seek to
 adhere to the schedule set forth below, I reserve the right to make any changes to this syllabus that I
 deem necessary.
 STUDENT LEARNING OBJECTIVES
          v   You will learn principles, issues, and concepts that are foundational to advertising and
              integrated brand promotion
          v   You will understand the broader structure, context, and societal dimensions of advertising
              and IBP
          v   You will recognize that advertising and IBP are in a state of constant flux
          v   You will begin to develop the habits of mind necessary to excel in advertising and IBP.
              Some of these habits include:
              o The need to constantly monitor the field
              o The need to develop effective verbal, written, and interpersonal communication skills
              o The need to develop critical thinking skills
          v   You will gain experience working in small teams to critically assess IBP issues
 STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
          v   Complete assigned readings prior to the first class for which they are listed, and attend and
              participate in class as required.
          v   In addition to the readings from your textbook, you are responsible for understanding all
              content from in-class lectures, exercises, discussions, and assigned videos.
          v   Examinations test conceptual understanding of information from the aforementioned
              sources. To do well on the exams, study your assigned readings, lecture notes, and class
              exercises.
          v   You should develop an awareness of the trends and issues concerning advertising and
              public relations. I encourage you to begin developing a weekly habit of monitoring
              Advertising Age, PR Week and AdWeek.


DD318J Sd
                                                                                                             3
 METHOD OF EVALUATION
 Overall letter grades are based on point totals calculated by adding:
       Assignment                         Points per Assignment             Points Total
       4 exams                            200                               800
       2 papers                           50                                100
       5 in-class “Arkaive” check-ins     20                                100
       TOTAL POINTS POSSIBLE                                                1,000
       1000
 The points necessary to earn a letter grade are as follows:
                                       Letter Grade      Point Total
                                       A                 910 and above
                                       A-                870-909.9
                                       B+                850-869.9
                                       B***              795-849.9
                                       C+                766.7-794.9
                                       C                 733.4-766.6
                                       C-                695-733.3
                                       D+                666.7-694.9
                                       D                 633.4-666.6
                                       D-                595-633.3
                                                         594.9 and
                                       F                 below
 ***NOTE: Students must earn at least a B in this class to apply or continue as an advertising/PR major.
 GRADE QUESTIONS
 You should check Canvas to confirm that your grades on exams, papers, and quizzes are recorded
 correctly. Report any errors to the TA immediately; do not wait until the end of the semester.
 EXTRA CREDIT
 There are no extra credit assignments. All missed assignments and/or late assignments earn zeros;
 there are no exceptions.
 EXAMS
 Exams will be administered in our classroom. (Note: the optional final exam may be held in a different
 classroom; this will be confirmed during the semester.)
     v    Each exam consists of 40 multiple choice and true/false questions.
     v    Exams 1-4 are not cumulative. I will not provide study guides for any of the exams, but encourage you
          to form groups—either in-person or via online social networks—to aid studying. There are no make-
          up exams.


DD318J Sd
                                                                                                                          4
       v   If you have a question about your exam, you must contact the TA immediately. Exam grades will be
           discussed only during the week immediately following when the grades are posted to Canvas. After
           that, exam grade changes will not be discussed; there are no exceptions.
       v   The final exam is optional; you may choose to take the comprehensive final exam (worth 200 points).
           If the final exam score is higher than the lowest exam score, it will be substituted in place of the
           exam score. If you miss an exam during the semester for any reason whatsoever, you must take
           the comprehensive final exam.
 PAPERS
 Grades on the two individual papers have a significant impact on your final course grade. The specific
 instructions for these papers will be provided to you in class or during the semester and posted on our class
 Canvas website. You may only turn in your own, original work. The TA will grade these projects.
 If you have a question about your grade on a paper, you must contact the TA immediately. Paper grades
 will be discussed only during the week (i.e., 7 days) immediately following when the grades are posted to
 Canvas. After that, grade changes will not be discussed; there are no exceptions.
 Finally, following instructions is an important part of these papers and no late papers will be accepted for any
 reason whatsoever—papers must be uploaded to our Canvas website before the beginning of class (12:30
 pm). Papers submitted after the deadline will earn an automatic grade of 0. Papers may be submitted early.
 IN-CLASS “ARKAIVE” CHECK-INS
 We are going to use a free app called “Arkaive” to take attendance. Arkaive is a geolocation-enabled app that will
 only recognize your attendance when you are in the classroom. You must have either a laptop, a tablet, or a
 smartphone to use this app. If you do not have any of these devices, let me know and we’ll work out an
 alternative.
 I will administer 6 Arkaive attendance “check-ins” this semester on random class meetings. Only 5 will count
 toward your grade, meaning that you can miss 1 “check-in” without penalty. On the days I choose to administer
 attendance, the check-in may occur at any time during the class meeting (e.g., promptly at 12:30pm, in the middle
 of the class, right before the end of the class, etc.). I will let the class know when it is time to log into Arkaive to
 check-in. Students will then have 20 minutes to complete the check-in process.
 More detailed instructions for how to set up and use your Arkaive account will be provided on our Canvas
 website.
MY EDUCATIONAL PHILOSOPHY FOR THIS COURSE
 Congratulations! … You’ve made it to the big leagues. You’re a student at one of the best public universities
 in the world. You’re bright and have ample promise as a student and citizen. As such, I regard each of you
 with high expectations. This course is the gateway course into the Advertising / PR major and is, therefore,
 challenging. Make no mistake: you will need to work diligently to earn the B or better that is required to apply
 or continue in this major. The TAs and I want you to succeed, but view you as a responsible adult who is
 capable of continually giving us your best work. We are here to push you to be at your best. We expect you
 to engage with the material, be present in class, and participate as required. In short, we expect you to be
 committed to learning—from us and from your peers.


DD318J Sd
                                                                                                                       5
 HOW YOU CAN MAXIMIZE YOUR RELATIONSHIPS WITH CLASSMATES & BE RESPECTFUL
          v   I encourage you to find a section of the lecture hall that you like and to sit in that section
              throughout the semester. Get to know your neighbor – they may be the person you start a
              successful company with some day.
          v   Latecomers aggravate me. I’m sure none of you will ever be late, but if you are late please enter
              the lecture hall quietly. If you enter loudly after class has started you will evoke snarls and
              disapproving stares from your classmates.
          v   Do not leave class early.
          v   Technology is cool. But when you’re here, use your tech—laptops, smartphones—only for class
              activities. It’s that simple. If your phone rings during class, I reserve the right to answer it. If you
              cannot use your devices appropriately during class time (what amounts to a little more than 2
              hours per week), I encourage you to re-evaluate your relationship with technology as it may be
              bordering on an attachment disorder.
 E-MAIL POLICY
 The TA is your first point of contact for this course. As such, your email inquiries should be sent to the TA
 and he/she will get me involved with your inquiries as needed. E-mail has become a favored way to
 communicate in academia and industry, but you must learn to use it appropriately. In other words, keep your
 emails formal; write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss at work, not to your friend. We will not
 respond to emails that are unprofessional or unclear.
 POLICY ON RECOMMENDATION LETTERS
 As you begin your college career, which might eventually involve asking professors to recommend you for graduate
 programs, jobs, or internships, please be aware that professors are not obligated to write references for any student
 who asks us. I do not serve as a reference for a student unless I know the student well and can be positive about
 his/her accomplishments and potential. Therefore, your job as a college student is to become the kind of student
 professors can celebrate in recommendations — hardworking, inquisitive, kind, and honest. Consider maintaining
 relationships with professors, so that they know you well enough to write for you. Many juniors and seniors tell me
 they wish they had thought about this during their first year.
 POLICY ON LECTURE SLIDES
 My lecture slides are my intellectual property. Students who post them online are infringing on my intellectual
 property. This activity is, therefore, not allowed. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
 must adhere to them.
 ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
 University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
 learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
 member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
 fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
 Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any
 work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student's own work. I
 encourage you to collaborate with your fellow students by studying together and discussing
 information and concepts covered in lecture, but all tests, quizzes and assignments must be
 done independently.
 Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student
 who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment.


DD318J Sd
                                                                                                                     6
 Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and
 University disciplinary action.
 During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during
 the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way.
 Any collaborative behavior during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may
 lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
 Understand that the online course format allows for multiple methods of identity verification, collusion,
 collaboration and plagiarism monitoring and detection. A violation of the course policy may include (but is
 not limited to) the following:
     v   Providing your UT EID to any other person
     v   Collaborating or sharing information with another person regarding the material on any activity,
         assessment or assignment, before, during and/or after any activity, assessment or assignment
     v   Recording any quiz, assessment or assignment material in any format
     v   The public (such that it can be viewed by more than one person) posting of any form of a test bank or
         group of questions from any assignment
 STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
 Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-
 related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office in order that
 the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus
 through Services for Students with Disabilities.
 Visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ for more.
 RELIGIOUS HOLY DAY OBSERVANCE POLICY
 The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from
 attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
 day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not
 be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from
 which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
 A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
 religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
 arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
 Visit http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance for more information.
 COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
 Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
 racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
 For immediate support:
   • Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |
       cmhc.utexas.edu
   • CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication
 • Abby Simpson, LCSW | M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC


DD318J Sd
                                                                                                           7
 •    Brief assessments and referral services
 •    Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
 •    MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
 •    Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.htm
COURSE SCHEDULE
   The tentative schedule below indicates the approximate dates when selected topics will be discussed. You
   are expected to complete the chapter readings before class on the day indicated. If changes in the
   schedule are necessary, you will be held responsible for such changes that will be announced in class and
   on Canvas.
                                      O’Guinn
  Week        Day     Date     Chapter Reading                       Lecture / Discussion Topic
     1      Thurs    8/30                                Introduction & Overview
            Tues     9/4      1                          Advertising Basics
     2
            Thurs    9/6      2                          Organization of the Advertising Industry
            Tues     9/11     3                          History of Advertising
     3
            Thurs    9/13     Video*                     “Business Not as Usual”
            Tues     9/18     4                          Social & Ethical Dimensions of Advertising
     4
            Thurs    9/20     EXAM 1                     Chapters 1-4
            Tues     9/25     5                          Consumer Behavior
     5
            Thurs    9/27     6                          Segmentation, Positioning, Value Proposition
            Tues     10/2     Video*                     “The Persuaders”
     6
            Thurs    10/4     Video*                     “Generation Like”
                     10/9     7, 8                       IBP Research & The IBP Plan
            Tues
     7                        Paper #1                   Due via upload to Canvas before 9:30am
            Thurs    10/11                               In-class Workshop
            Tues     10/16    EXAM 2                     Chapters 5-8
     8
            Thurs    10/18    9                          Managing Creativity in ADV and IBP
            Tues     10/23    10                         Creative Message Strategy
     9
            Thurs    10/25    Video*                     “Art & Copy”
            Tues     10/30    12                         Media Planning
    10
            Thurs    11/1                                In-class Workshop
            Tues     11/6     EXAM 3                     Chapters 9, 10, 12
    11
            Thurs    11/8     18                         Public Relations
            Tues     11/13    18                         Public Relations (cont.)
    12                        16                         Event Sponsorship & Branded Entertainment
            Thurs    11/15
                              Paper #2                   Due via upload to Canvas before 9:30am
            Tues     11/20                               To be announced
    13
            Thurs    11/22    ***THANKSGIVING BREAK***
            Tues     11/27    Video*                     “The Greatest Movie Ever Sold”
    14
            Thurs    11/29    15                         Sales Promotion, P-O-P, Support Media
            Tues     12/4                                In-class Workshop
    15
            Thurs    12/6     EXAM 4                    Chapters 15, 16, 18
   OPTIONAL FINAL EXAM                                  Time and Location TBA
*Lectures indicated with video will be held in the classroom and attendance is required.
