                                                                                                                  1
                              AFR 301: Introduction to African American Culture
Instructor: Dr. Patrick F. Walter
Email: Through Canvas Portal
Office Hours: MWF 3:15 p.m. – 4:15 p.m.
Class Time and Location: MWF 2:00pm – 3:00pm; GEA 114
         This course surveys African American Culture from 1600 to the present. Through critical encounters
with historical records, literature, music, dance and film/video, we will study blackness as key site of
antagonism in American history. Some of the periods and movements we look at include the Middle Passage,
Reconstruction, The Harlem Renaissance, New Orleans jazz culture, The Black Arts and Black Power
Movements, Hip Hop Culture, and #BlackLivesMatter. How do race, politics, economics and art all converge
at these moments? What possibilities for future emancipation might these events promise? What sorts of
openings might be offered for imagining new modes of gender and sexuality? These will be our guiding
questions. The primary goals of the course, which covers an enormous timespan, is to approach African
American Culture as field of historical resonances where a voice or gesture, taking place for instance in 1835,
might harmonize with an image pulsing on a computer screen in 2020. We will approach African American
Culture as a dynamic force that might reinvent the world.
Readings
All readings will be available on Canvas or Library EBook.
Assignments and Grade Breakdown
Attendance/Participation: 10%
Quizzes: 20%
Group Presentation: 20%
Final Revision: 10%
Essays: 40%
Attendance and Participation: See the attendance policy listed below. Along with maintaining your
attendance, you will also receive credit for being an avid and insightful contributor to our class conversations.
This is really a key component of being a professional intellectual.
Quizzes:
There will be occasional quizzes to monitor your engagement with the texts we have been reading. These
quizzes will be online, take-home quizzes.
Group presentation:
Each week, a group will provide a 15-minute creative video presentation that will lead off our discussion of the
week’s materials. This presentation will be due on Friday afternoon (by 6:00 p.m.) and will cover the next
week’s readings and materials. The video will be posted to Canvas where we as a class can view your work
and incorporate it into the coming week’s discussion. The video will be graded for engagement and creativity.
Don’t just read a prepared essay in front of your webcam. Try to make your presentation entertaining and
informative.
Final Revision: You will revise your first essay for a new grade. This revision grade will be based upon the
amount of work you put substantive improvements in the structure and cohesion of your first graded draft of
the essay. When you submit your final revision, at the end of the course, you will turn in your original graded
draft and your final revision. Thus, PLEASE SAVE THE ORIGINAL! On the final revision, you should
highlight additions or changes you have made in the revision process.
Essays:


                                                                                                                    2
In these 4-5 page essays, you will analyze a particular aspect of one of the texts we have delt with thus far in
class. You will consider how this texts relates to the dynamics of blackness that we have discussed in class.
Throughout your analysis, you should use both one primary text and one secondary text. We will discuss this
distinction in class. There will also be more detailed assignment descriptions for these essays posted on
canvas.
Course Policies
Attendance: Attendance is mandatory and will be taken at each of these meetings. Success in this course also
depends upon your active participation in discussions. You are allowed two absences for the semester without
penalty. Your third absence will result in a 1/3 grade reduction. A fourth absence will result in another 1/3
grade reduction. A fifth absence will result in the failing of the course.
Technology: There will be no use of laptops or phones in lectures, discussions, or screenings.
Anyone on a phone or laptop will be asked to leave and will not receive attendance credit for the
day.
Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are
not your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action, which will also reflect in their grade. More specifically, intentional plagiarism will result in failure of
the assignment and failure of the course.
Language and Comportment: This course necessitates the discussion of complex and delicate
ideas about race and power. Throughout the semester, in papers and discussions, attempt to use
precise and up-to-date language. For example, rather than “freedom” perhaps “emancipation” or
“manumission” is more appropriate. The use of the terms lesbian, gay, trans, or queer, are more
specific and accurate than homosexual. Either “Black women” or “black men” is preferable to
“the Black Man” or “the Black woman.” Never use the n-word unless quoting in an essay, and
even then, try to avoid it. Use African American rather than “negro” or “colored” and black
where appropriate (e.g. Jimmy Cliff, a Jamaican musician, is black but not African American).
Most importantly, be respectful to your fellow classmates. If you do not feel that what you are
about to say is inappropriate, maybe give yourself some time to work through your thought or
share it with your TA or myself in an office hour before articulating said thought in class.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, you can speak with me to make accommodations.
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive)
who requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations.
TRIGGER WARNING: This course is about race. We will be dealing with subject matter at times involving
racist language and sexual violence. I will try to provide specific warnings for certain classes or screenings,
but I am also providing this general warning for the entire course.
                                                     Schedule
Middle Passages
Week 1: Course Introduction


                                                                                                      3
Wednesday 1/22: Personal Introduction; Syllabus
Friday 1/24: Course introduction continued: What is race?
Week 2: Slavery the Meaning of Blackness
Monday 1/27: Introductory lecture: the concept of social death; the ontology of blackness.
Wednesday 1/29: Intro lecture continued.
Friday 1/31: Discuss Alexander Falconbridge’s “Account of the Transatlantic Slave Trade”
Week 3: Slavery, Literature and Blackness
Monday 2/3: Discuss Harriet Jacobs “Childhood”; “The New Master and Mistress”; “The Trials of
Girlhood”; “The Jealous Mistress”; “The Lover” EBOOK!
Wednesday 2/5: Discussion of Jacobs’ “What Slaves are Taught to Think of the North”; “Sketches of
Neighboring Slaveholders”; “Fear of Insurrection” EBOOK!
Friday 2/7: Finish Jacobs; the problem of “slave culture”
Week 4: Minstrelsy and the Invention of Blackness
Monday 2/10: Discuss Saidiya Hartman’s Scenes of Subjection selection
Wednesday 2/12: Continue to discuss Saidiya Hartman’s Scenes of Subjection selection.
Friday: 2/14: Discussion of Schoolboy Q “What They Want” Quiz 1.
Migratory Movements
Week 5: The Emergence of African Americans
Monday 2/17: Reconstruction Contexts: Discuss Du Bois’ “The Forethought”; “Of Our Spiritual Strivings”;
Essay Expectations.
Wednesday 2/19: Continued discussion of Dubois. Clip from Sorry to Bother You.
Friday 2/21: Discuss Jackson and Lomax; Afro-American Worksongs in a Texas Prison.
Week 6: The Movements of the Blues
Monday 2/24: The Great Migration
Wednesday 2/26/: Discuss LeRoi Jones’ Blues People (60-80). Robert Johnson; Mississippi Fred McDowell;
Skip James
Friday 2/28: Discussion of Angela Davis Blues Legacies (3-41); Ma Rainey; Bessie Smith.
Week 7: Blackness, Femininity and White Supremacy
Monday 3/2: Discuss Megan the Stallion’s “Big Ole Freak”
Wednesday 3/4: Discuss Blacks and Vaudville; Discussion of Josephine Baker “Black Diva in a White
World”
Friday 3/6: Continue discussing Josephine Baker documentary; Peer Review of Essay 1.
Week 8: Blackness, Femininity and White Supremacy
Monday 3/9: Discussion Nicki Minaj’s “Anaconda”
Wednesday 3/11: Discuss Baartman.
Friday 3/13: Continued discussion of Baartman; Major Lazor, Mannie Fresh Bounch Doc. ESSAY 1 DUE!
Quiz 2
The Changing Same
Week 9: Spring Break
Week 10: A Coming Change
Monday 3/23: Discussion of Ida B. Wells’ Southern Horrors
Wednesday 3/25: Continued discussion of Wells; Blackness as Bare Life
Friday 3/26: Blackness as Bare Life; Advertisements and Mike Brown


                                                                                                       4
Week 11: Harlem, Hughes and Black Political Culture
Monday 3/30: Harlem Renaissance Contexts
Wednesday 4/1: Hughes Poems; workshop one essay.
Friday 4/3: Hughes Poems Continued. Lynching Song and Childish Gambino’s “This is America.”
Week 12: From Harlem to Civil Rights
Monday 4/6: Civil Rights Contexts; Discussion of Freedom Riders Documentary
Wednesday 4/8: Discussion of King’s “Letter from a Birmingham Jail”
Friday 4/10: Finish discussing King.
Week 13: Black Radical Tradition
Monday 4/13: Discuss Black Power Mixtape; Black Radical Contexts
Wednesday 4/15: Discuss Ture and Hamilton’s Black Power chapter 2.
Friday 4/17: Finish discussing Ture and Hamilton; James Brown’s Live in Zaire (1974). James Brown doc.
Quiz 3.
Hip Hop and Intersectionality
Week 14: Black Radical Tradition and Black Feminism
Monday 4/20: Afrofuturism and Black Radicalism. Parliament, Ramellzee doc, Janelle Monáe
Wednesday 4/22: Discuss Combahee River Collective Statement and Introduction
Friday 4/24: Black Feminism and intersectionality.
Week 15: Hip Hop and the Neoliberal Apocalypse
Monday 4/27: Contexts for Hip Hop Generation
Wednesday 4/29: Discuss “Style Wars” and the Neoliberal Aesthetics of Hip Hop
Friday 4/31: To be Woke. Discuss Perry.
Week 16 Hip Hop and the Neoliberal Apocalypse
Moday 5/4: Discuss Jesse McCarthy’s “Notes on Trap” https://nplusonemag.com/issue-32/essays/notes-on-
trap/ Travis Scott.
Wednesday 5/6: OPEN
Friday 5/8: OPEN Final Revision and Essay 2 Due!
