           Jesus in history
            and tradition
     RS F335 (82005) / CC F348 (79045)
Term: First Summer Session, 2020
Instructor: Brent Landau
Description:
This class examines what can be known about the historical individual known as Jesus of Nazareth
and how early Christians remembered and imagined him. We will begin by figuring out what sorts
of writings the gospels are and how they were created. Then we will examine the distinctive
perspectives of each early Christian gospel. Next, we will learn what (many) scholars think that the
historical Jesus said and did. Finally, we will chart how early Christians eventually came to believe
that Jesus was God.
Course Format:
This course consists of 4 pre-recorded Zoom video lectures by the instructor per week, which
students may watch at their own pace during each week. Students will also be required to
participate in a real-time Zoom discussion section once a week led by a teaching assistant; times for
these sections will be arranged based on students’ availability and preferences. The assignments for
the course are the following: 1) a weekly short response (about a paragraph) to one of several
central questions about the lecture content and assigned readings for the week, to be turned in on
Canvas prior to your discussion section; 2) a weekly multiple-choice quiz on the lecture content
and assigned readings for the week, which must be completed by the very end of the week and can
be discussed during your weekly section; and 3) two short papers (3-4 pages) based on prompts,
which you will complete a first draft of and then revise based on feedback from your teaching
assistant. The first short paper will be due approximately halfway through the course, and the
second short paper will be due near the end of the course.
Writing Flag:
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help
you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments,
and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the
Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. For this course,


the Writing Flag requirement is satisfied through the writing and revising of the two short papers
mentioned above.
Instructor Information:
Email address: bclandau@utexas.edu
Student Hours (a.k.a. “Office Hours”): Due to the online format of this class, there will be no in-
person student hours (or in-person anything, for that matter). Professor Landau’s regular student
hours will be on Zoom on Tuesdays from 12:00PM to 1:30PM; all students in the course are
welcome to use this time to ask questions or discuss the course content or assignments on a drop-
in basis. Since multiple students may be present at the same time, please email me directly if you
would like to schedule a one-on-one meeting (which I’m very happy to do!). Here is the Zoom link
for my student hours on Tuesdays:
https://utexas.zoom.us/j/98092268867
Important UT Policies and Procedures Information:
Notice Regarding Academic Dishonesty:
    • University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
        learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
        member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
        trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
    •   Plagiarism is unacceptable; it will have significant repercussions for your grade in my class,
        and I will report instances of plagiarism to the Office of the Dean of Students. If you are at
        all uncertain about what constitutes plagiarism, please consult:
        http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students:
    • E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
        responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
        announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to
        your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend
        daily, but at minimum every other day—to stay current with university-related
        communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies
        and instructions for updating your e-mail address at http://utmail.utexas.edu/
Documented Disability Statement:
    • Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
        contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
        3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php. Faculty are not required to
        provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. The SSD
        keeps any and all student information confidential.
                                                                                                       2


Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin:
    • The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and
       support for your learning, even during a time such as now where courses are not meeting
       in person.
            o Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
            o Undergraduate Writing Center (this is a particularly helpful resource to be aware
               of, given that this course carries a Writing Flag; they are still providing very useful
               feedback on written work in an online format): http://uwc.utexas.edu/
            o Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
            o Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
            o Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Information About This Course:
Learning Management System:
    • UT uses a LMS called Canvas. Though the Canvas site for our course is live, it has very
       little material on it at present (but I needed to have it go live to email everyone!). It will be
       updated with much more information in the days to come. For more information about
       Canvas, including tutorials for students, please visit http://canvas.utexas.edu.
Student Response Platform:
    •  Occasionally I will ask students survey questions about the course content or assignments;
       these surveys will be administered through UT’s Qualtrics platform. You will receive a link
       to these surveys from me through email; your answers will be anonymous by default unless
       I include a question asking for your name for planning purposes (such as the discussion
       section survey, for which I’ve already sent you a link and which you will also find below in
       the Course Requirements section under the Discussion Sections bullet point).
Required Textbooks (both print and e-book versions are acceptable):
    • L. Michael White, Scripting Jesus: The Gospels in Rewrite (abbreviated “White”).
    • Bart D. Ehrman, How Jesus Became God: The Exaltation of a Jewish Preacher from Galilee
       (abbreviated “Ehrman”).
    • Synopsis of the Four Gospels (optional, but since it is really one of the coolest things ever
       invented, highly recommended).
Course Requirements:
    • Diligent watching of 4 pre-recorded video lectures per week (the lectures will usually be 30-
       40 minutes long) and careful reading of assigned textbooks. Links to Professor Landau’s
       pre-recorded Zoom video lectures will be posted to Canvas late in the evenings on Sunday,
                                                                                                         3


  Monday, Tuesday, and Wednesday each week (I am posting them the night before instead
  of in the morning, since I am in Washington State during this course, which is 2 hours
  behind Austin). You are not required to watch the videos or do the readings every day, but
  you will need to complete your viewing and reading for each week prior to the meeting
  time for your scheduled discussion section later in the week.
• Participation in a weekly Zoom discussion section led by one of the teaching assistants; the
  meeting times will be finalized in the next few days, and students will be assigned to
  discussion sections based on their preferences and availability. Please fill out the online
  survey on discussion section times no later than Friday, June 6 at 11:59PM local time in
  Austin (Central Standard Time). Here is the link to the survey:
  https://utexas.qualtrics.com/jfe/form/SV_9QzFOpauWjtzFe5
  The purpose of the discussion sections is to give students an opportunity to talk about
  what you’ve found interesting, challenging, confusing, etc. in my lectures and the assigned
  readings. They will also be a venue for providing guidance on several course assignments
  (see the next three bullet points for more information about these assignments). Your
  participation in a weekly discussion section is a requirement of the course. That said, I
  absolutely understand how scary and difficult life is for everyone these days; so if there are
  circumstances that prevent you from attending any of the discussion section times, please
  email me as soon as possible so that we can make alternative arrangements for you to fulfil
  this part of the course requirements.
• Completion of a weekly short response (about a paragraph, 5-8 sentences) to one of several
  central questions about the lecture content and assigned readings for the week, to be
  turned in on Canvas prior to your discussion section. The questions about the week’s
  lecture content and assigned readings will be posted under the Assignments tab in Canvas
  on Sunday nights. You must complete your short response no later than 3 hours prior to
  the time that your discussion section meets, since your teaching assistant will use your
  responses to plan the agenda for the discussion section. These will be graded on a
  complete/incomplete basis; if you receive a grade of incomplete, your teaching assistant
  will explain why your response was not satisfactory, and you will have the opportunity to
  revise it and submit it again for full credit.
• Completion of a weekly open-book, open-note, multiple-choice quiz (between 3-5
  questions) on Canvas about the lecture content and assigned readings for the week. The
  quiz questions for the upcoming week will be posted on Canvas on Sunday nights, and you
  will be able to see all of the quiz questions and possible answers before you actually take
  the quiz. The due date for these quizzes will be determined once we have finalized the
  discussion section times, since they will be due after all of the weekly discussion sections
  have met. You will also have the opportunity to ask questions during your discussion
  sections about any quiz questions about which you are uncertain (though you should not
  expect your teaching assistant to simply tell you the right answer!).
• Completion of two short papers (3-4 pages) based on prompts, which you will complete a
  first draft of and then revise based on feedback from your teaching assistant. The first short
  paper will be due approximately halfway through the course, and the second short paper
  will be due near the end of the course. These prompts for these papers will ask you to
  synthesize the most important concepts and information you have learned in the course;
                                                                                                 4


        they are therefore somewhat like a take-home midterm and final, but they also are the main
        way that you will satisfy the Writing Flag for this course—since you will complete a first
        draft and then revise it with feedback from your teaching assistant.
Grade Breakdown:
    • Attendance and participation in weekly discussion section: 10%
    • Completion of weekly short responses: 15% (3% for each weekly response)
    • Quizzes: 25% (5% for each quiz)
    • First Short Paper: 25%
    • Second Short Paper: 25%
        (note: for your first draft of each short paper, the teaching assistant will inform you what
        grade your paper would have received if it were the final version; but your grade for each
        paper will be what you receive for your revised version)
Schedule of Meetings:
Thursday, June 4: What Is a Course Called “Jesus in History and Tradition” About?
Friday, June 5: Overview of the Syllabus
Unit One: First Observations about the Gospels
Monday, June 8: Are the Gospels Eyewitness Accounts?
Readings: White vii-xii, 1-16
Tuesday, June 9: The Relationship Between the Gospels
Readings: White vii-xii, 1-16 (yes, please read it again); handout from Synopsis of the Four Gospels
(PDF on Canvas)
Unit Two: Extraordinary Beings in Jewish, Greek, and Roman Thought
Wednesday, June 10: The Messiah
Readings: White 19-38
Thursday, June 11: Wisdom/Sophia/Logos
Readings: White 39-50
Monday, June 15: The Divine Man and “Savior”
Readings: White 51-83
                                                                                                     5


Unit Three: How Were the Gospels Created?
Tuesday, June 16: The Gospels as LEGOs, Not Biographies
Readings: White 87-105
Wednesday, June 17: The Apostle Paul and Why He Matters
Readings: White 106-123
Thursday, June 18: The Passion Narrative
Readings: White 124-160
Monday, June 22: Sayings, Miracles, and Other Units of Tradition
Readings: White 161-225
Tuesday, June 23: The Stories of Jesus’ Birth
Readings: White 226-256
Unit Four: The Gospels as Distinct Literary Creations
Wednesday, June 24: The Gospel of Mark
Readings: White 259-289
Thursday, June 25: The Gospel of Matthew
Readings: White 290-317
Monday, June 29: The Gospel of Luke
Readings: White 318-344
Tuesday, June 30: The Gospel of John
Readings: White 345-360
Unit Five: How the Historical Jesus Became God
Wednesday, July 1: How to Find the Historical Jesus
Readings: Ehrman 85-98
Thursday, July 2: Who Was the Historical Jesus?
Readings: Ehrman 99-112
Monday, July 6: Did the Historical Jesus Consider Himself God?
Readings: Ehrman 112-128
Tuesday, July 7: Was Jesus Raised From the Dead?
Readings: Ehrman 129-210
                                                                 6


Wednesday, July 8: Exaltation (or Adoption): The Earliest Christology?
Readings: Ehrman 211-246
Thursday, July 9: Incarnation Christologies
Readings: Ehrman 247-282
                                                                       7
