Course:         ADV370/PR367                       Integrated Communications Management
Semester:       Summer 2019 (2nd Session)
Meeting:        100% Web Based Course
Classroom:      None/On-Line
Texts:          1. Integrated Brand Promotion Management: Text, Cases, and Exercises, Murphy, Cunningham, and
                Stavchansky Lewis, Kendall Hunt Publishing, 2011 at the UT COOP
                2. Subscription to the Wall Street Journal for a 15 week student subscription (digital only or
                digital/paper). The total cost is only $15. Please use this link to subscribe: link provided first day of
                class.
Professor:      Dr. Liza Stavchansky Lewis (Dr. Lewis), BMC 4.366, 471-1101, lizalewis@mail.utexas.edu
                Office Hours: None – Web Based Course. You may email me anytime and we can set up Face Time/Skype
                sessions.
                Please read my e-mail policy found on page three of the syllabus.
Commencement
                “The University of Texas at Austin is an inspiring place that cultivates exceptional people. Our
                graduates have upheld the highest standards of academic achievement. With their new degrees in
                hand, they are better equipped to make valuable contributions to their families and society, and to
                pursue their own personal ambitions. They are ready to make their mark on the world.”
                Larry R. Faulkner, Former President, The University of Texas at Austin
Course Description
Philosophy:     This course requires you to:
                1. assess problems, isolate key facts, and rank-order salient management issues,
                2. think in a precise and structured manner, then follow a structured decision-making process,
                3. make decisions and create action plans appropriate to the situation under consideration,
                4. efficiently and persuasively write up your analysis and sell your recommendations, then
                5. defend your case against criticism from your peers and others.
                Come to class prepared for discussion. As you read the text, outside readings and cases, do the
                following. Create a written outline of the material, list unanswered questions, boil the reading down
                into 4 to 5 sentences or phrases, then ask yourself, "How can I use this on a day-to-day basis?" Think
                of examples that illustrate and support your interpretation of the case. Find examples that contradict
                the prevailing position. Quantify your position. Inspect extreme solutions first. Be prepared to respond
                to a very simple question at all times, “Why do you recommend we do that?”
Objectives:     The course has several objectives.
                1. To present you with a wide range of interconnected advertising and public relations management
                decisions that are similar to what you will encounter in the business.


             2. To present you with a structured, field-tested approach to decision-making that is a practical and
             useful method for addressing a variety of communications management issues.
Assumptions: 1. Participants in this class have successfully completed all prerequisite courses and have a solid
             foundation in the fundamentals of marketing as well as the various advertising and public relations
             functional areas. Given the wide range of academic experiences in prerequisite courses, students are
             required to quickly identify and resolve any gross conflicts, fundamental inconsistencies, or
             background voids that exist. Because the course requires a common advertising and public relations
             foundation, students are responsible for timely background leveling.
             2. Since this is a 100% web based course – it is assumed that each student will read all communication
             carefully – it will mainly be done via Canvas. It is the responsibility of each student to read all
             announcements, emails, etc. from Dr. Lewis.
Strategy:    1. Utilize class discussions (threads) of the text, cases, outside readings, and current events as a
             common framework for the study of advertising and public relations management.
             2. Utilize individual case analyses and individual assignments to demonstrate your writing skills and
             communication problem solving abilities.
Tactics:     1. Measure individual performance with a subjective evaluation of participation and preparedness.
             The narrative portions of the Murphy, Cunningham, & Lewis text are very short and to the point,
             reflective of the fact that this course integrates information and concepts presented in depth by
             prerequisite courses. Class discussions (threads) will require your total command of the text material.
             A demonstrated command of the material coupled with a clear, concise, active presentation style is
             required to score above average on this dimension.
             Significant emphasis is placed on class participation, especially questions, comments, and discussion
             among peers. You must strike a balance between passive, silent listening and dominating the
             discussion with ill conceived or trivial remarks. Neither of these two extreme positions is acceptable.
             Neither earns you many participation points. Come prepared; take a stand. A lively discussion among
             peers is the objective. Air your ideas. Rebut others.
             Thorough preparation and concise expression are valued. Quality outweighs quantity. Enthusiasm
             counts. Contribute, don’t disrupt. Ask questions. There are no dumb or wrong questions. Throughout
             your academic career you’ve heard this phrase. But in ADV370/PR367, it is imperative that you believe
             it. This course is filled with uncertainty, inadequate information and not enough time. If you refrain
             from asking questions, you limit your exposure to fresh insights from others.
             2. Measure individual resourcefulness, organization, and writing skills with unannounced crash
             projects.
             3. Measure individual problem solving and writing skills with case brief assignments. The core of this
             course revolves around case brief analyses. A premium is placed on the development of quantitative
             dimensions in support of case solutions.
Evaluation:  Text Chapter Assignments                                      =          20%
             Individual crash projects (3)                                 =          15%
             Case brief assignments*                                       =          45%
             Class participation (not WSJ)                                 =          10%


            WSJ Assignments                                              =            5%
            WSJ Participation                                            =            5%
                               Total                                     =         100%
            *Your first individual case brief is worth 5%; the remaining are 10% each.
            Optional Final Exam Case may be substituted for your lowest case score or a crash project only.
            Course Participation Grade: Your participation in this course is worth 15% of you grade. The 15% will
            be divided up as follows:
            a.   10%: Class Participation (not WSJ) – this will include your first assignment and going on-line to
                 Canvas to discuss topics I select. There will be a due date and time when I post and ‘close’ a
                 discussion – the more you add to the discussion the higher your score will be.
            b. 5%: WSJ Participation – this will be a weekly discussion on current marketing/marketing
                 communication/PR news we will also do via a thread on Canvas.
            Since this is 100% web based – “Class Participation (not WSJ)” and “WSJ Participation” will be done via
            ‘threaded’ conversations (due by certain times) on Canvas. “Class Participation (not WSJ)” includes
            threaded conversations as well as an introductory assignment.
+/- System  UT at Austin has implemented +/- grading system for undergraduate students.
            The following scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades:
            A=        93.5 to 100
            A- =      89.5 to 93.4
            B+ =      86.5 to 89.4
            B=        83.5 to 86.4
            B- =      79.5 to 83.4
            C+ =      76.5 to 79.4
            C=        73.5 to 76.4
            C- =      69.5 to 73.4
            D+ =      66.5 to 69.4
            D=        63.5 to 66.4
            D- =      59.5 to 63.4
            F=        59.4 or below
            Note: you must earn a ‘C-’ or higher to move forward to IC Campaigns – a “C-“ will require that you
            take this course over again.
            Please ask your questions early in the semester regarding the +/- grading system.
Deadlines &
Standards:  1. All reading assignments are to be completed on time per the class schedule.


2. Everything produced for this class is to be your original work. Enlisting aid from anyone outside
the class is a breach of UT’s Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and will be dealt with accordingly.
3. All assignments/participation threads will be turned in on-line.   Late assignments are scored 0
(zero).    Turn in assignments early if you have a conflict with the deadline.
Tip: sometimes we lose Internet access due to various reasons: I HIGHLY suggest giving yourself
plenty of time before the deadline to turn in assignments on Canvas. Always have a ‘back-up’ plan –
find out where there are multiple Wi-Fi/Internet connection spots you can use. I do not accept late
work for any reason – you can take the optional final to replace a zero on a case or crash project.
4. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors can reduce your score by one to two letter grades. If
you need help with writing please use the undergraduate writing center.
5. E-mail Policy: As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate in academia and industry,
you must learn to use it appropriately. People have been fired from their jobs for misuse of this
communication tool. Thus, when e-mailing me, you will address it formally. Communication between
professors and students is professional in nature, not informal. Begin your e-mail with, “Dear Dr.
Lewis:” and use block business format. Write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss at work,
not to your friend.
I will return your e-mail within 24 hours of receiving it on weekdays or by Monday evening if I
I receive it on the weekend. Many times I will e-mail you back much faster. E-mail is an excellent way
to communicate with me if done appropriately.
6. The schedule of events is tentative and can change. Students are responsible for changes to the
schedule as announced on Canvas/Canvas Messaging/E-Mail.
7. Any questions regarding grades are to be asked within 3 days of learning your grade. After the
3-day window – you may ask questions but a grade will no longer be changed.
8. All students agree to read and abide by The University of Texas at Austin Policy on Academic
Integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
If you have any questions about what constitutes plagiarism, or any other form of Scholastic
Dishonesty, ask me or any other member of the faculty. Students are responsible for their own
conduct and for reporting any violations to their instructor or other member of the Department of
Advertising faculty.
9. University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
10. Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact Services for Student with Disabilities at 512.471.6259 (voice) or 512.232.2937 (video phone).
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/


11. This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you
improve your writing. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
your written work.
12. Religious Holy Days Observance Policy/Military Duty: The Texas Education Code specifies that an
institution of higher education shall excuse a student from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so
that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence.
If you are in the military and are called to duty for a short time I will also work with you.
Please read UT’s policy below:
Visit: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html - attendance
13. Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or
anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor          | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
|CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
     •   Brief assessments and referral services
     •   Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     •   MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     •   Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
17. Dean of Students/Emergency Services: if you have an immediate emergency and must miss
several classes – you need to speak with the Dean of Students at UT’s Emergency Services. Together,
we will work out a schedule for missed classes/work. Please visit this website for more
information/help: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
