  David (D.S.) Cohen           ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu     Office Hours: Tues/Thurs 11a-12:30p      Spring 2019
                                                                            (by appointment)
AET 336C - Video Game History and Culture
Course Sections
 Instructor                TA(s)                          UID         Meeting Times               Room
 David (D.S.) Cohen                                       20930       Tues/Thurs 8-9:30am         RLP 0.126
Abstract:
         This course will provide a historical examination of how video games have significantly impacted
         our culture. Students will study, analyze, and articulate the ways in which video games have
         influenced the course of society, politics, and artistic expression.
         Video games have grown into an increasingly powerful force from humble beginnings in
         computer labs, to a defining influence in popular culture, to conflicts that led to altering laws, to
         controversies in gender politics and minority representation, and establishing new forms of
         artistic expression.
         For example:
              ●   Link connections between the games industry crash in 1983, and downturn in the great
                  recession, to shifts in how how digital media is consumed
              ●   Discuss ways video games drove the home computer and mobile revolutions
              ●   Connect virtual economic systems used in virtual worlds to real world organized crime,
                  legal regulations, and influence the rise of cryptocurrency
              ●   Chart the historical influences of gender and ethnic representation in game industry and
                  culture toward the Gamergate political movement and the resulting sociological impact.
              ●   Measure how historic game hardware technology and evolution of game audio lead to
                  the chiptune music movement.
         As students evaluate historical significances such as these they will examine other ways game
         history has shaped artistic movements, industry, practices in science and medicine, and society.
Learning Objectives and Outcomes:
         By the end of this course students will,
              ●   Understand the history and modern influences of video game design, technology,
                  industry, and "gamer" culture.
              ●   Think critically as to why video games influenced politics and economy from their
                  inception to today, and will continue to do so into the future.
              ●   Identify significant landmarks in video game history, and how they have sociologically and
                  artistically impacted culture.
              ●   Discuss why game technological, artistic, and cultural advancements through the
                  decades, changed the course of modern and future development.
              ●   Interpret video game historical influences on other forms of media, including film, music,
                  fine arts, theater, and dance.
                                                                                                                   1


Required Equipment/Course Material
       All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of internet access, run software
       tools such as Microsoft Office Suite, and Google Drive tools as well as software tools needed for
       the creation of presentations which may include PowerPoint or Google Slides, photo editing
       software, video and audio recording capabilities.
       This course will not have a required textbook. Reading assignments will consist of articles,
       journals, and other writings that can be accessed either by direct links provided or through the
       UT Library System​.
Prerequisites
       None
Assessment Model:
       This course is participation and project focused. Grading is based on successful completion of
       project objectives, participation in forum discussion posts, team collaboration, professionalism,
       and attendance...
            ●  Assignments and Projects are 30% of your grade.
            ●  Discussion Posts are worth 30% of your grade.
            ●  Peer Reviews are 20%
            ●  Professionalism is 20% of your grade
       No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
       complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before the
       deadline for doing so passes.
Letter Grade Policy:
       To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage.
       Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not
       recognize the grade of A+.
       Letter grade equivalents:
        A = 94-100                          C+ = 77-79                      D+ = 67-69
        A- = 90-93                          C = 74-76                       D = 64-66
        B+ = 87-89                          C- = 70-73                      D- = 60-63
        B = 84-86                                                           F = 0-60
        B- = 80-83
Attendance/Absences
       ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of
       the class.
       Your professionalism grade will be impacted for each unexcused absence.
       After your first three unexcused absences your final grade will be lowered by one letter grade,
       and continue to be lowered with each subsequent unexcused absence.
                                                                                                         2


     Seven unexcused absences or more will result in a failing grade for the course.
     An excused absence is granted on a case-by-case basis as determined by your instructor. For an
     excused absence to be considered, the student must notify the instructor and TA that they will be
     absent in advance of the class, or within a reasonable period afterwards. Waiting until you attend
     the next class to ask for an excused absence will not be accepted.
     However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts
      your attendance, please inform your instructor and TA as soon as possible. In addition, see the
      exception below for religious holy days.
     Please be on time for class. ​Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after
      a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count
      as being tardy and have an impact on your professionalism grade.
     Three tardies equals an absence.
     https://catalog.utexas.edu/undergraduate/fine-arts/academic-policies-and-procedures/
     Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send an
     email to your instructor and TA, attaching any class work as needed.
Professionalism
     Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students, instructor, and
     Guest Speakers. These will have an impact on your professionalism grade so it is important that
     you follow these guidelines...
     1) Be on time at the beginning of class. If you must come in late at the beginning of class, please
     enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible.
     If you have a class beforehand that is on the other side of campus, you must inform your TA on
     the first day of class so adjustments can be made.
     2) Turn your cell phone off or on silent, and put it away. Looking at your cell phone during
     lectures, exercises and discussions is not acceptable. Use your computer for taking notes, not
     your cell phone.
     3) Computer use for notes is acceptable, but for no other use. Surfing the web, watching videos
     that are not part of the class, checking emails, sending messages, or other non-class note taking
     uses of your computer during class will impact your professionalism grade.
     4) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
     sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to
     loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, Sleep etc., please do so outside of the
     classroom, not during class time.
     5) Headphones and sunglasses are not allowed to be worn during lectures, exercises or
     discussions. Even if your headphones are not playing music, they should never be in your ears
     during these times.
     6) Arrive to class prepared, with your required equipment (IE: Computer), assignments completed,
     and reading/tutorials reviewed and ready to discuss.
                                                                                                           3


      7) Be prepared and willing to participate in class discussions and present your work (in progress
      or completed) when called upon.
      8) Be polite and considerate to others. Insults, bullying behavor, and discrimination will not be
      tollerated.
      9) Do not fall asleep in class.
File Format and File Naming Convention:
              Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, concept art, etc. File Format: PDF;
              Game Builds – File Format: Executable file (PC and Mac) with supporting files.
      File Naming Convention:
              If submitting as an individual…
              FirstInitialLastname_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
              Example: dcohen_project01_07042018
      IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it may not
      read correctly.
      REQUIRED File Format:
      Both Windows and Mac builds must be submitted for all digital games. It is important to test your
      builds before submitting.
      Documentation and images must be submitted as a single PDF per each assignment.
      See individual assignments for additional details of required file formatting.
Class Policy
      Devices
           ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
              this with me prior to class).
           ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media (unless related to
              class activities)
           ● Do not take a call, chat, or respond to emails during class time.
      Food/Drink
           ●  Food is not allowed in class, unless for medical reasons. If for medical reasons you must
              provide an accommodation letter from Services for Students with Disabilities
              (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone
              512-471-6644).
           ●  Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
              when not in use. You spill it, you clean it up.
                                                                                                        4


Use of Class Materials
     The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
     assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
     violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
     Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor
     may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
     which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading
     class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
     students. For more information, go to:
     https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Management+of+Course+Materials%3A+Copyrig
     hts+and+Class+Recordings
Q Drop Policy
     The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
     reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
     institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
     dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
     higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Academic Integrity
     The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
     abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to
     maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken
     at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other
     scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
         ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
         ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
              assistance in preparing them;
         ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
              academic discipline; and
         ● avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
              student.
              (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic Dishonesty
  ●  In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
     dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
     such as:
         o Cheating
         o Plagiarism
         o Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
         o Falsifying Academic Records
         o Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
              extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
         o M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
              without authorization to do so)
                                                                                                         5


           o   Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
           o   (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)
           o   Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
               penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
               University.
               (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism
      Plagiarism is a serious crime. According to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, to plagiarize
      means:
      1) to steal and pass off (the ideas or words of another) as one's own
      2) to use (another's production) without crediting the source
      3) to commit literary theft
      4) to present as new and original an idea or product derived from an existing source.
      Plagiarism is a serious crime. According to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, to plagiarize
      means:
      “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
      obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
      including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
      and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
      conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
      http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-con
      duct/).
      "Self-plagiarism":​ it is an offense against University rules to turn in the same work for credit more
      than once unless all involved instructor's consent in advance. (from
      https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/ams/about/academic-integrity.php).
Copyright and Fair Use
      Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers.
      Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the
      doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright
      holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will
      discuss these issues during the semester as needed, but when you have questions about
      whether or when you can appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K.
      Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
      Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
      students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
      current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
      communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
      minimum, twice per week.
                                                                                                           6


       It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
       in his or her official e-mail address. Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with “User
       Unknown” is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable
       messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered
       without further action required of the University or instructor. For further information, go to:
       http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy​.
Religious Holidays
       Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
       classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
       day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
       may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
       an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
       University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to
       the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day. For more
       information, go to:
       https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/​.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
       for qualified students with disabilities.
       Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that the
       necessary accommodations can be made promptly.
       For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259,
       ssd@austin.utexas.edu​,​ ​http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/​, or videophone 512-471-6644).
Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
       harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
       funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
       environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
       community, the university can:
             1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
                have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
       Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
       “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
       Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents
       that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty
       or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
       employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official
       report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting
       options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
       titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                                                                                             7


Student Support Services
     There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
     include (but are not limited to) the following:
          ●  Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333,​ ​utexas.edu/finearts/careers​) provides a full
             range of services and resources to support students and alumni.
          ●  The Undergraduate Writing Center (512-471-6222,​ ​uwc.utexas.edu​. helps students with
             every phase of writing assignments for their courses.
          ●  The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614,​ ​utexas.edu/ugs/slc​) provides study skills,
             time-management, and note-taking courses.
          ●  University Health Services (512-471-4955,​ ​healthyhorns.utexas.edu​) provides medical and
             health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
             officially enrolled in certain University programs.
          ●  The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515,​ ​cmhc.utexas.edu​) helps students
             with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
     Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
     is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
     Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
     Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal​.
Emergency Procedures
     Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide
     students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security
     of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff
     of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have
     the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of
     users subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
     https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
     (adapted from
     http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf
Overview of Schedule
     Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be
     altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design
     program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be
     announced via Canvas.
     Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas.
                                                                                                          8


Calendar
Note – This schedule, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
 Week       Topic of Study                                                  Assignments
 Week 1     Course Intro                                    Discussion Post Assignment
            The US Economy creates the need, then
 Tues:      reinvents a game market of arcades.             Reading:
 1/21
            - The Panic of 1893 - Birth of the penny arcade  ​"The Penny Arcade" Billboard 1947-03-15
 Thurs:
            - Great Depression (1929-1930s) - Rise of       P124-125
 1/23       Coin-op arcade games                            Blizzard gets bigger despite economic
            - The Great Recession - Rise of MMOs, Mobile,   downturn
            and Free-To-Play
            - Uncertainty, Streaming, Isolation and Social
            Games
            Class Split into Discussion and Project Teams
 Week 2     Computer Labs of the 1940s to 1960s, Birth of   Discussion Post       Project 1
            Electronic and Computer games, and the          Assignment            Due Friday Feb 14th
 Tues:      introduction of Artificial intelligence.                              at 11:59pm
 1/28
                                                            Reading:
 Thurs:
                                                            - ​Cathode-Ray        Team Project -
 1/30                                                       Tube Amusement        create a recorded 10
                                                            Device                minute presentation
                                                            - ​OXO aka            focused on one of
                                                            Noughts and           the following...
                                                            Crosses               - A video game
                                                            - ​Tennis for Two     movement that was
                                                                                  impacted by US
 Week 3     Access to Games - Computer Labs (no public      Discussion Post       Economic Change.
            access), to - Arcades (limited access) to the   Assignment            - Comparison of an
 Tues:      Home and Pocket (constant access)                                     open access game
 2/4
            - Handheld Games develop to mobile game         Reading:              Vs. a limited access
 Thurs:
            market, exploring domestic and international    - ​Spacewar!          game.
 2/6        shifts.                                         - ​"The History of    - The history,
                                                            Video Games," by      technology, and
                                                            S. D. Bristow, 1977   design (content and
                                                            - ​Mobile Revenues    User Interface) of a
                                                            in 2018               pre-1960s arcade or
                                                                                  computer game
 Week 4     The First Generation of games - New             Discussion Post       (see assignment for
 Tues:      technology, the emergence of gaming culture.    Assignment
 2/11
                                                                                  further details)
 Thurs:
                                                            Reading:
 2/13
                                                            Magnavox              (Assignment will be
                                                            Odyssey - The First   followed by a Peer
                                                            Gaming Console        Review)
                                                            Pong: The First
                                                            Video Game
                                                                                                       9


                                                         Megahit
Week 5 The Second Generation - Rom Cartridges, the       Discussion Post      Project 2
Tues:  Atari Generation, and the lawsuit that both built Assignment
2/18   and broke the industry                                                 Team Project - Due
Thurs:
                                                         Reading:             Friday March 6th at
2/20
                                                         Jerry Lawson -       11:59pm
                                                         Creator of the Rom   Create a recorded
                                                         Cartridge            10 minute
                                                         The Atari Video      presentation
                                                         Computer System      (see assignment for
                                                         Atari Vs. Coleco     topics and details)
                                                         Lawsuit
                                                                              (Assignment will be
Week 6 Computers enter the home (Jack Trammell's         Discussion Post      followed by a Peer
Tues:  Commodore computers "for the masses, not the      Assignment           Review)
2/25   classes")
Thurs:
                                                         Reading:
2/27
                                                         (Video) ​Jack
                                                         Tramiel interview,
                                                         The Computer
                                                         Chronicles
                                                         04/08/1985
Week 7 The industry crash of 1983, and rebirth of 1984   Discussion Post
Tues:                                                    Assignment
3/3
Thurs:
                                                         Reading:
3/5
                                                         - ​Home Video
                                                         Games are Coming
                                                         Under Attack -
                                                         Gainesville Sun
                                                         Dec. 12, 1982
                                                         - ​The Rise and Fall
                                                         of Video Games
Week 8 Ethnic and Gender Politics in game industry,      Discussion Post      Project 3 - Due
Tues:  content, and culture (Early pioneers, the         Assignment           Friday April 3rd at
3/10   Patriarchy building to Gamergate, and impacts                          11:59pm
Thurs:
       on both games and media industries)               Reading:
3/12
                                                         The virtual census:  Team Project -
                                                         representations of   Create a recorded
                                                         gender, race and     10 minute
                                                         age in video         presentation (see
                                                         games                assignment for
                                                         How Brianna Wu       topics and details)
                                                         Went From
                                                         Gamergate Victim
                                                         To Congressional     (Assignment will be
                                                         Candidate            followed by a Peer
                                                                              Review)
                                                                                                  10


Week 9  Spring Break
Tues:
3/17
Thurs:3
/19
Week    Video Game Controversies, Political              Discussion Post
10      Movements, and the impacts that established      Assignment
Tues:   and impacted law.
3/24
                                                         Reading:
Thurs:
3/26
                                                         (video) ​Video
                                                         Game Violence -
                                                         Senate
                                                         Governmental
                                                         Affairs Committee
                                                         Hearing 12/9/93
Week    Virtual Worlds                                   Discussion Post
11      -Evolution of text based worlds into fully       Assignment
Tues:   rendered three dimensional worlds the size of
3/31
        countries that live beyond the player.           Reading:
Thurs:
4/2
        - Science using MMOs to study spread of          - ​Modeling
        disease                                          Infectious Diseases
        - Virtual economic systems used in virtual       Dissemination
        worlds, leading to real world organized crime,   Through Online
        and legal regulations, and influence the rise of Role-Playing
        cryptocurrency.                                  Games
                                                         - ​Emerging threats:
                                                         financial crime in
                                                         the virtual world
                                                         - ​How Video
                                                         Games Helped
                                                         Pave the Way for
                                                         Cryptocurrency
Week    Games for Good                                   Discussion Post      Project 4 Due
12      - Games use in medicine, science,                Assignment           Friday.
Tues:   developmental learning, and training                                  Team Creative
4/7
        - Accessible gaming for individuals with         Reading:             Project
Thurs:
4/9
        disabilities                                     - ​How thousands of
                                                         gamers are helping   Develop a
                                                         to decode the        collaborative
                                                         human body           creative project
                                                         - ​Corrupted Blood:  representing a
                                                         How                  significant impact
                                                         Epidemiologists      video games have
                                                         Use World Of         had on culture (see
                                                         Warcraft To Save     assignment for
                                                         Lives                details)
                                                         - ​Evaluating the
                                                         potential of the     Proposal Due Friday
                                                         Nintendo Wii to      April 10th at 11:59pm
                                                                                                   11


                                                         support disabled
                                                         students in        Project Due
                                                         education          May 1st at 11:59pm
Week   Games as an art form, and influence on other      Discussion Post    (Assignment will be
13     arts through the decades: Film, fine arts, dance, Assignment         followed by a Peer
Tues:  theater, and music.                                                  Review)
4/14
       - Artistic movements within games and the fine    Reading:
Thurs:
4/16
       arts, installations, and public events.           - ​Are Video Games
       - Introduction of dance to video games as a form  Art?
       of control, leading to live dance performances.   - ​Video Games as
       - Evolution of game music technology,             Live Performance
       developing into orchestral symphonies, and
       music movements such as chiptunes.
       - Classic video game inspirations for traditional
       and experimental media and performing arts.
Week   Single to Multiplayer (evolution of personal to   Discussion Post
14     social gaming)                                    Assignment
Tues:  Competitive gaming: 1980s video arcades to
4/21
       international eSports                             Reading:
Thurs:
4/23
                                                         WoW is the New
                                                         MUD Social
                                                         Gaming from Text
                                                         to Video
                                                         The Donkey Kong
                                                         World Record: The
                                                         Real History, From
                                                         1982 to Today
                                                         Comparison of
                                                         eSports and
                                                         Traditional Sports
                                                         Consumption
                                                         Motives
Week   158 years of VR/AR - From theory of the virtual   Discussion Post
15     into a reality, movement, and market              Assignment
Tues
:4/28
                                                         Reading:
Thurs:
4/30
                                                         Seeing is
                                                         Believing: The
                                                         State of Virtual
                                                         Reality
Week   Postmortem/Class Discussion: Making the future
16     of games, game culture, and their influence
Tues:  better by examining the past
5/5
Thurs:
5/7
                                                                                                12
