                             University of Texas - Austin
                                 Summer I, 2019
                              PSY F364S SU19 83120
                                   Human Sexuality
                                  Dr. Amy M. Meeks
COURSE GOALS
        This course is designed to introduce you to the field of human sexuality. In doing
so, we will discuss various aspects of sexuality and how those aspects interact with
psychological principles. Because this is a survey course, we will not be able to go into
great detail on each of these topics. The goal, instead, is to cover the main points and
give you a good working knowledge that will help you understand human sexuality as a
discipline and as a science. You will find that this working knowledge will add to your
understanding of how complex and fascinating the human body can be. As we walk
through this course together, my hope is that you encounter new ideas and facts,
incorporate this new material into your existing values and beliefs, and emerge at the
end of this semester more aware of human sexuality and its’ impact on our lives. It is an
incredibly rich field that touches us in a myriad of ways. Whenever possible, we will use
in-class projects, out-of-class assignments, demonstrations, and videos to illustrate key
concepts in this course.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
---- Four (4) Multiple Choice Exams
REQUIRED TEXT: Hyde and DeLamater, Understanding Human Sexuality, (13th ed.).
New York: McGraw-Hill. Earlier editions will work, too, but try to stay with the 12th or
13th. Please be certain you are studying the correct topic, knowing the chapters are
often re-numbered in each edition.
INSTRUCTOR
Dr. Amy M. Meeks UT email: ammeeks@utexas.edu
                   OR Texas State E-mail: am23@txstate.edu
Office Location: SEA 4.318
Office Hours: MTWH after class or by appointment
GTA: Kylee Smith , UT email: kyleesmith@utexas.edu


COURSE POLICIES
Attendance
Class attendance and class participation are considered important in the attainment of
course goals. Therefore, absences are strongly discouraged. Attendance is taken daily
and class is best when we are here together.
If you choose to be absent, or are absent for reasons beyond your control, that is alright
and not the end of the world. Life happens and sometimes you are not in class. The only
absences which are accepted and excused are those that are school related in that you
are elsewhere representing Texas State University. Documentation verifying those
times is essential. Students who attend class MUST VERIFY their attendance each
class day.
If you are dropped from the class for non-attendance I will not allow you back in the class.
Excessive absences will negatively affect your course grade in that your final course
grade will drop one letter grade if you miss more than five (5) of the scheduled lecture
days, excluding test days.
Attendance for classes held in Regular Classrooms:
Attendance will be documented by signing in on the roster each class day. You must
sign in each day in order to be counted as being present in class.
Academic Integrity Issues
Dr. Meeks will strictly adhere to the University Academic Integrity Policy described in the
Student Handbook in dealing with plagiarism or other academic integrity issues. This
policy states:
    All work submitted for credit must be the student’s original work. Any
    assignment turned in that is questionable in terms of its authorship will be
    investigated and will be subject to the disciplinary action(s) recommended
    under Texas State University policies.
STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
Daily Assignments
We will cover approximately three chapters per week. You are expected to have read
the chapter by class time and you are responsible for all assigned reading material for


the examinations. Classroom activities and lectures will be based on the chapter topics
and related issues, all of which may be discussed.
Classroom Discussions
Issues in psychology can be among the most sensitive and personal that we may
encounter in the academic world. Your opinion is valuable and we want to hear from
you!! Listening to new perspectives in a discussion will facilitate your own learning and
that of others. The following ground rules will aid us in having useful, respectful
discussions about these sensitive topics:
Take responsibility for your own learning in this class.
Speak up if you have a question or do not understand.
Respect all opinions, your own and those of others.
Feel free to disagree with any opinion that is expressed, but only after you fully
understand the other point of view.
Derogatory comments or personal attacks are not acceptable.
Agree that we may disagree.
Take risks by sharing feelings and opinions, but leave what others say in the classroom.
If, during this course, personal issues are raised that you would like to discuss with a
counselor, please contact the University Counseling Center. I am willing to help you
find the right resources for you and your situation.
SPECIAL STUDENTS
If you are a student with a disability who will require an accommodation(s) to participate
in this course, please contact me as soon as possible. You will be asked to provide
documentation from the Office of Disability Services. Failure to contact me in a timely
manner may delay your accommodations
COURSE GRADES
Your grade in this course will be the result of four (4) examinations, plus any extra credit
points you accumulate.
Examinations will be based on class materials, lectures, guest lectures, media
presentations, and text assignments.
Make-up examinations are allowed only in cases of an excused absence or an
emergency, and the reason must be documented in writing. This will not apply to
students who miss an exam due to university related business.


All make-up exams must be taken within one week of the class exam.
No test grades are dropped.
The grading scale will be as follows:
                       A…94 to 100, A-…90 to 93
                       B+…87 to 89, B…84 to 86, B-…80 to 83
                       C+…77 to 79, C…74 to 76, C-…70 to 73
                       D+…67 to 69, D…64 to 66, D-…60 to 63
                       F…… 59 and below
You are each responsible for the grade that you make in this class. I want you to all
make A’s, and I will do my part to help you achieve that grade, but I cannot do it for you.
If your average for the course falls in the 70’s then you will receive a C in the class,
regardless of how much you explain to me that your transcript cannot handle another C.
 At the end of each semester, I have students tell me in great detail why they REALLY
need a certain grade in this class. If you choose to do this, I will listen patiently to your
explanation and then I will give you the grade that you have earned. I will be glad to give
you an A, if your average is in the 90’s.
I see this class as a joint effort between you and me. I promise to do my part by showing
up each class day ready to lecture on the material and explain it in a way that you can
hopefully understand. I need you to do your part by coming to class willing to learn and
prepared to discuss the material of the day.
It is possible to make a great grade in this class and to have fun doing so. That is
my goal for each of you.
ELECTRONIC BEHAVIOR IN THE CLASSROOM:
Laptop computers may only be used to take notes from the class lecture. Using
your laptop during class for any other purpose will cause you to loose the privilege of
having your laptop in this class. Cell phone use is not allowed in class so please
silence your phones while you are in class
HOW YOU AND I COMMUNICATE:
When I have information that I need to tell you, I will always put it in the form of an
Announcement on our on-line class site. At the same time, I always send a copy to your
university email account. PLEASE read your university email so you will know of any


changes I have made to the class schedule and/or events you may attend for extra
credit.
EXTRA CREDIT
Limited to 8 points total for the semester.
1.) Attendance in class:
If you have perfect attendance between tests, then 2 points will be added to your test
grade. For example, if you do not miss a class before Test #1 then you will be given 2
points as extra credit for Test #1. The same concept will apply to Test #2, 3, and 4.
Attendance is taken every day and, with the completion of each test, you start over on
your ability to earn 2 points for the next test. You must sign in each day to verify your
attendance.
2.) Extra Credit Papers:
I will give you 2 points for each one-page paper you write. These papers can be on
anything in life that you experience or wonder about. You can tell me about an event
that you attended, a movie that you saw, a relationship that you have noticed. It can be
about any aspect of life that causes you to think. Tell me about it in one page or less
and I will give you two points.
The one-page papers must be typed, double-spaced, and turned in as a hard
copy.
COURSE CALENDER – HUMAN SEXUALITY – SUMMER I 2019
WEEK 1 June 6           CHAPTER 1: Sexuality in Perspective
                         CHAPTER 2: Theoretical Perspectives
WEEK 2 June 10           CHAPTER 3: Sex Research
                          TEST #1: Chapters 1, 2, 3 (Likely will be on Thursday or Friday)
                          CHAPTER 4: Sexual Anatomy
                          CHAPTER 5: The Menstrual Cycle
WEEK 3 June 17           CHAPTER 6: Conception, Pregnancy, and Childbirth


                        TEST #2: Chapters 4, 5, 6 (Likely will be on Monday or Tuesday)
                        CHAPTER 7: Contraception and Abortion
                        CHAPTER 8: Sexual Arousal
WEEK 4 June 25          CHAPTER 11: Attraction, Love, and….
                        TEST #3: Chapters 7, 8, 11 (Likely will be on Wed or Thursday)
                        CHAPTER 13: Sexual Orientation….
WEEK 5 July 2           CHAPTER 14: Variations in Sexual Behavior
            July 4      NO CLASS
 WEEK 6 July 9          Finish 13 and 14 and add New Chapter???
            July 12     Last Day of Class (Test #4??)
            July 13 and 14 FINALS Scheduled – (which is Test #4) May happen
                         prior to these final dates if we finish the material earlier.
This course schedule is subject to change.
TESTING PROCEDURES FOR ALL CLASSES
On test days, the only item you need to bring to class is a pencil. Scantrons will be
provided.
On your scantron please write in and bubble in YOUR NAME, ID NUMBER, COURSE
NUMBER, SECTION NUMBER, and TEST FORM. For each of these that are not filled
in 5 points will be deducted from your test score.
If you bring other items to class, they must be placed against the wall or on the stage.
During the test, no caps, hats, or head gear are allowed.
During the test, no electronic devices are allowed. If one is visible, it will be
assumed you were using it to cheat and you will be given a zero for the test.


When turning in your test, please be certain it is placed in the correct stack.
Asking to clarify a test question is acceptable; asking for the answer is not.
