              E S350R      l   1-Law, Society, and the Novel in Nineteenth-Century Britain-WB
          Instructor: Christian, G.                                      Areas: 5
          Unique #: 79854                                                Flags: none
          Semester: Summer 2020, second session                          Restrictions: none
          Cross-lists: N/A
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English rhetoric and writing.
Description: This course introduces students to the closely related discourses of law and literature. In the context of nineteenth-
century British society, which underwent vast changes in economic, political, social, and religious conditions, we will examine the
ways in which legal principles, institutions, and practices permeated the literary imaginations of some of Britain’s most popular and
widely read novelists. We will also read selections from canonical works of English legal history, as well as more contemporary
interpretations of such history with respect to selected topics. These readings will help us identify the central legal issues raised by
the novels and evaluate how the novelists perceived the law and its effects on social relations.
Texts: Maria Edgeworth, Castle Rackrent; George Eliot, Adam Bede; Benjamin Disraeli, Sybil; Elizabeth Gaskell, North and South;
Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights; Charles Dickens, Bleak House; all other readings posted on Canvas
Course Requirements:
     •    Weekly reading. Reading assignments for each class are given in the detailed schedule below. Please come to class
          prepared to discuss the readings assigned for that class period.
     •    Regular participation in class discussion. Even though we will be videoconferencing this semester, class discussion will still
          be the primary method of instruction. While there may be some short lectures for purposes of background or historical
          context, most class time will be spent discussion the texts we have read and their significance to the topics of the day.
     •    Response essays. Students will write periodic response essays of no more than 500 words, which will be submitted on
          Canvas. Each response will answer a query relevant to the current reading.
     •    Essay. Students will write one 5-7-page essay at the end of the term. This essay may be revised for a higher grade, timer
          permitting.
     •    Regular attendance. Attendance is mandatory. Let me know if something comes up that may necessitate missing class.
Required Texts:
Maria Edgeworth, Castle Rackrent (1800); George Eliot, Adam Bede (1859); Benjamin Disraeli, Sybil (1848); Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary
Barton (1848); Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights (1847); Charles Dickens, Bleak House (1852-53); supplemental readings posted on
Canvas
Grading:
Class participation, 25%
Response essays, 50%
Essay, 25%
Schedule:
Monday, July 13: Magna Carta (1215); selections from William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England (1765-70)
Tuesday, July 14: Maria Edgeworth, Castle Rackrent
Wednesday, July 15: Selections from Sir Frederick Pollock and Frederic William Maitland, The History of English Law Before the Time
of Edward I (1895) (Canvas)
Thursday, July 16: George Eliot, Adam Bede, Chapters 1-10
Friday, July 17: George Eliot, Adam Bede, Chapters 11-22
Monday, July 20: George Eliot, Adam Bede, Chapters 23-40


Tuesday, July 21: George Eliot, Adam Bede, Chapters 41-end
Wednesday, July 22: Selections from A.V. Dicey, Lectures on the Relation Between Law & Public Opinion in England During the
Nineteenth Century (1898, 1914) (Canvas)
Thursday, July 23: Benjamin Disraeli, Sybil, Books I-II
Friday, July 24: Benjamin Disraeli, Sybil, Books III-IV
Monday, July 27: Benjamin Disraeli, Sybil, Books V-VI
Tuesday, July 28: Selections from Jeremy Bentham, A Comment on the Commentaries (1776) (Canvas)
Wednesday, July 29: Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary Barton, Chapters 1-12
Thursday, July 30: Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary Barton, Chapters 13-26
Friday, July 31: Elizabeth Gaskell, Mary Barton, Chapters 27-end
Monday, August 3: The Married Women’s Property Act, 1882, 1884, 1893, 1907; The Matrimonial Causes Act, 1857, 1864; selections
from William Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England (Canvas)
Tuesday, August 4: Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights, Chapters 1-9
Wednesday, August 5: Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights, Chapters 10-18
Thursday, August 6: Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights, Chapters 19-26
Friday, August 7: Emily Brontë, Wuthering Heights, Chapters 27-end
Monday, August 10: Charles Dickens, Bleak House, Chapters 1-20
Tuesday, August 11: Charles Dickens, Bleak House, Chapters 21-31
Wednesday, August 12: Charles Dickens, Bleak House, Chapters 32-43
Thursday, August 13: Charles Dickens, Bleak House, Chapters 44-55
Friday, August 14: Charles Dickens, Bleak House, Chapters 56-end
Saturday, August 15: Final Essay Due
Policies:
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone), or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work. For
additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Web Site:
Use of Canvas in Classes


This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is created for each course.
(Student enrollments in each course are updated each evening.) Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate
and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys. You will be responsible for
checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. As with all computer systems, there are occasional
scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notiﬁcation of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page.
Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a signiﬁcant period of
time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date.
Canvas is available at canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday 8 am to 6
pm, so plan accordingly.
Instructor:
George S. Christian
Office: CAL 14
Office hours: M 1-2 or by appointment
Teaching Assistant:
