ADVANCED THEORY SEMINAR
ARC 327R/386M LAR388
Instructor: Nichole Wiedemann
Time: F 9am-12pm
Location: Sutton 2.110
Office hours: M 10am-12pm or by appointment
Email: wiedemann@utexas.edu
Phone: 512-471-0736
                                                         …if one takes the “map” in its current
                                                         geographical form, we can see that in the
                                                         course of the period marked by the birth of
                                                         modern scientific discourse (i.e., from the
                                                         fifteenth to the seventeenth century) the map
                                                         has slowly disengaged itself from the
                                                         itineraries that were a condition of its
                                                         possibility. (Michel de Certeau, The Practice of
                                                         Everyday Life, 1984)
                Battle of San Romano Analysis, Uccello
           Education of an Architect, The Cooper Union
SPATIAL STORIES (An Exploration of Narrative, Space + Time)
The itinerary, or “tour,” documents, or proposes, a journey. It includes places visited, actual and
figurative, situated within a narrative of connected events and experiences. Rather than autonomous
measures, as presented in the “map,” space and time are embedded in a complex, operational
structure.
The seminar will explore the itinerary as an approach to spatial representation. Students will be
introduced to texts (philosophy, travel journals, narratives) and images (maps) to cultivate
informed investigations of representation. Cartographic resources at the Harry Ransom Center
and the Benson Latin American Collection will be referenced. Since this course draws from an
array of information, I will try to provide you with selective texts that introduce you to the subjects
rather than define them. Paralleling the readings, archive visits and discussions will be a
sustained “drawing” project as a means for each student to develop a journey of their own.
                                                       1


The course is positioned as a collection of questions rather than an answers. It is a speculation –
the forming of a theory or conjecture without firm evidence– primarily through drawing.
Structured as a “lab” (a space equipped and positioned for experimentation), we will focus on how
to practice or test the information absorbed. The products, whether essays or drawings, are
directed toward discovery, or invention, rather than solely reiterating what we have read/seen. The
intent is to habitually occupy a world of indeterminacy each week in order to make/think things
we don’t often have time for… to wonder (wander) about the world.
engagement
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Each class meeting is a double class period.
Please contact me prior to the beginning of class if you will be late or absent.
The work done in the course will be in several formats: student-led discussions, essays and
drawings.
         1) Each student will help introduce and direct 1-2 class discussions over the course of
              the semester. To do so, students assigned should create a strategy for engagement
              (questions, prompts, presentations, exercises, etc.) as well as select examples (maps,
              art, design, etc.) that relate to, and may elucidate, the reading.
         2) Essays will help you to critique what we are reading as well as formulate your own
              understanding. They are intended to be speculative, rather than derivative, but should
              reference the reading directly by including quotes.
         3) The drawings will include in-class exercises, homework assignments and a drawing
              construct –to make or form by combing or arranging parts or elements- at the
              conclusion of the semester. While the in–class exercises will be predominately by
              hand, the homework and final construct are open to a range of approaches and/or
              media.*
         4) All students are expected to be prepared for every class meeting and ready to engage
              through words and/or drawing to the fullest extent. Our time is valuable and precious,
              especially when we meet once a week.
Assignments will be graded, using the university’s grading scale, with an emphasis on three
elements: 1) POSITIONING -a critical or insightful engagement; 2) METHOD –the adaptation of an
idea into a practice (drawing or writing); and 3) OUTCOME –the product itself (drawing, essay,
presentation).
Discussions (1-2)                                             10%
Essays (3)                                                    30%
Drawings* (in-class and homework)                             50%
Drawing Composite*                                            10%
*Students are asked to collect all drawings in a portfolio, even ones you don’t like, to be submitted
for grading on the last class meeting, November 22nd.
tools
The course will require a range of media and approaches but we will try to standardize the size
(11 x 14), when possible. Please be prepared to engage (and acquire/borrow/share) new tools -
analog or digital- from class to class. Be flexible.
To begin:
Drawing/Sketch Paper (100 sheets?)            11x14
Drawing Pencils                               HB, 2B and …
Pencil Sharpener
                                                      2


schedule
wk 1     8/30             Drawing
wk 2     9/6              Drawing           *reading /discussion team assigned
wk 3     9/13             Visit to…. + Discussion + Papers
wk 4     9/20             Drawing
wk 5     9/27             Drawing           *reading /discussion team assigned
wk 6     10/4             TBA
wk 7     10/11            HRC @ 9:30am + Discussion + Papers
wk 8     10/18            Drawing           *reading /discussion team assigned
wk 9     10/25            BENSON @ 9:30am + Discussion + Papers
wk 10    11/1             Drawing
wk 11    11/8             Drawing
wk 11    11/15            Drawing
wk 12    11/22            FINAL PRESENTATION
*Schedule may have revisions. Advance notice will be provided.
religious observances
A student shall be excused from attending classes for the observance of religious holy days.
University policy requires students to notify the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible so that arrangements can be made.
accommodations
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations should obtain a from the Services
for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students. This letter should be
presented to the instructor.
                                                    3
