                      History of the Black Power Movement
                                      HIS/AFR 317L
                                         Fall 2019
                                   T/TH: 11:00-12:30
Professor Leonard N. Moore
Department of History
Office: MAI 302
Office Hours: Thursdays 2-4
Course Description and Objectives
The Black Power movement was a distinct period in African American life from the
late 1960s and early 1970s that emphasized racial pride, the creation of black
political and cultural institutions, self-reliance, and group unity. The expression of
black power ideology ranged from the desire to create an all-black nation-state to
the promotion of black economic power. This course will look at the major
organizations, key figures, and ideologies of the black power movement.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the
university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication
skills, critical thinking skills, personal responsibility, and social responsibility.
Course Content Disclaimer
In this course, students may be required to read text or view materials that they
may consider offensive. Additionally, class discussions in this class can at times
become intense. The ideas expressed in any given text or in class discussions do not
necessarily reflect the views of the instructor, the History Department, or the
University of Texas at Austin. Course materials and discussion topics are selected
for their historical and/or cultural relevance, or as an example of stylistic and/or
rhetorical strategies and techniques. They are meant to be examined in the context
of intellectual inquiry of the sort encountered at the university level.
Required Books
Negroes With Guns, Robert F. Williams (weeks 1-3)
Autobiography of Malcolm X (weeks 4-7)
Assata, Assata Shakur (weeks 8-11)
Do I Dare Disturb the Universe, Lyles (weeks 12-15)


Course Grading
The course will consist of three exams and a project.
Exam 1: 30%          September 24
Exam 2: 30%          October 29
Project: 10%         November 14
Exam 3: 30%          December 6
Course Schedule
Week 1:      The Making of Black America
Week 2:      The Second Great Migration and the Foundations of Black Power
              Ghanaian Independence and the Global Dimensions of Black Power
Week 3:      Robert F. Williams and the Roots of Black Power
             Mae Mallory, Urbanization, and Internationalism
Week 4:      Adam Clayton Powell and Black Politics in the 1950s
             The Nation of Islam and the Emergence of Malcolm
Week 5:      The Ideology and Philosophy of Malcolm
             From Malcolm X to El Hajj Malik El-Shabazz
Week 6:      The Watts Riots and Death of the Civil Rights Movement
Week 7:      Lowndes County
             Oakland and The Birth of the Black Panthers
Week 8:      The Black Panther Party and State Repression
             The Survival Programs of the Black Panther Party
Week 9:      US and the Development of Cultural Nationalism
             The Black Arts Movement
Week 10:     Ali, The Black Power Movement and the Black Athlete
             The 1968 Olympic Boycott
Week 11:     Black Power on Campus /The Birth of Black Studies
Week 12:     The Rise of Black Political Power
Week 13:     Black Capitalism
Week 14:     Black Power in the 70s and 80s
Week 15:     Contemporary Expressions of Black Power
