ARC|ARI 310K: DESIGN FOUNDATIONS 2 | SPRING 2019
MWF 10am-1pm
SUTTON ATTIC
INSTRUCTORS
Francisca Aroso                              aroso@utexas.edu
Michael McCall                              mike@mccalldesign.com
Smilja Milovanivic-Bertram                   smilja@utexas.edu
Joyce Rosner                                 jrosner@austin.utexas.edu
Please Note: Office locations and hours to be distributed in class. Appointments for office hours should be setup by emailing instructor(s).
PREREQUISITES
ARC 310K and 311K or ARI 310K and 311K with a grade of at least C in each, and registration for ARC 311L or ARI
311L.
APPROACH
The projects and exercises explored during the course of this term are intended to provide the student with a
foundation in the perceptual, conceptual and technique-based skills necessary for subsequent design work in
architecture / interior design. As in Design Foundations 1, this semester will consist of sequentially linked projects
that begin by introducing a question or investigation, tested through a series of variables and end with a possible
design response. Projects have been devised to encourage many avenues of inquiry with students taking
responsibility in framing their own investigations.
THEME
The main topic of this semester is THE IN-BETWEEN. In architecture and interior design, it is important to be
sensitive not only to objects and forms, but also to the forms and qualities of the spaces between them, the spaces
that we inhabit, the transitional spaces. You can also think of the space in between as poche space, such as the
space within a wall or cavity. What is in that space? Is it structure, or can it be occupied? What is considered to be
“inside” versus “outside”? The concept of the IN BETWEEN can be addressed at many different scales, from the
smallest detail or connection that links one element to another and becomes the piece that allows that transition
to occur, to the space or element between inside and outside, and finally to the space between 2 or more objects
or forms. This semester we will be looking at how formal operations as well as environmental forces and
experiential elements, impact your design decisions at multiple scales.


OBJECTIVES
The studio is designed to create strong theoretical and methodological underpinnings for design which require
students’ active engagement in design as a physical process. This asks students to actively engage in on-going
critical self-assessment, response, and re-assessments of their work.
•      To build upon the skills and knowledge acquired during Foundation 1
•      To continue to form a foundation upon which each student’s own values will be developed.
•      To provide students with a basis through which to view, assimilate, evaluate, and implement design ideas.
•      To introduce students to both the formal and experiential aspects of design.
•      To encourage an understanding of form as a dependent variable, or as a consequence of multiple
       considerations
LEARNING
Self-motivation is necessary to succeed in this class and subsequent design studios. As a creative endeavor, the
process of design is one of exploration rather than explication; as such, it is defined by questions, not answers.
Class time is intended for the exchange of ideas and approaches. You will be expected to work in studio both
during class and, later, to complete assignments. Design studio is a significant time commitment! There will be
both group and individual projects. Likewise, work will be discussed in groups and individually and project
evaluations will be subject to both faculty review as well as peer review.
Always look for ways to bring something extra to your studio work. In addition to pursuing the paths laid out by
your instructor you should constantly seek additional inputs to your design process. That means anything from
going to the library and bringing in copies of related material to finding a video from which the class might benefit.
Our school has developed a Studio Culture Policy: http://soa.utexas.edu/architecture/culture
Our school also has a lecture series each semester, with speakers coming from all over the world. These lectures
will enhance your education in design and broaden your scope of understanding. The lectures are widely
advertised throughout the school and will also be announced in studio. You are required to attend all of the
lectures held in Jessen Auditorium and highly encouraged to attend the others as well.
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning encourages dialogue,
collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio offers an environment where students can
come together to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates,


faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from
faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and
spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where project-based
learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to the school's core values
— broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's
fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
STUDIO BEHAVIOR from 10am-1pm
     1.   No cell phone use especially social media, texting, surfing. Cell phones should be put away during class so
          they do not become a distraction.
     2.   Decorum- no blankets, pajamas, or food. Drinks are ok.
     3.   Attentiveness- emphasizing that the entire studio time is class time and deserves the same attentiveness
          whether during lectures, instructional direction, or production. Discussions with fellow students are
          encouraged and should be directed toward studio work.
     4.   Time management is a skill that will be directly addressed in this course and important to your overall
          success.
VISUAL NOTES / CONVERSATIONS: This semester you will keep a sketch book (or use yours from last semester)
for visual notes of lectures and readings. For each of the readings prepare visual notes, diagrams, and text. Limit
your entries to no more than two pages.
THEORY CONVERSATIONS: MICHAEL BENEDIKT
Jan 28      Lecture Zero: Metaphors and analogies in architecture
Feb 4       Lecture One: Biological: buildings as organisms
Feb 18      Lecture Two: Mechanical: buildings as machines
Feb 25      Lecture Three: Gastronomic: architecture as cuisine
March 4      Lecture Four: Semiotic: architecture as a language
March 25 Lecture Five: Geographical: buildings as landscapes
April 8      Lecture Six: Ontorelational: buildings as being(s).
 DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the design conversations
taken place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc.). Students are encouraged to participate
and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures
(three per semester by lead practitioners from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio
that follow are important for the holistic education of intellectually engaged students and participation will have
an impact on students’ grades (see below).
Feb 13              Deborah Berke / Jessen
March 4             Michael Murphy / Jessen


RREQURED TEXT
POETICS + PRAGMATICS: a design studio companion, Smilja Milovanovic-Bertram and Joyce Rosner, Kendall Hunt
Publishing, 2018.
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is
derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to
deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
     Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
          •   The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of
              inquiry
          •   The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing and
              models, etc.) in the development of the design
          •   Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is
              asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
     Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in
     companion courses.
          •   A strong and clearly stated design objective
          •   Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic elements –
              and sectional development
          •   Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through
              creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and
              environmental system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in
              support of the design objective
          •   Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and
              assembly
     Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the final
     design presentation.
          •   Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of skill
              displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical documentation
          •
     Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and
     reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School of
Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements.


GRADING
Semester’s Work                                                                                            90%
Visual Notes                                                                                               10%
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-             Excellent
                 Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
                 conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
                 above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-          Above Average
                 Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
                 pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
                 Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C             Average
                 Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
                 dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D-       Poor
                 Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
                 level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F                Fail
                 Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
                 this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X                Excused Incomplete
                 Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work
                 on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
                 consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion date.
                 Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student is
                 enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
                 Incomplete coursework must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester. ALL
                 GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full
letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused
with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing
work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.


If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused
absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students
must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not
acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this
subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after
the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the
Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic
integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
HONOR CODE
"As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
academic integrity."
UNIVERSITY CODE OF CONDUCT
"The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect towards peers and community."
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
      •   In-house CARE counselor (see below)
      •   For immediate support
               o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                                           th
                    M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5 floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
               o CMHC Crisis Line:
                    24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
      •   Free services at CMHC:
               o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
               o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
               o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
               o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html


CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges
or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are struggling
emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer
students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is
unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-
4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each
course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to
the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop.
Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days
a week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and
your studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce
material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with
white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate materials and take what they
need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA
Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the
Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be
reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If
something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
     •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.


     •   Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may
         occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
         class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
         The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
SECURITY, SAFETY AND THE STUDIO
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to
the needs of everyone. Please see your instructor if problems that you are unable to resolve on your own arise. All
spraying of fixative, spray paint or any other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary
component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Please be
mindful not to admit any uninvited visitors and keep all exterior doors locked after hours.
Be courteous. Be smart.
