                                 Methods in Primate Biology
                                                ANT 347C
                                              SPRING 2020
LECTURE:                   Mondays         1-2 PM WCP 4.120
LABS:                      Mondays         2-5 PM WCP 4.120 and offsite
INSTRUCTOR:                Aaron Sandel (pronounced “san-dell”)
                                   Goes by: Dr. Sandel or Professor Sandel
                                   Pronouns: he/him/his
                           E-mail: aaron.sandel@austin.utexas.edu
                           Office: WCP 5.146
                           Office hours: Wednesdays 1-3 PM & by appt.
TEXTS:                     Studying Primates by Joanna Setchell (2019)
                                   You can get it at the University Co-op or online.
                                   Please let me know if you have trouble acquiring it.
                           Additional readings will be available on Canvas
ABOUT DR. SANDEL
           My research focuses on the behavior and physiology of wild chimpanzees in Uganda. I
           study social relationships formed between male chimpanzees during adolescence and
           young adulthood, the social network of the chimpanzee community, and markers of
           growth and stress during development. I am also interested in a variety of topics related
           to the evolution of animal behavior including cognition, skin, and war.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
           This course focuses on the study of primates and animal behavior. You will learn how to
           formulate hypotheses and predictions, devise research projects to test these predictions,
           collect data, and write scientific research reports. You will gain familiarity with
           technologies that facilitate wildlife studies. Working around a specific research question,
           students will develop and implement a sampling protocol and collect their own data,
           which they will then analyze and discuss. The final project for this course will involve (1)
           a presentation to your peers in a conference environment, and (2) a written,
           comprehensive scientific report.
           Students will learn what goes into creating a scientific article. Students will conduct
           hands on research on campus squirrels. Students receive mentoring in academic
           writing and professional development.
           If you want to go on to graduate school, want to be the next Jane Goodall, or just are
           interested in science and animals, this is the course for you!
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
           Prerequisite: ANT 346L, 346M, or Biology 359K
1	   	  


       COURSE SCHEDULE/TOPICS
              Topic for Lab and Lecture                                      Reading             Assignments
              Aims of Primatology                                            Rodman (1999)       Reading Response
              Before coming to class, please read the article “Whither       “Whither            (350 to 450
Week 1        primatology” and complete Reading Response by Fri              primatology”        words) & CV
              Introduction
              Lecture and Lab: Introduction to primates, introduction to the
              course and syllabus, Overview of how to develop a research     Setchell Ch. 10 &
Week 2        project and be a primatologist                                 11                  SMART Goals
              Ethology & Behavioral Ecology
              Lecture: We will discuss the origins of animal behavior, and
Week 3                                                                       Setchell Ch. 6
              the differences between ethology and behavioral ecology.
              Lab: How to read and Introduction to Squirrels
              Primate behavior, traits, and evolution                        Strum (2019) “Why
              Lecture: What makes primates unusual?                          Natural History Is
Week 4        Lab: Squirrel locomotion                                       Important”          Professional Email
              Natural History & Sampling Methods                             Altmann (1974)
              Lecture: Sampling procedures                                   “Observational
Week 5        Lab: Paper and pencil data collection on squirrels.            study of behavior”
              Hormones, behavior, & Health
              Lecture: Studying physiology in the wild and captivity.                            Enter Practice
Week 6
              Lab: Excel and HanDBase for data organization and                                  Data into Excel
              collection. And how to collect urine from wild animals.
              Kinship and behavior
              Lecture: How genetics are used to study behavior and
              evolution in wild primates.                                                        R Practice
Week 7        Lab: Data management and Introduction to R
              Ecology                                                                            Plant
Week 8        Lecture & Lab: Transects, plants, & nutrition                                      Identification
              Cognition, Communication, & Collective Behavior
Week 9        Lecture: Primate cognition.                                    Setchell Ch. 17     Project proposal
              Lab: Squirrel tolerance and cognition
              Developing a project & Peer Review
Week 10       Lecture: Research aims and giving/receiving critique                               Enter Pilot Data
              Lab: Pilot data collection                                     Setchell Ch. 18     into Excel
              Captive Studies & Primate Welfare                                                  Draft of final
Week 11       Lecture & Lab: Off-site trip to MD Anderson                    Setchell Ch. 20 & 4 paper
              Field work and management
                                                                             Setchell Ch. 5 & 15
Week 12       Lecture: Logistics of fieldwork
              Lab: Developing Community Standards
Week 13       Statistics and data quality                                    Setchell Ch. 22, 23
              Lab: Using R for statistics                                    & 24
              Conservation, Colonialism
Week 14       Lecture: Interviewing humans                                   Setchell Ch. 3
              Lab: Ethnography and interviews
              Conference & Public Dissemination                                                  Final
Week 15       Lecture & Lab: Student presentations                                               Presentations
       Final paper due May 18, 2020 (submit electronically via Canvas)
       2	   	  


ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING
           During the course of the semester, you will be conducting a series of exercises related to
           research projects. Keep in mind that this course requires a substantial amount of time
           outside of class conducting library research, analyzing data, and writing research reports.
           All due dates are firm and are on the accompanying schedule. Late papers will be
           lowered by a half letter grade for each day that they are late.
           Much of the learning occurs during the lab and lecture. This is not a traditional lecture,
           and many classes will not have a PowerPoint presentation. Thus, it is crucial that
           students attend and pay attention. Do not check your cell phone during class. No
           messaging from your laptop. Pretend the class is a podcast and enjoy and learn!
 Category                        Assignment                                Percent of grade
 ATTENDANCE                      Come to all lectures and labs                             10
 PARTICIPATION                   Actively engage in the course                             10
 ASSIGNMENTS
                 Data Analysis  Enter Practice Data into Excel                               2
                                Excel and R Lab                                              2
                                R Practice                                                   2
                                Enter Pilot Data into Excel                                  2
                                Statistics Lab                                               2
                       Writing  Reading Response                                             3
                                In-Class Free-Writes                                         3
                                Preliminary Research Paper                                   4
                                Project proposal                                           10
                                Draft of Research Report                                   15
                                Final Research Report                                      15
             Oral Presentation  Final Presentation                                         12
    Professional Development    SMART Goals                                                  1
                                CV                                                           1
                                Professional Email                                           2
                                Community Standards Policy                                   2
                         Other  Plant Identification                                         2
3	   	  


COURSE FLAGS
                                   Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
                                  with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can
                                  expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial
                                  writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help
                                  you improve your writing. This course is a substantial writing
                                  course. You will be expected to write multiple papers. There are no
                                  tests, so you can spend ALL your time devoted to working on the
                                  papers. Please plan accordingly.
                                  Independent Inquiry Flag courses are designed to give students
                                  experience with designing and undertaking significant research or
                                  creative work, either independently or in collaboration with others.
                                  In this class, you can expect to implement an original behavioral
                                  research project from start to finish. A substantial portion of your
                                  grade will come from independent investigation and presentation
                                  of your own work.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you
use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite
your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary
action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
The core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Useful Resources:
• Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
• Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
• The Sanger Learning Center: All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
           classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching,
           and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information,
           please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
4	   	  


                                  Student Rights & Responsibilities
      •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
      •    You have a right to respect.
      •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
      •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
      •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
      •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
           improve your learning environment.
      •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
           shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way. With these rights come
           responsibilities:
      •    You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
           with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or
           overwhelming.
      •    You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
            others.
      •    Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
           bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
      •    You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
           someone is excluded.
      •    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each
           other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Names and Personal Pronouns
           To have a productive learning environment, it is important that I get to know you and you
           get to know your fellow students. This means learning everyone’s names. Class rosters
           are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your
           request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by your
           gender pronoun. Please advise me of this early in the semester.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Additional University Resources for Students
Counseling and Mental Health Center
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know
5	   	  


experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we
strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1- 866-329- 3986
(video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right, trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Emergency Exits
      • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
           evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
           requires exiting and assembling outside.
      • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
           building. And that the nearest exit may be behind you.
      • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
           the first week of class.
      • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
           re- enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
           The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
      • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
           can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
      • The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
           Campus Safety and Security, 512- 471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
MISCONDUCT, DISCRIMINATION, & REPORTING
UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-
based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic
violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. I am a Responsible Employee
and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or
one-on-one.
If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to
the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu
6	   	  


When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
      •    Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
      •    Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
            have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
      •    Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      •    Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
            “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title
            IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the
professor for this course is required to report for further investigation any information
concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, and stalking
committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also
requires reporting incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct
(collectively known as Title IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information
about any such incidents that you share with us.
If you need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality, please contact University
Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental Health
Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). UT Austin strongly urges you make use of these
services for any needed support and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
For more information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the
Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Additional Resources:
• ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
• Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
• Come to Dr. Sandel’s Office Hours! Drop by Wed 1-3pm or email me to find a time!
7	   	  
