                                               University of Texas at Austin
                                             Moody College of Communication
                                 Department of Communication Sciences and Disorders
                                                      Course Syllabus
                                                  Semester: Summer 2020
Department, Course Number, Title and Credit Hours: CSD F313L, Hearing Science, 3 credits
Unique number: 72700
Class time: 7-8:30pm Mon. and Thu., web-based class
Instructor:             Chang Liu, PhD
Email Address:          changliu@utexas.edu
Office Hours:           11-12pm on Tue. or by appointment
Catalog Description: This is an introductory course for hearing science. This course is composed of lectures and/or labs and
students are strongly recommended to register for the 1-credit lab (CSD 113P, Hearing Science Lab). This course will
explore two general topics related to the hearing process: (1) the physics of sound, and (2) auditory processing and perception
of sound. In particular, the class is focused on how language and cultural backgrounds of listeners on their speech production
and auditory processing of non-speech and speech sounds. This course is also flagged with global culture at UT.
Prerequisite(s): None
Textbook(s) and Related Material (recommended):
    William A. Yost (2006). Fundamental of hearing: an introduction, 5th Edition, by Brill Publisher.
    Norman J. Lass and Charles M. Woodford (2006) Hearing Science Fundamentals, 1st Edition by Mosby
    The textbooks will be supplemented with notes and readings.
Format of lectures: PowerPoint lecture notes will be available at Canvas as well as recorded lectures with PPT notes. The
online sessions will be composed of the review of the class materials from the last online session and the instruction of how
to conduct the class project.
Technology Expectations: PowerPoint presentation will be used in most of the lectures.
Learner Outcomes:
There are two major areas in this class. The learner outcomes are listed in the three areas in which students will be able to
1.   Acoustics
         a. Describe the basic concepts in physics related to acoustics
         b. Explain generation and properties of sinusoidal and complex sound waves
         c. Analyze acoustic properties of sounds
         d. Speech acoustics and synthesis
2.   Auditory processing
         a. Describe auditory pathways, peripheral and central.
         b. Explain cochlear mechanics and physiology
         c. Understand basic psychoacoustic methods
         d. Explain auditory sensations such as sensitivity, intensity resolution, frequency resolution, and temporal
              resolution.
         e. Interpret auditory perception of complex sounds like speech sounds
Quizzes and Exams: Quizzes and exams will be taken and proctored online on Canvas at a certain time/day. There will be
no make-up quiz or exam and they may not be taken at an alternative time unless there is some documented excuse. An
example of a documented and excused absence is a doctor note. Another example of a documented excused absence is family
emergency for which you need to contact Dean’s office for details. Again, no make-up quizzes or exams are allowed without
the documented excuse. NO EXCEPTIONS. Each quiz will cover the contents from the last quiz/exam while each exam
covers the entire section (Acoustics, and Psychoacoustics).
                                                           1


Time for Quizzes and Exams: The quiz will take 20 mins from 7:00pm to 7:20pm and the exam will take 1.5 hours from
7:00 to 8:30pm on the quiz/exam day. The quiz and exam will not be accessible at Canvas until the assigned time slot. For
example, the exam 1 is scheduled on June 22nd (Monday), meaning the exam will be accessible only between 7:00 and
8:30pm on that day. You need to download the exam, finish it, and then submit it to Canvas within the 1.5-hour slot
(instructions of how to do so will be released before the exam). If the exam day happens to be on Mon. or Thu., there is no
online class on that day. If the quiz day happens to be on Mon. or Thu., we will have the online class after the quiz. If the
quiz/exam is scheduled on days other than Mon. and Thu., there is ONLY a quiz/exam on that day, NO online meetings.
Project: There will be three projects, most of which are group projects. Project details and requirement including the
deadline will be provided in a timely manner. The project deadline should be strictly followed. All project files and reports
are required to be submitted electronically. For the group project, each group will be composed of five to six students and
only one project submission is needed with everyone in the same group receiving the same project grade.
Attendance Policy: Attendance on two time-synchronous (live) online sessions per week using Adobe Connect is required
for this course. The online meeting will be held by Adobe Connect on Monday and Thursday evening 7:00-9:00pm.. The
online session from 7 to 9pm on Mon. and Thu. combines the time of lecturing and lab. The website for the meeting will be
released 1-2 days in advance. You NEED to contact the instructor at least three days before the class that you are going to
miss. If any emergency, contact the instructor immediately when you are able to. You attendance will be counted toward your
final grade (see the Grading section for details). In addition to the Mon. and Thu. online meetings, there may be some other
online meetings for the purpose of sectional reviews and these additional meetings are not required, but highly recommended
if needed. The time/date of the additional sessions will be informed at least three days in advance.
Grading: There will be TWO exams, THREE projects, and FOUR quizzes for this course. For the final grade, the exams
contribute 40% with each taking 20%, while the projects contribute 45% with each taking 15% with the quizzes contributing
15% (e.g., the best three of the four quizzes counted). There will be randomly BONUS quizzes in online classes. The grade
of each bonus quiz ranges from 1 (fully correct), 0.5 (partially correct), 0 (incorrect) to -1 (absence from the class with no
acceptable reasons). The bonus-quiz points will be added to the final grade with the range between -3 to 3. Your FINAL
grade follows the formula below:
Final = 40%* average exam grade + 45%*average project grade + 15*average quiz grade + bonus-quiz points.
For example, if your average grade of the two exams, three projects, and four quizzes are 85, 95, and 95 respectively, and you
get 2 in-class quiz-bonus credits, your final grade is 40%*85 + 45%*95 + 15%*95 + 2 = 93.
The overall cutoff scale is as follows (total points: 100):
94.0 – 100 A, 89.0 – 93.9 A-, 84.0 – 88.9 B+, 80.0 – 83.9 B, 77.0 – 79.9 B-,              73.0 – 76.9 C+, 70.0 – 72.9 C,
67.0 – 69.9 C-, 63 - 66.9 D+, 60 – 62.9 D,          57.0 – 59.9 D-, and below 57 F.
Academic Honesty: A standard of honesty, fairly applied to all students, is essential to a learning environment. Students
abridging a standard of honesty must accept the consequences; penalties are assessed by appropriate classroom instructors or
other designated people. Serious cases may result in discipline at the college or University level and may result in suspension
or dismissal. Dismissal from a college for academic dishonesty, constitutes dismissal from the University.
Special Needs: In case you have a physical, perceptual, psychiatric/emotional, medical, or learning disability that may
impact your ability to carry out assigned course work, contact the Service for Students with Disability (SSD), Student
Services Building 4.104. (Voice 512-471-6259 or 512-471-TTY for users with hard of hearing) at the Office of the Dean of
Students. SSD will review your concerns, confirm your disability, and determine, with you, what accommodations are
necessary. All information and documentation of your disability is confidential and will not be released by SSD without your
written permission. A letter that documents the disability from the SSD should be presented to the instructor in each course at
the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an
exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed.
See website below for more information: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Campus Safety: Emergency Preparedness and Emergency Plan Instructions: Although this is a web-based class,
emergency may occur. Emergencies may range from inclement weather, to building evacuations, to campus closures, and
the university has a variety of tools to communicate with the public in the event of these and other possible emergencies.
There is a monthly emergency communications test (every first Wednesday at 11:50 a.m.)) and there are several
communications channels the university uses during emergencies like siren system, emergency website, local press and
social media, text alert, university group email and etc. All occupants of university buildings are required to evacuate a
building when a fire alarm and/ or an official announcement is made indicating a potentially dangerous situation within
the building. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. If you require assistance in evacuation, inform
                                                            2


your instructor in writing during the first week of class. Please call Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL: 512-232-
5050) if you have concerns regarding the attitude or actions of students, staff, or other faculty. If you would like more
information regarding emergency preparedness, visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing
thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-     CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- |CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
-     Brief assessments and referral services
-     Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-     MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-     Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Requirement and suggestion:
1. Pre-reading the textbook or related readings is helpful for your class. Also, the review of the textbook and/or notes can
help you understand the lectures and prepare for quizzes and exams.
2. Canvas will be frequently used for the class, mainly for general course information, class notes, discussion,
communication and etc.
3. Pay attention to figures and pictures in the book and readings, which are usually helpful to understand the texts.
4. If you have any difficulty or concern for the course, come to talk with me AS SOON AS POSSIBLE!
                                                           3


Tentative Course Schedule: NOTE – This schedule is tentative and may be changed during the summer session.
 Date      Syllabus                                                Reading schedule         Reading schedule
                                                                    (Yost)                  (Lass)
 Jun. 4    Overview of the course
 Jun. 5    Basic physical concepts and nature of sound             Supplemental readings    Supplemental
 Jun. 8    Quiz 1; Sinusoidal wave (I);                            Chapt. 2                 Chapt. 1
 Jun. 9    Sinusoidal wave (II);                                   Chapt. 2                 Chapt. 1
 Jun. 10   Exponent and logarithm                                  Supplemental readings    Supplemental
 Jun. 11   Sound intensity and decibel (I);                        Chapt. 3                 Chapt. 1
           Project 1 – sine wave generation (individual)           Chapt. 3                 Chapt. 1
 Jun. 12   Sound intensity and decibel (II)
 Jun. 15   Quiz 2; Complex wave (I)                                Chapt. 4                 Chapt. 1
 Jun. 16   Complex wave (II)
 Jun. 17   Speech acoustics (I)
 Jun. 18   Speech acoustics (II)
           Project 2 – Vowel acoustics (group)
 Jun. 19   Speech acoustics (III) – culture and language effect
 Jun. 22   EXAM 1; Intro. to A&P                                   Supplemental readings    Supplemental
 Jun. 23   Outer and middle ear                                    Chapt. 6                 Chapt. 2
 Jun. 24   Cochlea                                                 Chapt. 7, 8              Chapt. 3
 Jun. 25   Central auditory system                                 Chapt. 15                Chapt. 4
 Jun. 26   Introduction to Psychoacoustics                         Chapt. 10                Chapt. 15
 Jun. 29   QUIZ 3; auditory discrimination (I)                     Chapt. 11                Chapt. 5
           Project 3 – auditory discrimination (group)
 Jun. 30   Auditory discrimination (II)
 Jul. 1    Masking and critical band (I)                           Chapt. 11                Chapt. 6
 Jul. 2    Masking and critical band (II)                          Chapt. 11                Chapt. 6
 Jul. 3    Independence day observed, No class
 Jul. 6    QUIZ 4; Loudness and pitch perception (I)               Chapt. 11                Chapt. 7
 Jul. 7    Loudness and pitch perception (II)                      Chapt. 13                Chapt. 7
 Jul. 8    Auditory perception – culture and language effect
 Jul. 9    EXAM 2
                                                             4
