                                           AFR 372E 30570
        Performance Ethnography as Community-Building
              Austin/Los Angeles Domestic Study Program
                                                          2019
Dr. Omi Osun Joni l. Jones                                        jonijones@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: W, 10-12 CST
Professor Sharon Bridgforth                                       Sharon.bridgforth@gmail.com
Office Hours: Available by Appointment
                                               Classroom BEN 1.106
Everything is related and therefore what we do in our work with others will
inevitably be done to us.
                                                                  M. Cristina Gonzalez
To me, the most important doorway into the soul of a person is his or her words.
                                                                  Anna Deavere Smith
I believe that life and art are not separate. It is important that artists integrate all
aspects of themselves, their histories, identities and beliefs into the creation
process and into the vision of their lives as artists. As artists we document the
cultures, place(s), issues, and times we live in. Who are you? Where are you
from? How do you fit/or not fit in your world? This is the bone and marrow of the
work. These are the areas of focus for our class.
                                                                  Sharon Bridgforth
Course Description
This course introduces students to the rigors of creating and mounting art for social change
through community engagement. Students will contrast the activist art strategies in Austin,
Texas and Los Angeles, California by engaging in a series of art practices and art presentations in
each city. Through collaboration, innovation, and vulnerability students will create work that
encourages embodied engagement with the audience, and reveals how innovation is born of risk-
taking and community commitment. The work developed in this course will be shared during
the Block Party at the end of the semester.
It is not necessary to identify as an artist to take this course.
Objectives


Upon completion of this course, students should be able to define performance ethnography,
employ strategies for audience engagement, conduct ELP, use storytelling as an activist tool, and
shape ethnographic data into performance.
Required Readings
Course Readings Will be Available on Canvas.
Assignments
Artists as Activists (5 pts.)
Students will conduct archival and print research on Austin-based artists who have agreed to
work with the Domestic Study Program. This research will occur prior to meeting the selected
artists. The preliminary research will be submitted to Prof. Sharon as a two-page, double spaced,
typed presentation that includes images, audio, and video. The presentation should address
the significance of the artist, their contributions to the communities they serve, information about
the artist’s lineage and aesthetics, and how the artist’s work serves social justice. This
presentation is worth 5 pts. On the same day this presentation is due, students will share
elements of this research with the class. This oral presentation is required but not graded. This
work will evolve into a multi-media installation about the artist, their work and their life that will
be presented at the “Block Party.”
Everyday Life Performance (10 pts.)
Students will use ELP techniques in the performance of a 30-second excerpt from the oral history
assignment in Introduction to Ethnographic Methods. Students will “witness” the community
member by 1) giving attention to the energy, personality, and intent of the community member;
2) approximating the vocal and physical characteristics of the community member; 3) including
one artifact that reflects the community member; 4) suggesting the location and circumstances
under which the oral history was gathered; and 5) including a referent specific to the community
member. The performance must be memorized.
Engagement Exercise (10 pts.)
With one or two other students, students will create an exercise designed to encourage the
audience/witnesses to participate in a specific aspect of their research. The exercise should be
explained clearly, be guided respectfully and encouragingly when implemented, and have a
precise moment of closure. Students will conduct the exercise with their classmates, and may use
notes as they guide the exercise.
Solo Work (20 points)
Students will create a solo performance that grows from a semester-long developmental process
based on their identities, personal excavation, and family history research. The first layer of the
work will be a written draft of the work submitted to Prof. Sharon prior to the start of class; this is
ungraded but due on the date indicated on the syllabus. Students will be asked to share and
discuss excerpts in class. The next layer is a second draft in the development of the work that
reflects revisions and refinement in consultation with Prof. Sharon; this will be worth 5 pts.


Evaluation is based on timeliness, presentation, preparedness, and attention given to the
development of the work. Points will be deducted if work is either turned in or presented late.
The final layer is an in-class performance of an excerpt from the solo work worth 15 points. No
additional performers are permitted; this should be a solo presentation, even if the larger work
calls for multiple performers. Props, music, and projections are optional. Evaluation is based on
timeliness, presentation, preparedness, and attention given to the development of the work.
Performance Ethnography Block Party (50 pts.)
Students will participate in a public performance—a “Block Party”—that combines self-
reflexivity, documentation of Austin and Los Angeles activist artists, ELP, engagement exercises,
and the ethnographic research they have conducted throughout the semester. Emphasis will be
placed on how Austin and Los Angeles use distinctive methods for employing art at the service of
activism. There may be additional rehearsals required outside of classroom time
that the students must attend.
Participation (5 pts.)
Students must actively participate in class discussions and exercises. Students must also attend
local events throughout the semester. Such participation will earn students full credit.
Attendance
Students are allowed one unexcused absence from class. If students have more than one
unexcused absence, their final grade will be lowered by one letter. If students arrive more then 10
minutes late to class, or leave before class has ended, they will be counted as absent. If students
have an emergency, notify the professor as soon as they are able.
Course Protocols
*Rules for respectful discussion will be followed. These rules will be established and agreed upon
by everyone early in the semester. If a student violates these rules, that student will be counted as
absent for the day.
*Being on time for class and events means arriving early.
*As we work to build community with many people, consider how your style of dress may
exclude you from being seen, heard, and understood. We will discuss dress codes for our public
events.
*During in-person instruction, devices are not to be used in class. During in-person instruction,
notes should be taken in a notebook.
* The University of Texas rules and regulations regarding plagiarism and intellectual honesty
will be enforced. For details please see: deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_plagiarism.php
* Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Disability Programs and Resource Center at San Francisco State University.
http://access.sfsu.edu/content/students


* By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of their pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If students must miss a
class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day,
they will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Course Schedule
                                        FIELD SITE: AUSTIN
JAN     28      Introduction to Performance Ethnography
                Exercises: Augusto Boal, Theatre of the Oppressed
                           Sharon Bridgforth, Guest Artist, Finding Voice
FEB     4       Due: Artists as Activist First Draft
        11      View in Class: Robbie McCauley’s Sally’s Rape
                Read: Joseph and Cook, “Life is Living”
                         Jones, “South of Pico: Migration, Art, and Black Los Angeles”
        18      View in Class: Johnson, Sweet Tea,
                Read: Lowe, “Social Vision and a Cooperative Community”
                Exercises: Developing Improvisation as a Tool for Social Change
        25      Read: Excerpts from Fires in the Mirror, Anna Deavere Smith
                View in Class: Anna Deavere Smith’s TED Talk
                Exercises: Building Solo Work
                            Using ELP
MAR 4            Due: ELP
        11       NO CLASS
                         MAR 14-15        Attend: Black Studies Conference
                                    FIELD SITE: LOS ANGELES
        16               ARRIVE IN LOS ANGELES
                         Guest Artist: Adelina Anthony
        17               Event: World Stage Performance
        18               Event: “Black Super Hero Magic Mama,” Geffen
                         Theatre


    19         Tour: Hollywood
    20         Event: California African American Museum
    21         Guest Speaker: Cauleen Smith, Filmmaker
               Event: Njideka Akunyili Crosby Mural, MOCA
    22         Tour: Universal Studios
    23         ARRIVE IN AUSTIN
                              FIELD SITE: AUSTIN
    25 Due: Solo Work Draft I
APR 1  Due: Solo Work Draft II
       Rehearse: Performance Ethnography for “Block Party”
    8  Due: Engagement Exercise
    15 Due: Solo Work Final
       Rehearse: Performance Ethnography for “Block Party”
    22 Rehearse: Performance Ethnography for “Block Party
May 1  Presentation: “Block Party”
    8  Reflections on the “Block Party”
       Summation of the Course
