                          World War I: The Colonial Experience
Semester: Spring 2020                                        Instructor: Christopher S. Rose, Ph.D.
Course Numbers: HIS 366, AFR 374E,                                        Email: csrose@utexas.edu
ANS 361                                                         Student Hours: T 1-1:50, W 10-11,
Class Time: TTh 2:00 – 3:30 PM                                                    and by appointment
Class Location: Garrison Hall 1.126                                    Office Location: GAR 3.102
                                 Course aim and objectives
World War I has been described as a “total war,” one in which civilian as well as military
populations were expected to participate. However, the war was not just between European
nation-states, but also between imperial powers, who drew on the natural and human resources of
their colonial holdings for the war effort. British Egypt, Ottoman Syria, and German East and
Southwest Africa saw military action in their own territories, while Indians and Indochinese were
utilized as sources of both laborers for the front and fighting men by Britain and France in both
colony and metropole.
This course will examine the impact of the total war on the colonies and colonial subjects. From
the ways that resource provisioning triggered starvation and famine in the countries of the
Mediterranean, the recruiting methods used by imperial powers to rally support for the war cause
in the colonies, to the challenges of colonial concepts of race posed by Vietnamese soldiers in
the streets of Paris, we’ll explore the global nature of World War I in North Africa, Sub-Saharan
Africa, the Eastern Mediterranean, South Asia, Southeast Asia, and East Asia.
We’ll end with a discussion of the so-called “Wilsonian moment,” and the tensions that resulted
when promised nationalist aspirations were dashed at Versailles in 1919—tensions that would
remain unresolved until after the Second World War and the beginning of decolonization. What
had these nations-in-waiting expected to happen at Versailles, and why?
Objectives
     1. Students will gain an understanding of using different units of analysis—such as nation,
        region, and empire, and the advantages and disadvantages of each (scope and scale);
     2. Students will develop a greater understanding of the relationship between colonies and
        metropoles, and the ways in which the First World War intensified and altered these
        relationships;
     3. Students will understand the war’s impact—culturally, socially, and environmentally—on
        the regions studied in this class;
     4. Students will understand the importance of the Wilsonian moment at the end of the war,
        and the hopes that these inspired in the colonial entities that participated (and why);
     5. Students will understand how the drawn-down from World War I contributed to lingering
        issues that would eventually lead not only to World War II but also have ramifications for
        the era of decolonization.


Global Cultures Flag
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. Thus, a substantial part of the
course lectures and assignments will explore the practices, beliefs, and histories of non-U.S.
cultural groups, past or present.
                                      Attendance Policies
Tardiness
Anyone who arrives between 2 and 2:10 will be marked tardy; after that you will be marked
absent. Every three tardies count as an absence.
If there is an extenuating circumstance (i.e., you have another class immediately before ours and
have to run across campus), please let me know so that I don’t count this against you.
Absences
Absences happen. Students are allowed up to two no-questions-asked unexcused absences to
allow for doctor’s appointments, religious holidays, etc., without the need to disclose sensitive
private information.
Students who are absent—whether excused or unexcused—are responsible for material that was
covered that day, including notes from class. Class handouts will be posted on Canvas.
More than three absences will result in a 5% deduction from your overall class participation
grade per absence.
Attendance is required on the day of your final paper presentation; if there is a conflict
please let me know as soon as possible. E-mails simply alerting me to your absence the day of
will not be accepted without catastrophic extenuating circumstances.
Religious Holidays: UT-Austin policy (Section 51.911, Texas Education Code) requires that
you must notify me of your pending absence as far in advance of the date of the observance of a
religious holy day (including travel) as possible so that we can make arrangements to complete
assignments affected by your absence.
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your
needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus (see
“Campus Resources” below).
                                  Course Work and Grading
Course Requirements:
     •  Class participation: 20%
     •  Response papers: 30% (2 at 15% each)
     •  Research Project: 50% (divided)
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 2


Grades:
This course uses the College of Liberal Arts grading system: (A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-, D+,
D, F).
Late Work and Makeup Work:
Due dates will posted on the syllabus; if there are changes I will announce these in class and post
on Canvas.
All assignments are due on the date posted. If an extension is needed on any assignment you
may request one in writing before the original deadline. Please propose an alternate deadline
in your message (in other words, let me know when you think you’ll be able to turn it in). For
assignments submitted late without an approved extension the highest possible score will be
reduced by one letter grade for each day that passes between the deadline and submission.
Extensions on the final paper assignment will be difficult to grant due to the final grade
submission deadline on my end, however, if you are afraid that you will not be able to finish on
time please let me know and we will see what we can do.
Class Participation (20% of the final grade):
I firmly believe that students can learn from each other as much as they can from their
instructors, and, as such, I expect all students to participate in class discussion. This includes
asking questions during lectures, being prepared to discuss the readings, and participating in
small group work.
Under Reading Strategies, you will find suggestions for taking notes on the readings. I expect
you to bring these notes to class and be prepared to discuss them. I may select names at random
and ask you to begin a conversation based on your notes on that day’s readings—be prepared!
Response Papers (15% each)
You will write two 3-page thoughtful response papers to the readings. The first should cover the
readings on Labor and Mass Recruitment, and will be due on Monday, March 2. The second
will cover the readings on Cultural and Social Dimensions and Health, Medicine, and
Environment, and will be due on Wednesday, April 15. While you do not need to incorporate
all of the readings from each section (this would be nearly impossible in 3 pages), you should
draw connections in your responses to as many of the articles as you can.
Research Project (50%)
As you will no doubt notice, there are substantial gaps in the coverage of this course; in your
research project you will select a topic of interest to your own research and develop a research
project around it. Remember that the context of this course is colonies (and peripheral areas).
You are welcome to expand your research beyond those covered in the course to other colonial
or peripheral regions (i.e., Caribbean, Latin America, Australia, New Zealand, Canada), but your
project should not focus on members of the Entente or Central Powers (including the United
States). I encourage you to visit me during student hours to discuss your ideas before beginning
to develop your research proposal.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 3


Research Proposal 15%
A research proposal with literature review will be due before spring break. This should contain a
1-2 page identification of the issue that you wish to explore, how it fits into the subthemes of the
course, and your research hypothesis (i.e., what you expect your thesis to be). You should
include an annotated list of at least 5 sources (specific instructions will be given in class and
posted on Canvas).
Presentation of Research Paper 10%
You should be prepared to speak for 7-10 minutes about your research project to your colleagues
during the sessions indicated on the syllabus. Think of this as your chance to teach the class
about your topic. You do not have to have the paper done at this point, but you should use this as
a chance to get feedback from classmates and me on your project, so you should have enough to
say about your findings at this point (for point of reference, it should take 2 minutes to read a
double-spaced page of 12 point text, so you should have 4-5 pages of source material).
Critique of Colleagues’ Presentations 5%
Part of the presentation will involve listening to your colleagues and offering constructive
feedback on the nature of their research—this will be particularly important if your classmates
ask for assistance on a particular aspect. I would like these to be positive, and helpful. (A
template will be provided.) Each student will critique one presentation on the days that they are
not presenting themselves (for total of 3); I will assign these based on similarity of interest topic
where possible.
Research Paper 20%
The actual research paper will be submitted one week after the last day of class. It should be 10-
12 pages in length, using 12 point font and 1 inch margins. Please cite using the citation method
of your choice (my preferred method is Chicago, but use what you are comfortable with). A list
of works cited should be enclosed.
Extra credit
I do not believe in extra credit. Students who are putting in visible effort (even if they are
struggling), coming to office hours, participating in class, and turning in assignments throughout
the semester will find their effort rewarded in the calculation of their final grade.
Incompletes
A grade of Incomplete (X) will not be available in this course. If you are struggling to complete
readings and become concerned that you may not be able to finish the course successfully, please
let me know as soon as possible.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 4


Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use
words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your
sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action,
including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty
and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Please discuss any concerns you have regarding these policies with me and please understand
that “ignorance” is not a defense in plagiarism cases.
                                          Class Materials
Required texts
All of the texts for this course are articles or book chapters. I have posted them on Canvas; you
may also purchase them as a reading packet from UT Document Solutions (in the Union, just
past Panda Express). The packet costs $43.17 and is substantially less expensive than printing
material out one by one at the library.
Either way, I will expect you to have the reading with you when you come to class.
Reading strategies
Readings form a major component of this course. Most class sessions will be discussion-based;
lectures will illustrate the major points, or sometimes provide additional material that builds on
the readings. If you do not do the readings, you will be unable to participate.
No text is perfect. Engage with the author: do you agree with their argument? Does the author
leave you with unanswered questions? You are allowed to disagree with the authors (even when
the author is me!). Bring these notes to class and be prepared to discuss them.
I do expect that some of these readings will be tough to parse through—that’s fine. Part of what I
want to accomplish in this class is to help you learn how to work with this kind of material.
Please bring questions and comments (even if it’s “I didn’t understand this one.”)
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible for keeping the university informed about changes to your
e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently–at minimum twice a
week–to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
critical. You can find UT-Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 5


Contacting me
Please contact me with any questions, concerns, or issues that arise concerning this course,
assignments, grading, etc. I am happy to help in any way that I can. The easiest way to reach me
is by email.
I do have scheduled student hours – as the name implies, these are for you! Please come say
hello, let me know how the course is going for you, or brainstorm about your research project. I
encourage everyone to come visit with me at least once.
If my student hours conflict with your class schedule, I am also normally in my office on the 4th
floor of Garrison between 9 and 4 M-Th (I have a standing obligation between 12-2 on
Mondays); you are welcome to drop in with short notice. The floor has restricted access; call my
office number 512-475-9515 so that I can either come down to the 3rd floor office or let you in.
                                       Tentative Schedule
    (note: reading assignments are listed on the days I will expect you to have read them by.)
Tuesday January 21, 2020: Introduction to the Class
    •    No reading for today (obviously!)
                                        Imperial Dimensions
Thursday, January 23, 2020: The Global and Local War
    •    Rose, Christopher. “Grad School Survival Guide: How to Read.” Christopher S Rose
         (blog), May 15, 2019. https://christophersrose.com/2019/05/15/grad-school-survival-
         guide-how-to-read/.
         (This is a short piece that may help you develop reading skills to get through articles
         quickly and effectively. Full disclosure: this is on my personal website, which is not
         monetized in any way).
    •    Gregory, Adrian. “Globalising and Localising the Great War.” Transactions of the Royal
         Historical Society 27 (December 2017): 233–51.
Tuesday, January 28, 2020: The Imperial Framework
    •    Hopkins, A. G. “Back to the Future: From National History to Imperial History.” Past &
         Present, no. 164 (1999): 198–243.
Thursday, January 30, 2020: The Case for a Colonial Ottoman Empire
    •    Deringil, Selim. “‘They Live in a State of Nomadism and Savagery’: The Late Ottoman
         Empire and the Post-Colonial Debate.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 45,
         no. 02 (April 2003): 311-342.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 6


                                        Global Dimensions
Tuesday, February 4, 2020: The War in Africa and the Middle East
    •  Stapleton, Tim. “The Impact of the First World War on African People.” In Daily Lives
       of Civilians in Wartime Africa: From Slavery Days to the Rwandan Genocide, edited by
       John Laband, 113–37. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press, 2007.
    •  Khalidi, Rashid. “The Arab Experience of the War.” In Facing Armageddon: The First
       World War Experienced, by Hugh Cecil and Peter Liddle, 642–55. London: Leo Cooper,
       1996.
Thursday, February 6, 2020: The War in East Asia
    •  Xu, Guoqi. “China’s Great War.” In The World During the First World War, edited by
       Helmut Bley and Anorthe Kremers, 59–78. Essen: Klartext Verlag, 2014. (print only; on
       reserve in PCL)
    •  Dickinson, Frederick R. “Toward a Global Perspective of the Great War: Japan and the
       Foundations of a Twentieth-Century World.” The American Historical Review 119, no. 4
       (October 1, 2014): 1154–83.
                                  Labor and Mass Recruitment
Tuesday, February 11, 2020: Troops for the Glory of the Motherland
    •  Koller, Christian. “The Recruitment of Colonial Troops in Africa and Asia and Their
       Deployment in Europe during the First World War.” Immigrants & Minorities 26, no. 1–
       2 (March 2008): 111–33.
Thursday, February 13, 2020: Indentured Labor on the Front
    •  Bailey, Paul J. “Semi-Colonialism and Cultural Interaction: Chinese Indentured Labor in
       World War One France and the Sino-French Connection.” In From Early Tang Court
       Debates to China’s Peaceful Rise, edited by Friederike Assandri and Dora Martins, 111–
       20. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2009. (Hard copy only; on reserve in
       PCL).
Tuesday, February 18, 2020: Strangers in a Strange Land
    •  Hill, Kimloan. “Strangers in a Foreign Land: Vietnamese Soldiers and Workers in France
       during World War I.” In Việt Nam: Borderless Histories, edited by Nhung Tuyet Tran
       and Anthony Reid, 256–89. Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2006.
Thursday, February 20, 2020: What’s in it for us?
    •  Rogan, Eugene. “No Stake in Victory: North African Soldiers of the Great War: No Stake
       in Victory.” Studies in Ethnicity and Nationalism 14, no. 2 (October 2014): 322–33.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 7


Tuesday, February 25, 2020: Looking for Labor in all the Wrong Places
    •  Singha, Radhika. “Finding Labor from India for the War in Iraq: The Jail Porter and
       Labor Corps, 1916–1920.” Comparative Studies in Society and History 49, no. 2 (April
       2007): 412–45.
Thursday, February 27, 2020: Rethinking Coercion as a Recruitment Tool
    •  Anderson, Kyle J. “The Egyptian Labor Corps: Workers, Peasants, and the State in
       World War I.” International Journal of Middle East Studies 49, no. 1 (February 2017):
       5–24.
Monday, March 2, 2020: Response Paper 1 due
                                 Cultural and Social Dimensions
Tuesday, March 3, 2020: Race and Racism on the Home Front
    •  Fogarty, Richard S. “Race and Sex, Fear and Loathing in France during the Great War.”
       Historical Reflections / Réflexions Historiques 34, no. 1 (2008): 50–72.
Thursday, March 5, 2020: No class
Tuesday, March 10, 2020 (Purim): What’s in it for us (redux)?
    •  Akın, Yiğit. “War, Women, and the State: The Politics of Sacrifice in the Ottoman
       Empire During the First World War.” Journal of Women’s History 26, no. 3 (2014): 12–
       35.
Thursday, March 12, 2020:: Race and Racism on the War Front
    •  Bonnerjee, Samraghni. “‘This Country Is Rotten’: Australian Nurses in India during the
       First World War and Their Encounters with Race and Nationhood.” Australian Journal of
       Politics & History 65, no. 1 (2019): 50–65.
    •  Research Proposal Due
                                 Health, Medicine, Environment
Tuesday, March 24, 2020: Desperate Times
    •  Üngör, Uğur Ümit. “Orphans, Converts, and Prostitutes: Social Consequences of War
       and Persecution in the Ottoman Empire, 1914–1923.” War in History 19, no. 2 (April
       2012): 173–92.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 8


Thursday, March 26, 2020: Disease and War
    •  Shanks, G Dennis. “How World War 1 Changed Global Attitudes to War and Infectious
       Diseases.” The Lancet 384, no. 9955 (November 8, 2014): 1699–1707.
Monday, March 30, 2020: IHS Workshop, 12:00 – 1:30 (GAR 4.100)
    •  Attendance not required. I will be presenting a pre-circulated paper on World War I in
       Egypt for the Institute for Historical Studies, with Khaled Fahmy (Cambridge) as my
       respondent. Lunch will be served at the workshop. RSVP to Courtney Meador in the
       History Department (I will send info when available).
Tuesday, March 31, 2020: Famine and War
    •  Pitts, Graham Auman. “‘Make Them Hated in All of the Arab Countries’: France,
       Famine, and the Creation of Lebanon.” In Environmental Histories of the First World
       War, edited by Richard P. Tucker, Tait Keller, J. R. McNeill, and Martin Schmid, 1st ed.,
       175–90. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2018.
    •  Foster, Zachary J. “Why Are Modern Famines so Deadly? The First World War in Syria
       and Palestine.” In Environmental Histories of the First World War, edited by Richard P.
       Tucker, Tait Keller, J. R. McNeill, and Martin Schmid, 191–207. Cambridge: Cambridge
       University Press, 2018.
Thursday, April 2, 2020: Food and War
    •  Rose, Christopher S. “Food, Hunger, and Rebellion: Egypt in the First World War and Its
       Aftermath.” In Battlefields and Homefronts: Expanding Boundaries in Food and
       Warfare, 1840-1990, edited by Justin Nordstrom. Fayetteville: University of Arkansas
       Press, 2020. (Pre-press version).
Tuesday, April 7, 2020: Environment and War
    •  Sunseri, Thaddeus. “Forest Policy, Wildlife Destruction, and Disease Ecologies:
       Environmental Consequences of the First World War in Africa.” In Environmental
       Histories of the First World War, edited by Richard P. Tucker, Tait Keller, J. R. McNeill,
       and Martin Schmid, 1st ed., 231–54. Cambridge University Press, 2018.
                                         Post War Impact
Thursday, April 9, 2020 (Pesach/Maundy Thursday): They Know Too Much
    •  Jarboe, Andrew Tait. “The Prisoner Dilemma: Britain, Germany, and the Repatriation of
       Indian Prisoners of War.” The Round Table 103, no. 2 (March 4, 2014): 201–10.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 9


Tuesday, April 14, 2020: Getting the Troops Home
    •   Fogarty, Richard S., and David Killingray. “Demobilization in British and French Africa
        at the End of the First World War.” Journal of Contemporary History 50, no. 1 (January
        1, 2015): 100–123.
Wednesday, April 15, 2020: Response Paper 2 Due
Thursday, April 16, 2020: The Wilsonian Moment
    •   Omar, Hussein A. H. “The Arab Spring of 1919.” London Review of Books, April 4,
        2019. https://www.lrb.co.uk/blog/2019/april/the-arab-spring-of-1919.
Tuesday, April 21, 2020: Post-War Racial Constructions
    •   Stovall, Tyler. “National Identity and Shifting Imperial Frontiers: Whiteness and the
        Exclusion of Colonial Labor After World War I.” Representations 84, no. 1 (2003): 52–
        72.
Thursday, April 23, 2020 (beginning of Ramadan): Student Presentations 1
Tuesday, April 28, 2020: Student Presentations 2
Thursday, April 30, 2020: Student Presentations 3
Tuesday, May 5, 2020: Student Presentations 4
Thursday, May 7, 2020: Student Presentations 5 and Wrap Up
Thursday, May 14, 2020: Research Papers due by 10 pm.
                                   Policies and Resources
Campus Resources
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there
are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have
medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case
the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate,
also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
(video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Please note that you must provide me with your accommodation letter from the Services for
Students with Disabilities at the beginning of the semester.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 10


Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning
how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
 If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support:
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
     •  Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     •  Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     •  ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
                               Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
            1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
            2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
                harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
            3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 11


Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or
with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they
are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Campus Concealed Carry
See UT’s information page for responsibilities of concealed gun permit holders at
https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students.
My office gun policy is the same as that of the university: concealed means concealed. Please
visit the above page for more information.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
 •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
      Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
      building.
 •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
      first week of class.
 •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
      re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
      University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
HIS 366/ANS 361 Spring 2020 Syllabus | 12
