ACC 356                                                                                       Fall 2019
                    Financial Accounting Concepts and Research
                                        ACC 356 – Fall 2019
Professor:        Jeffrey Hales, PhD,
Office:           CBA 4M.244                                           Telephone: 512-471-5727
E-Mail:           jeffrey.hales@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Monday 11:00 am – 12:00 pm and by appointment.
Class Hours: 02545: M/W 8:00 – 9:15 am in GSB 3.138
                  02550: M/W 9:30 – 10:45 am in GSB 3.138
Teaching Assistant: Cassie Mongold
                          CBA 5.334Z
                          Cassie.Mongold@mccombs.utexas.edu
                          Wednesday 11:45 am – 12:45 pm and by appointment
Course Summary and Objectives
ACC 356 is the first in a three-course sequence of upper division/graduate financial accounting
courses in the integrated MPA program. The main objective of this course is to give you a
foundation in accounting concepts that prepares you for the two following financial accounting
courses, which cover advanced accounting topics (380K.1 and 380K.2).
The course is divided into three parts. The first part of the course introduces the Financial
Accounting Standards Board’s (FASB) Conceptual Framework. We begin by understanding the
objective of financial reporting and the concepts the FASB uses to set accounting standards for
U.S. entities. We will cover the definition and recognition of financial statement elements (i.e.,
assets, liabilities, equity, revenues, expenses). We will also explore how these elements are
initially and subsequently measured and presented in financial statements.
In the second part of the course, we will study a select number of actual accounting standards
under US GAAP, seeing how standard setters have addressed various issues in setting accounting
standards. These standards reflect some controversial areas in accounting.
In the last part of the course, we will consider how financial statements fit into the broader
landscape of corporate reporting. We will see the importance of the Conceptual Framework in
dealing with current accounting standard issues, evaluate some of the strengths and weaknesses
of financial statements, and discuss the additional types of mandatory and voluntary corporate
disclosures that are available to help investors make decisions.
Required Course Materials
1. Course Notes – Each week we will post class notes to Canvas that contain reading
    assignments, technical notes, and practice questions that require you to answer questions
    from the readings as well as apply this material. These notes will be an invaluable resource
    for the course.
2. Financial calculator – A calculator with time value of money capabilities is required.
                                                  -1-


ACC 356                                                                                        Fall 2019
The course notes and other materials are the intellectual property of the professors teaching this
course and are given to you, for free, on an individual basis only. You may not, in anyway, share,
distribute or post electronic, hardcopy or other versions of the class materials with other people
or on websites or other avenues of social media without explicit permission from the professor.
Posting or sharing materials, or even snippets of materials, will be considered a violation of our
University’s Academic Policies for all parties involved.
Recording Class
Recording all or any part of class without explicit written permission from the professor is
strictly prohibited. Violations will constitute a violation of the academic integrity policies of our
University and may lead to a failing grade in this class and legal prosecution.
Performance Evaluation
Course grades are determined by the following assessments.
                  Component                                                  Percent
                  In-class assignments                                        20.0%
                  Test 1                                                      25.0%
                  Test 2                                                      25.0%
                  Accounting case                                             15.0%
                  Reporting case                                              15.0%
                     Total                                                   100.0%
In-class assignments – Attendance is required. Numerous short quizzes and other types of
assignments will be given in class on an unannounced basis throughout the course. These
assignments will often cover basic concepts and should not be viewed as representative of exam
questions. No makeups will be given for items completed in class, but students may drop two
items completed in class.
Cases – Cases will be graded on the quality and completeness. When working in groups, your
discussions of the case should be limited to your group members only. No cases will be dropped,
and no late cases will be accepted.
Tests – There will be two tests. The dates and times are provided in the course schedule provided
within the syllabus. These dates are set and will not change, except if the University officially
closes on one of these days (which is an extremely unlikely event).
Grading
We will use plus/minus grading (A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, etc.) for this class. Consistent with the
MPA Program GPA guidelines, we will strive for an average GPA across all ACC 356 students
of 3.2-3.4. As such, I do not expect the letter grades to strictly follow traditional absolute
numerical cutoffs (e.g., a 90 percent or above being required for an A- or better). To be clear, the
MPA Program guidance is only a general guide and is in no way a limitation. Lower grades such
as Cs, Ds, and Fs are possible for underperformance and/or any academic integrity issues.
                                                  -2-


ACC 356                                                                                       Fall 2019
Canvas
Canvas. I will use Canvas to post important course materials, lecture notes, and announcements.
You can log on to Canvas at http://canvas.utexas.edu/. I will make course announcements
periodically through Canvas, so it is important that you have an active e-mail address with the
University.
Professional Conduct
The MPA program at Texas is one of the most highly regarded accounting programs in the
country. In order to preserve our reputation, our students must maintain a high standard of
professionalism at all times. Professional conduct, as it relates to this class, involves:
     1.  Arriving to class on time
     2.  Attending only the sections for which you are registered
     3.  Preparing for class in advance
     4.  Turning off and not using cell phones
     5.  Never using computers during class for anything other than note taking.
     6.  Keeping personal breaks during class to an absolute minimum
     7.  Attending class to learn
     8.  Refraining from side conversations or other disruptive behavior
     9.  Being respectful toward your fellow peers and the McCombs Faculty
I expect you to behave professionally. In return, you can expect that the TAs and I will strive to
provide you with the best accounting education possible.
Departmental Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the department’s Policy Scholastic Dishonesty. By teaching this course, I have agreed
to observe all of the faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this
class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described in that document.
If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way,
it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should
refer to the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the
General Information Catalog to access the official University policies and procedures on
scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
                                                   -3-


ACC 356                                                                                               Fall 2019
Application of Departmental Policy to this Course
One of the faculty responsibilities is “to communicate clearly in writing the instructions for each
assignment.” Following are the instructions for each type of assignment in this course.
In-class assignments – Unless otherwise instructed, in-class assignments are treated as
individual assignments. The only materials that are permitted are blank paper, pen or pencil, and
a calculator (when necessary). Students are prohibited from using words or formulas that are
stored in programmable calculators without the express permission of the instructor. Students
who have taken a quiz are prohibited from discussing the quiz with other students. This
prohibition applies to any students in any sections of this course. Violation of this policy will be
treated as an act of scholastic dishonestly.
Cases – For group assignments, you are allowed to consult with fellow group members for these
assignments and NO ONE ELSE. Copying solutions from any source is not permitted nor is
copying and then editing another’s work. Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of
scholastic dishonestly.
Tests – The tests are closed book and closed notes. The only materials that are permitted are blank
paper, pen or pencil, a calculator, if permitted. Students are prohibited from using words or
formulas that are stored in programmable calculators without the express permission of the
instructor. Students who have taken a test are prohibited from discussing the test with students
who have not yet taken the test. This prohibition applies to any students in any sections of this
course. Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of scholastic dishonestly.
    Under no circumstances should you use any materials (course packets, notes, etc.)
    obtained from students who have already completed this course. Such usage will
    constitute scholastic dishonesty for both borrower and lender.
    Evidence of any act of scholastic dishonesty will be forwarded to the Dean of
    Students with a recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the course.
Additional Disclosures
        Website Privacy Disclosure required by the University: Password-protected class sites
        are available for all accredited courses taught at The University. Syllabi, handouts,
        assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available within
        these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions
        and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters are a component of the
        sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must
        restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room
        1. For information on restricting directory information see:
        http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html
        Privacy in Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be
        aware that I will use a merged Canvas site for all sections of the course that I am teaching
        this semester. This will allow students in other sections to see that you are enrolled in the
        course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your
        email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have
        any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name
        from view of other students.
                                                      -4-


ACC 356                                                                                        Fall 2019
                                     Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                      Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives will be well served
by this course, that students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the diversity that
students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength
and benefit. Please let me know right away if this ever is not the case.
                                         Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                  Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to
observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed
to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
                                          Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by
the Office of Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
 • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
      evacuate buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
 • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
 • If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
 • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
 • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or online. In case of emergency,
further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                  -5-


ACC 356                                                                             Fall 2019
                  ACC 356 COURSE SCHEDULE
       DATE   DAY Session                              TOPIC
       28-Aug  W     1    Introduction
       2-Sep   M          LABOR DAY
       4-Sep   W     2    Overview of financial reporting
       9-Sep   M     3    Objective and characteristics
       11-Sep  W     4    Definitions of financial statement elements
       16-Sep  M     5    Performance reporting
       18-Sep  W     6    Recognition and measurement of financial statement elements
       23-Sep  M     7    Subsequent measurement and financial statement articulation
       25-Sep  W     8    Subsequent measurement and cash flow reporting
       30-Sep  M     9    Catch up / review
       2-Oct   W    10    EXAM 1
       7-Oct   M    11    Revenue recognition – the basics of ASC 606
       9-Oct   W    12    Revenue recognition under ASC 606
       14-Oct  M    13    Revenue recognition under ASC 606
       16-Oct  W    14    Revenue recognition under ASC 606
       21-Oct  M    15    Revenue recognition under ASC 606
       23-Oct  W    16    Fair value
       28-Oct  M    17    Investments in debt and equity securities
       30-Oct  W    18    Impairment of long-lived assets
       4-Nov   M    19    Restructuring obligations
       6-Nov   W    20    R&D and intangible assets
       11-Nov  M    21    Catch up / review
       13-Nov  W    22    EXAM 2
       18-Nov  M    23    Beyond financial statements
       20-Nov  W    24    Non-GAAP reporting
       25-Nov  M    25    Sustainability reporting
       27-Nov  W          THANKSGIVING
       2-Dec   M    26    Significant accounting policies
       4-Dec   W    27    Current accounting issues
       9-Dec   M    28    Catch up / Wrap up
                                       -6-
