CRP 386; ARC 386M
URBAN LAND INSTITUTE WORKSHOP
Professor Simon Atkinson
Background
This seminar encompasses the ULI Hines Urban Design Competition, but is also distinct from it.
It aims to develop principles and methods to address the development of a complex inner city
environment.
Particular points of focus are:
         1) the integration of community through place making;
         2) approaches to urban sustainability, through the design of accessible, long life, low
             impact and productive development;
         3) opportunity for all through the design of more inclusive environments;
         4) design interventions towards the “green” and resilient city;
         5) ability to evolve multi-disciplinary solutions based on teamwork;
         6) the exploration of creative finance as the means to bring about proposals that are
             both feasible and acceptable;
         7) and investigation of graphic techniques, “branding” and methods of communication to
             effectively represent proposals.
The seminar is based centrally around the competition, is a careful reflection on it, and
consideration of potential insights for practice, as well as production of a competition report.
Eligibility
This seminar is open to graduate students, and final year B.Arch students. Backgrounds of
participants may be in undertaking degrees in development finance, planning, architecture,
sustainable development, landscape architecture, urban design, historic preservation and related
disciplines.
There are three “entry gates” for eligibility: 1) a team member registered for the competition; 2) a
student who has previously undertaken the competition; 3) a student who takes on particular
responsibility to monitor the competition, and be an editor of the final report.
Program
     1. The Competition
         Engage in, or mentor, all aspects of the Competition. This requires a significant
         contribution to the decision making process of the team in determining approaches and
         solutions for the site(s) in the Competition brief. This means involvement in discussions
         with mentors and advisors, as well as team meetings. The ability to find ways to
         represent ideas, and to produce the entry submission is also fundamental, and an
         important aspect of learning. In summary, this involves a high level of daily commitment
         during the competition, help with a Goldsmith Hall exhibit, and a powerpoint showing the
         overall work and detail of the work of your team.
     2. The Reflection
         a)       i) Make a copy of your submission entry [paper + PowerPoint] for presentation
                  purposes. Make five [one or two line] statements of the particular contribution
                  your submission made to addressing the issues. Make five statements [one or
                  two line] of what you might have done differently upon reflection, or if there had
                  been more time.
                                                                                                     1


                  ii) if not a team member, you will undertake a special assignment related to the
                  processes, progress, and output of teams.
          b)      Undertake a critique of one of the other team entries, as assigned. This is a
                  written and verbal presentation. The critique should: provide an overview of the
                  given project; identify key criteria and features; consider particular merits of that
                  team’s approach; discuss areas where you are critical of the solution, or see that
                  it could be improved or brought out more strongly.
          c)      Review the entries of the four short listed teams. State briefly why you believe
                  they are the chosen four, and comment on their selection
     3. The Insight Report
          Prepare a report of the team entries to the competition, including the financial pro formas.
          Consider, as a part of this report, insights that may be drawn from the competition.
          Suggestions could include changes to the discipline and professions in light of the issues
          the competition teams were required to address. Students monitoring the competition will
          take on particular responsibilities in report production.
References
Barnett, J. City Design: Modernist, Traditional, Green, and Systems Perspectives, 2011.
Beatley, T. Biophilic Cities: Integrating Nature into Urban Design and Planning, 2010.
Chase, J., Crawford, M., Kaliski, J. Everyday Urbanism, 2008.
Condon, P. Seven Rules of Sustainable Communities: Design Strategies for the Post Carbon
        World, 2010.
Cooper Marcus, C. and Francis, C. People Places, 1997.
Gosling, D. The Evolution of American Urban Design, 2003.
Gosling, D., Gordon Cullen, 1996.
Hayden, D. The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public History, 1997.
Hillier, B. and Hanson, J. The Social Logic of Space, 1984.
Jacobs, A. and Appleyard, D. ‘Towards an Urban Design Manifesto’ in the Urban Design Reader.
        ed. Larice M. and McDonald, E. Routledge. 2007.
Jacobs, J. The Death and Life of Great American Cities, 1961.
Lynch, K. Image of the City, 1960
Lynch, K. Site Planning, 2012.
Lynch, K., Bannerjee, J., Southworth, M. City Sense and City Design: Writings and Projects of
        Kevin Lynch, 1995.
Peirce, N.R. and Johnson, C.W. Century of the City: No Time to Lose. The Rockefeller
        Foundation. 2008.
Rogers, R. Cities for a Small Planet, 1998.
Sennett, R. The Conscience of the Eye: The Design and Social Life of Cities, 1992.
Schedule
December 10                 Competition Team Entry
January 14 - 28             ULI Competition
The Seminar then meets at 6:30 pm Mondays
Feb 1                       Hang exhibit and submission of Powerpoint
Feb 4 & Feb 11              Critique of entries
Feb 18                      Judging and awards celebration
Feb 25                      Reflection and further critique
March 4                     Reflection and further critique
March 25                    Prepare a report of the team entries, and reflections and insights from the
                            competition. This work will continue until the report is ready for publication.
                                                                                                         2


Course Requirements
     - participation in all aspects of the Hines Urban Design Competition;
     - students are expected to have read background notes and readings posted on Canvas;
     - class meetings will take place in the form of a careful presentation of selected case
          studies requiring thoughtful discussion as the means to eliciting key principles informing
          the design of cities;
     - students will prepare a report of the competition. This will provide a clear graphic
          presentation of each of the team entries, supported by explanation and critical insight,
          and proposals for change that will positively impact the basis to inner city development.
Evaluation
The Seminar is divided into two parts: the competition (Part 1); and city case studies (Parts 2 & 3).
          1. Competition            70%
          2. Class Presentations 15%
          3. Final City Report      15%
Grading Policy
A/A-: excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual
ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and
techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. The work submitted exceeds required
drawings and models.
B+/B/B-: above average
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
The work demonstrates potential for excellence and is complete.
C+/C/C-: average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with
dedication or rigor. The work is nearly complete.
D+/D/D-: below average
Basic skills including graphic skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not at an appropriate
level. Student does not demonstrate the required skill and knowledge base. The work is
incomplete.
F: failure
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
assigned with excessive unexcused absences.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. The minimum penalty for more than three
unexcused absences is a full letter drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact the
instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class.
ADA Accommodations
Compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act is a policy of this course. Students with
disabilities may request accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
471.6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. If you are entitled to accommodations
                                                                                                        3


please let me know as soon as possible by providing your accommodation letter and discussing
with me the particular accommodations you will need.
Academic Integrity Statement
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.”
                                                                                                  4
