                         African-American Women’s Political Activism
                                             GOV 370K
                                       Unique Number 37715
                                              Fall 2019
                                    TuTh 11:00 am to 12:30 pm
                                             GAR 2.112
Professor
Tasha S. Philpot
tphilpot@austin.utexas.edu
4.140 Batts Hall
512-232-3681
Office Hours: TuTh 9:30 am to 11:00 am
Description
This course explores how Black feminism, as a guiding ideology, helps to explain how Black
women have functioned in the U.S. political system. In particular, this course dissects the roles
of race, gender, and class (and their intersection) in shaping African-American women’s
orientation towards politics and political participation. In doing so, the course begins with a
brief historical overview of the unique political, social, and economic position occupied by Black
women in America, followed by an examination of the historical writings of early Black female
activists. We will then critically examine the definition of “citizenship” as it relates to American
politics and how stereotypes of Black women’s sexuality have historically prevented them from
wholly benefiting from full citizenship and equal protection under the law. Next, we shift our
focus to how these persistent stereotypes influence current policy debates and restrict Black
women’s opportunities in electoral politics. Lastly, we explore the impact of Black women’s
activism in the areas of criminal justice, foreign policy, and the fight against sexual and domestic
violence.
Prerequisites
Six semester hours of lower-division coursework in government.
Required Text Books
There are two required text books for this course, both of which are available for free as an
eBook through www.lib.utexas.edu:
Collier-Thomas, Bettye, and V. P. Franklin, eds. 2001. Sisters in the Struggle: African American
Women in the Civil Rights-Black Power Movement. New York: New York University Press.
                                                   1


Hill Collins, Patricia. 2002. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the
Politics of Empowerment. New York: Routledge.
Required Course Packet
There is also a course packet for this course, which is available at Paradigm Books, 407 W. 24th
St., Austin, TX 78705, 512-472-7986.
Grading
Your grade will be based on two exams, leading class discussion, and several in-class
assignments/quizzes. The format for the two exams will be multiple choice and will cover the
lectures, films, and readings. Exams will NOT be cumulative. In the case of a conflict, please
notify me ahead of time so that we can make alternative arrangements. Without prior notification
and proper documentation, missed assignments and exams cannot be made up. NO
EXCEPTIONS. The weight of each assignment in determining your final grade is as follows:
Leading Class Discussion                 25%
Exam 1                                   25%
Exam 2                                   25%
In-Class Assignments/Quizzes             25%
A       93-100               B+      87-89            C+      77-79               D       60-69
A-      90-92                B       83-86            C       73-76               F       0-59
                             B-      80-82            C-      70-72
Leading Class Discussion
Working in groups of 2 or 3, students will choose a section on the syllabus and lead class
discussion. You can sign up for your section on Canvas. You will have ten minutes to present
an artifact to the class to look at and consider. You will explain how that artifact relates to your
topic. You will then lead the class discussion of that artifact. Your artifact may be:
     •  A couple of quotes;
     •  A chart or diagram;
     •  A set of images;
     •  A questionnaire that gets people thinking;
     •  A set of bullet points;
     •  Or ask classmates to generate their own artifact by writing for a few minutes about a
        question.
Note about Electronic Devices
                                                   2


Electronic devices (phones, laptops, tablets, mp3 players, etc.) may be used during class for
academic purposes only. Students disrupting the class because of their use of electronic devices
for non-academic purposes will be asked to leave class. Under NO circumstances may
electronic devices be used during quizzes or exams. Students using electronic devices during
quizzes or exams will be given a zero grade for that assignment.
Website
For class information and assignments please see the Canvas site at canvas.utexas.edu. Class
notes WILL NOT be on Canvas.
E-mail
No assignment is to be e-mailed to me. Also, I regularly check my e-mail, but sometimes I am
unable to respond quickly. Please allow one to two days for an e-mail response. In addition,
please limit your e-mails to questions about class topics. Any grievances involving the class must
be handled during my office hours. Please exercise proper e-mail etiquette (for etiquette tips see
https://www.netmanners.com/e-mail-etiquette-tips/). Finally, make sure to check the syllabus or
Canvas first before sending an e-mail. In many cases they will answer your question.
Excused Absences
An absence from class will only be excused if proper documentation is presented. In the case of
an illness you will need to produce a note from the doctor stating that you could not attend class
that day. Generic UHS slips will not be accepted. In all other cases you will need to provide
documentation from Student Emergency Services. In the case of planned activities, the
documentation must be presented to me at least a week before your scheduled absence. I will not
accept a planned activity as a valid excuse for an absence after the fact. In the case of
unexpected circumstances, the documentation must be turned in within a week of your return.
Expectations
Meeting the goals of the class requires three things—attendance, preparation and
professionalism.
Attendance: Although attendance is not mandatory, it is expected. Therefore, I find it
unnecessary to formally take attendance. Nevertheless, missing class will greatly affect your
grade. First, I frequently give pop quizzes and in-class assignments. Students that miss a
quiz/assignment will receive a zero. Second, exams are based on a combination of the course
readings, class lectures, and supplementary media presentations. Thus, missing class will greatly
affect your grade.
                                                  3


Preparation: Doing well in this class necessitates that students are informed and prepared.
Therefore, you will be expected to complete the readings prior to the first day we are scheduled
to cover that topic. This course covers a large amount of material in a short amount of time. If
you do not keep up with the readings, your grade will reflect it.
Professionalism: Remember that this is an academic environment. Therefore, I ask that you
minimize unnecessary disruptions. This includes (but it is not limited to) side conversations, cell
phone calls, bringing pets to class1, and the consumption of tobacco products2. I also ask that
you be proactive if any conflict occurs. This means notifying me ahead of time if you are unable
to meet the requirements of the course.
Ground Rules
Because this course will sometimes deal with sensitive material, it is imperative that we set a
series of ground rules.
    1. Respect others. There will be times when you disagree with an idea that has been
        presented to the class. Although you have the right to disagree with someone, you must
        remember to challenge the idea and not the person.
    2. Listen attentively. The purpose of this course is to present and discuss different ideas. In
        order to reap the benefits of such an exchange, you must be willing to pay attention to
        what others have to say.
    3. Think before you speak. Refrain from making broad, general, and/or unsubstantiated
        comments. Make sure that you use evidence and provide a rationale for your statements.
    4. Maintain the dignity of the academic environment. Your ideas should be presented using
        Standard English.
    5. Raise your hand. This helps to maintain order in the classroom and helps to ensure that
        everyone has a chance to talk.
    6. Be courteous. Refrain from interrupting or engaging in private conversation while others
        are speaking. Also, limit disruptive behavior, such as social media use, personal
        grooming, etc.
Procedures for Dealing with Grade/Evaluation Concerns
Grade/evaluation concerns will only be considered if the following procedure is followed:
All grade complaints must be TYPED and must clearly express the student’s specific concerns.
These written statements must be accompanied by citations of support from course materials, i.e.
readings, textbook, and/or lecture notes, in order to ensure accuracy. Written statements will not
be considered until one week AFTER the assignment is returned to students. This allows the
student time to reread his/her answers and think carefully about what improvements could have
been made. Grievances will not be considered once two weeks have passed. For example, if I
1
  The Elliott Rule
2
  The Mock-Hall Rule.
                                                  4


return a graded assignment on Monday, the student must submit a complaint BEFORE the
Friday of the following week. Once class is over on that Friday, no complaints will be considered
for that assignment. Since class time is limited, I will only deal with questions or concerns during
scheduled office hours. Finally, submitting a grade grievance will result in a complete re-grade
of the assignment.
University Code of Conduct
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Student Honor Code
As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.
Academic Dishonesty
According to the Institutional Rules, scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to,
cheating, plagiarism, collusion, and falsifying academic records. In the event that a student
violates the University policy on scholastic dishonesty, he or she will be subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Day Observance
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                    5


Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
    •  Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
       evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
       requires exiting and assembling outside.
    •  Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
       Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
       building.
    •  Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during
       the first week of class.
    •  In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    •  Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
       Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
       Services office.
    •  Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
    •  Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
       can be found at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Outline of Course Topics and Readings
I.     Introduction: Studying Black Women’s Activism
Reading:        Hill Collins, Patricia. 2002. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
                Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment. New York: Routledge.
                Chapter 9.
                Springer, Kimberly. 1999. “Introduction: African American women redefining
                activism for the millennium.” In Still Lifting, Still Climbing: African American
                Women’s Contemporary Activism, ed. Kimberly Springer. New York: New York
                University Press.
II.    Black Feminist Thought
Reading:        Hill Collins, Patricia. 2002. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
                Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment. New York: Routledge.
                Chapters 1 and 2.
                                                 6


             James, Stanlie M., Frances Smith-Foster and Beverly Guy-Sheftall, eds. 2009.
             Still Brave: The Evolution of Black Women’s Studies. New York: Feminist Press.
             Pp. 3-44.
             Guy-Sheftall, Beverly, ed. 1995. Words on Fire: An Anthology of African-
             American Feminist Thought. New York: The New Press. Pages 25-68.
III.  Black Women as Citizens
Reading:     Harris-Perry, Melissa. 2011. Sister Citizen: Shame, Stereotypes and Black Women
             in America. New Haven: Yale University Press. Chapters One and Two.
IV.   The Black Family
Reading:     Hill Collins, Patricia. 2002. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
             Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment. New York: Routledge.
             Chapters 8.
             Franke, Katherine M. 1999. “Becoming a citizen: Reconstruction Era regulation
             of African American marriages.” Yale Journal of Law and the Humanities 11(2):
             251-309.
V.    Civil Rights Activism
Reading:     Collier-Thomas, Bettye, and V. P. Franklin, eds. 2001. Sisters in the Struggle:
             African American Women in the Civil Rights-Black Power Movement. New York:
             New York University Press. Chapters Two, Four, and Six.
VI.   Black Power
Reading:     Collier-Thomas, Bettye, and V. P. Franklin, eds. 2001. Sisters in the Struggle:
             African American Women in the Civil Rights-Black Power Movement. New York:
             New York University Press. Chapters Twelve and Thirteen.
VII.  Activism through Work
Readings:    Hill Collins, Patricia. 2002. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
             Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment. New York: Routledge.
             Chapter 3.
                                              7


             Gill, Tiffany M. 2010. Beauty Shop Politics: African American Women’s
             Activism in the Beauty Industry. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. Chapters
             Two and Five.
VIII. Activism against Sexual and Domestic Violence
Reading:     Hill Collins, Patricia. 2002. Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
             Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment. New York: Routledge.
             Chapters 6 and 7.
             White, Aaronette M. 1999. “Talking Black, talking feminist: Gendered
             micromobilization processes in a collective protest against rape.” In Still Lifting,
             Still Climbing: African American Women’s Contemporary Activism, ed. Kimberly
             Springer, 189-219. New York: New York University Press.
             Irving, Toni. 2007. "Borders of the body: Black women, sexual assault, and
             citizenship." Women's Studies Quarterly 35(1/2): 67-92.
IX.   Demanding Justice in the Criminal Justice System
Reading:     Smith, Jennifer E. 1999. “ONAMOVE: African American women confronting
             the prison crisis.” In Still Lifting, Still Climbing: African American Women’s
             Contemporary Activism, ed. Kimberly Springer, 219-240. New York: New York
             University Press.
             Finzen, Margaret E. 2005. “Systems of oppression: The collateral consequences
             of incarceration and their effects on Black communities.” Georgetown Journal of
             Poverty Law & Policy XII (2): 299-324.
X.    Contemporary Cultural Politics
Reading:     Rebollo-Gil, Guillermo and Amanda Moras. 2012. “Black women and Black
             men in Hip Hop: Misogyny, violence and the negotiation of (White-owned)
             space.” The Journal of Popular Culture 45(1): 118-132.
             Armstrong, Edward G. 2001. “Gangsta misogyny: A content analysis of the
             portrayals of violence against women in rap music, 1987-1993.” Journal of
             Criminal Justice and Popular Culture 8(2): 96-126.
XI.   Electoral Politics
                                                 8


Reading:    Smooth, Wendy. 2006. “Intersectionality in electoral politics: A mess worth making.”
            Politics & Gender 2 (3): 400-414.
            Philpot, Tasha S. and Hanes Walton, Jr. 2005. “An historical election in context:
            The 2001 Atlanta mayoral election.” National Political Science Review 10: 43-
            53.
            Philpot, Tasha S. 2018. “Race, gender, and the 2016 presidential election.” PS:
            Political Science & Politics 51(4): 755-761.
XII.  Black Women and Public Policy
Reading:    Jordan-Zachary, Julia S. 2009. Black Women, Cultural Images, and Social
            Policy. New York: Routledge. Chapters Two and Six.
            Smooth, Wendy. 2011. “Standing for women? Which women? The substantive
            representation of women's interests and the research imperative of
            intersectionality.” Politics & Gender 7(3): 436-441.
            Marby, Marcus. 2007. Twice As Good: Condoleezza Rice and Her Path to
            Power. New York: Modern Times. Chapters Twelve and Thirteen.
                                             9


                            Course Schedule at a Glance
August 29                       Welcome and Introductions
September 3 – September 10      Introduction: Studying Black Women’s Activism
September 4                     Prof. Philpot’s Birthday
September 12 – September 17     Black Feminist Thought
September 19 – September 24     Black Women as Citizens
September 26 – October 1        The Black Family
October 3 – October 8           Civil Rights Activism
October 10 – October 15         Black Power
October 17 – October 22         Activism through Work
October 24                      Exam 1
October 29 – October 31         Activism Against Sexual and Domestic Violence
November 5 – November 7         Demanding Justice in the Criminal Justice System
November 12 – November 14       Contemporary Cultural Politics
November 19 – November 21       Electoral Politics
November 28                     No Class – Thanksgiving Break
November 26 – December 3        Black Women and Public Policy
December 5                      Exam 2
                                         10
