MODULES + MONOLITHS
ARC-s327R/s386M
Workshop and Seminar
UTSOA
Instructor: Juan Jofre Lora  OBJECTIVES
juanjofre@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By Appointment Part Seminar, part Workshop, Modules + Monoliths aims to explore the history and
                             future of the solid object. While current modes of operation, both digital and physical,
Tuesdays 4-7pm               prioritize planar construction, we will focus on mass. The aim is to develop a critical
SUT 2.112                    history of stereotomic processes and their potential future.
                             We will begin with a series of lectures and readings that explore the different base
                             building materials and the respective constructive methodologies that they engender.
                             Our goal is to uncover both the cultural reasoning and constructive logic that each
                             material created. We will trace each material across time to uncover lost techniques,
                             different working systems, and the rich projects that they produced. Readings will help
                             us question and contextualize the history and potential future of all of the techniques
                             we uncover.
                             Each student will select a single building or specific technique to study and analyse as
                             a critical reserch component. The aim of the research is to understand and be able to
                             reproduce the construction logic of the precedent in order to be able to project future
                             uses for the techniques explored.
                             As we build a more robust understanding of the different building techniques, we will
                             begin to deploy them to create contemporary objects. In doing so, we will be forced
                             to test and refine our understanding of each technique and potentially discover new
                             means to push it forward.
                             The course will be structured with two major deliverables, and two minor material
                             explorations; first, an analytical research article on a relevant historic case study or
                             process, and second, an exploration of a new cast object and module. In between,
                             students will undertake two small design exercises aimed at understanding gravity and
                             mass, and the process of building a complex mold. At the end of the semester, each
                             student will develop and produce their own monolithic structure.
                             WORKING METHODOLOGY
                             The course will be structured as a hybrid seminar and workshop. Each class will have
                             a mix of lectures, reading discussions, tutorials, and generative work time. We will
                             be learning through intellectual research and discussion, but also through the act of
                             making. These two different types of knowledge should inform each other and create
                             a productive synergy.
                             We will split our time between the seminar room and the shop, with an emphasis on
                             intellectual pursuits towards the beginning of the semester and physical production
                             in the latter half. Students will be encouraged to utilize digital fabrication tools as well
                             as traditional fabrication techniques and should be comfortable working in a shop
                             environment.
                             The course will have mandatory meetings on Tuesdays from 4-7pm. A large portion
                             of the grade is contingent on student participation and collaboration, as such, it is
                             essential that students come to class and participate in reading discussions.


MODULES + MONOLITHS
ARC-s327R/s386M
Workshop and Seminar
UTSOA
Instructor: Juan Jofre Lora  SCHEDULE
juanjofre@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By Appointment Wk 1 Tue 1|22     Introduction + Syllabus
                                               Modules + Monoliths Lecture
Tuesdays 4-7pm                        Readings The Medium is the Message, Marshall McLuhan
SUT 2.112                                      The Wall and the Books, Borges
                                               Monolithic Architecture, Machado, el-Khoury
                             Wk 2 Tue 1|29     History, Narrative + Monumentality
                                               Reading Discussion
                                               Research Topics Introduction
                                      Readings Learning From the Past, The Cannibal’s Cookbook,
                                               Brandon Clifford
                                               A Culture of Stone, Inka Perspectives on Rock,
                                               Introduction, Carolyn Dean
                             Wk 3 Tue 2|5      Monoliths, Megaliths, + Cyplopean Constructs
                                               Reading Discussion
                                      Readings Stone Architecture, Arches, Alfonso Acosella
                                               Drawn Stone, The Projective Cast, Robin Evans
                             Wk 4 Tue 2|12     Geometry of Stone
                                               Reading Discussion
                                               Projective Geometries Lecture
                                      Readings The Tell Tale Detail, Marco Frascari
                                               The Art of Japanese Joinery, Kiyosi Seike
                                               Wood Joints as an Expression of Aesthetic Values,
                                               Wood and Wood Joints, K. Zwerner
                             Wk 5 Tue 2|19     Wood, Jointry + Detail
                                               Reading Discussion
                                               Assemblies + Jointery Lecture
                                               Exercise 1 - Center of Gravity
                                      Readings Brick: A World History, Intro, James Campbell
                                               From the Photograph, Red Plenty, F. Spufford
                                               Living Bits and Bricks, Carlo Ratti
                                               About Building with Bricks, LRO
                             Wk 6 Tue 2|26     In Class Workday
                             Wk 7 Tue 3|5      In Class Workday
                             Wk 8 Tue 3|12     Bricks, Modules + Bits
                                               Reading Discussion
                                               Arches | Symmetries | Compression Lecture
                                      Readings Brick: A World History, Various, James Campbell
                                               The Function of Ornament, Moussavi, Kubo
                                               Ornament and Crime, Adolf Loos
                                               Ornament in Architecture, Louis Sullivan


MODULES + MONOLITHS
ARC-s327R/s386M
Workshop and Seminar
UTSOA
Instructor: Juan Jofre Lora  Wk 9 Tue        3|19              SPRING BREAK (No class)
juanjofre@utexas.edu         Wk 10 Tue       3|26              Bricks, Pattern + Ornament
Office Hours: By Appointment                                   Reading Discussion
                                                               Exercise 1 Due
Tuesdays 4-7pm                                                 Exercise 2 - Two Part Mold
SUT 2.112                                    Readings          Vers un Architecture, Le Corbusier
                                                               A Concrete Atlantis, Reyner Banham
                                                               The Material Without a History, Adrian Forty
                                                               Architecture and Technology: Two Centuries of
                                                               Creative Tension, Antoine Picon
                             Wk 11 Tue       4|2               In Class Workday
                             Wk 12 Tue       4|9               Research Presentations
                                                               Exercise 3 - Assemblage or Monolith
                             Wk 13 Tue       4|16              Concrete + Modernity
                                                               Reading Discussion
                                                               Exercise 2 Due
                                             Readings          Towards a Concrete Utopia: Architecture in
                                                               Yugoslavia 1948 -1980
                                                               Bunker Archeology, Paul Virilio
                                                               The Semantics of Exposed Concrete, Rejean
                                                               Legault
                             Wk 14 Tue       4|23              Concrete Monoliths
                                                               Reading Discussion
                                                               In Class Workday
                                             Readings          A Sculptors World, Isamu Noguchi
                             Wk 15 Tue       4|30              In Class Workday
                             Wk 16 Tue       5|7               Final Presentation
                             *Note: Schedule is tentative and subject to change.


MODULES + MONOLITHS
ARC-s327R/s386M
Workshop and Seminar
UTSOA
Instructor: Juan Jofre Lora  REQUIREMENTS
juanjofre@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By Appointment The course will make significant use of the Rapid Prototyping Facilities at UTSOA. For
                             that reason, it is mandatory that all students in the course sign up for the semester
Tuesdays 4-7pm               subscription plan and take the prerequisite course.
SUT 2.112
                             Students are required to have a laptop computer by the first day of class that is capable
                             of running high performance 2d and 3d software applications and meets or exceeds
                             the UTSOA recommended laptop’s performance, including:
                             Rhinoceros 5.0
                             Student licenses are available at the Rhino website.
                             You may also purchase a single-user, educational license at a discounted price online:
                             http://www.rhino3d.com/sales/order-na-std.htm
                             Grasshopper
                             A free plug-in for Rhino that can be downloaded from here:
                             http://www.grasshopper3d.com/
                             Adobe Design Standard CS6 or CC
                             The suite contains multiple pieces of Adobe software, including Photoshop, Illustrator,
                             InDesign and Acrobat, all of which you will use at some point in the semester. If you
                             have an earlier version of CS already (such as CS4 or more recent), it may be adequate
                             for the required coursework. You may purchase a student license at the Campus
                             Computer Store; for
                             MAC or Windows. Free 30-day trial versions of individual CS applications can be
                             downloaded online: http://www.adobe.com/downloads.html
                             There is also a Cloud-based monthly subscription.


MODULES + MONOLITHS
ARC-s327R/s386M
Workshop and Seminar
UTSOA
Instructor: Juan Jofre Lora  EVALUATION
juanjofre@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By Appointment Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than
                             grading in other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable
Tuesdays 4-7pm               elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived
SUT 2.112                    from a broader, more subjective set of issues.
                             Each assignment will be weighted based on its duration and complexity. Your work will
                             be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades will be distributed
                             at the completion of interim assignments and final portfolio submissions. Participation
                             and punctuality will be part of the grading equation.
                             The instructor and teaching assistant are available for any questions or concerns
                             throughout the semester.
                             GRADING SCALE
                             A/A- : excellent
                             The work submitted surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness,
                             verbal and visual ability, craft, and personal development. Student pursues ideas and
                             techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class.
                             B+/B/B- : above average
                             The work submitted is thorough, diligently pursued, and successfully executed.
                             Student pursues ideas and techniques presented in class and puts in effort to resolve
                             assignment. The work demonstrates potential for excellence and is complete.
                             C+/C/C- : average
                             The work submitted meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are
                             not pursued with dedication and/or the work submitted is incomplete. (Note: C- does
                             not meet the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree.)
                             D+/D/D- : below average
                             The work submitted does not address basic skills including graphic skills, verbal clarity
                             or presentation is not level appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required
                             conceptual and technical rigor expected and/or the work submitted is incomplete.
                             F: failure
                             Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable.
                             X: excused incomplete
                             Given for reasons of illness or family emergency. An incomplete is assigned after
                             consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices. Coursework must be completed prior
                             to the beginning of the following semester.


MODULES + MONOLITHS
ARC-s327R/s386M
Workshop and Seminar
UTSOA
Instructor: Juan Jofre Lora  ATTENDANCE
juanjofre@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By Appointment Attendance is mandatory. Most of our class meetings will be devoted to discussions,
                             exercises, and hands-on workshops, so regular attendance and active participation
Tuesdays 4-7pm               is expected. With 2 unexcused absences will lower by a full letter grade. Because
SUT 2.112                    our time in class is limited, promptness is important. If you are late for class, it is your
                             responsibility to make sure you have not been marked absent. Please contact the
                             instructor prior to class (juanjofre@utexas.edu) if you will be late or miss class.
                             Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you
                             miss an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a
                             religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within
                             a reasonable time after the absence. Please notify each of your instructors as far in
                             advance as possible prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to
                             observe a religious holy day.
                             STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
                             Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
                             documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
                             Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are
                             deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course
                             at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at
                             that time. Five business days before an exam the student should remind the instructor
                             of any testing accommodations that will be needed.
                             HONOR CODE
                             It is expected of every student to abide by the UT Honor Code. Dishonesty and/or
                             the poor treatment of your classmates will not be tolerated. The UT Honor Code (or
                             statement of ethics) and an explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism can
                             be found at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html
                             SAFETY + SECURITY
                             Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
                             evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
                             requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each
                             classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may
                             not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in
                             evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the
                             event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
                             re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
                             The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
                             To find more information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
                             procedures go to: www.utexas.edu/emergency


MODULES + MONOLITHS
ARC-s327R/s386M
Workshop and Seminar
UTSOA
Instructor: Juan Jofre Lora  RESEARCH TOPICS
juanjofre@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By Appointment The aim of the research project is to produce in depth knowledge of the historical
                             context and construction process of a specific building. Each student will be tasked
Tuesdays 4-7pm               with becoming an “expert” on their selected building and presenting their findings to
SUT 2.112                    the rest of the class. The research should deal with three specific components; the
                             historical context of the project, the technical and construction processes utilized for
                             its construction, and its adaptation for current use.
                             First, it needs to establish the history and lineage of the project to be able to contextualize
                             its inception. What projects or technological innovations preceeded the project and
                             allowed for its development? How does it fit into a narrative of progress? Why was it
                             culturally significant?
                             Second, it must address the specific construction methods and challenges associated
                             with its development at the time. How did these developments further the field? What
                             innovations where achieved during its construction?
                             Finally, it needs to propose how those techniques could be applied or modified with
                             today’s technologies to produce new projects. Does digital technology facilitate the
                             production of a similar project? Or does it “naturally” produce a simplified version? How
                             can modern technology be utilized to reduce labor? Or can it?
                             There is no specific format for the research, but it must include both a written component
                             and any necessary visual imagery and explanatory diagrams. Students are encouraged
                             to develop their own diagrams and drawings to help explain the methods utilized.
                             The final submission will be a digital presentation to the class and an accompanying
                             physical copy with footnotes and references.
                             Potential Topics
                             Baths of Caracalla
                             Baths of Diocletian
                             Colossus of Constantine, Acrolithic Sculpture
                             Osaka Castle Stone Walls
                             Governor’s Palace, Uxmal
                             Cappadoccia Caves
                             Badami Chalukya Temples
                             Alhambra Dome
                             Halle Au Ble, Nicolas Le Camus
                             St. Genevieve Crypt Vaults, J.G. Souflott
                             San Carlo alle Quattro Fontane, Francesco Borromini
                             Grundtvig’s Church, Peder Vilhelm Jenser Klint
                             Spaarndammerbuurt Het Schip, Michel de Klerk
                             Brion Cemetery, Carlo Scarpa
                             Candelaria Metro Station, Felix Candela
                             Zarzuela Racetrack Stands, Eduardo Torroja
                             *Students may suggest any other research topic, to be approved by instructor
