                 INTRODUCTION TO
 NATIVE AMERICAN HISTORIES
 Prof.: Brad Dixon           MWF
 HIS 317L / AMS 315          2:00 p.m. to 3:00 p.m.
 Spring 2019                 RLP 0.126
Your map for this course.
This course will cover the
histories of the Native peoples of
North America from the earliest
times to the present day. First
and foremost, it will introduce
you to the unique and specific
histories of indigenous peoples
and nations in North America. In
the process, you will learn about
their     cultures,     languages,
religions, political and economic
systems, gender relations, and
the internal dynamics that helped
propel their histories. The course
will also consider the effects of
colonialism in great detail,
connecting students with various
Native American perspectives on
familiar colonial and United
States history.
Native American maps like the Catawba Map (1721) above, charted
relationships between people. Think of this syllabus in the same way—as your
guide to the people (and resources) who will help you get the most out of the
course.


                               Signatories to the Treaty of Middle Plantation,
                                    1677, UK National Archives, Kew.
                                 Center: The Pamunkey Frontlet, ca. 1677.
What are my obligations in class?
Be sure to arrive each day before our start time of
2:00 p.m. Keep your phones off and out of sight. If
you take notes using your computer or tablet,
please sit in the first two rows of the classroom. We
ask that you refrain from using your device for
anything other than note-taking. No email, social
media, or web-surfing please.
Come to class prepared. Do the assigned readings
beforehand and be ready with points for discussion.
Take notes during class. The lectures and
                                                                            Samson Occom (Mohegan)
discussions will differ from the textbook reading.
                                                                     What will we read?
How can I get the most out of this
course?                                                              Your main textbook is Collin G.
                                                                     Calloway’s First Peoples: A
Native American History rich field that opens up                     Documentary Survey of
                                                                     American Indian History, 5th ed.
many intellectual possibilities to the student.                      New York: Bedford/St. Martin’s,
                                                                     2016.
1.  Read critically and take notes on your reading.
2.  Be open to different perspectives on history.                    In addition a number of primary
3.  Visit the library and take advantage of its                      and secondary sources will be
    resources for in-depth exploration of topics you                 available online through Canvas.
                                                                     Think of the textbook as a guide
    care about.                                                      to help you understand the other
4.  Ask questions in class and participate in                        readings in context.
    discussions.


How can I contact my                                            Office Hours
professor or teaching
assistant?                                                     Brad Dixon
                                                                  GAR 4.120
bradley_dixon@utexas.edu
                                                         Mon., 3:00 – 5:00 p.m.
jmichaelheath@gmail.com                                Fri., 11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.
You may also contact us through                               Justin Heath
Canvas’s message application, in                                PCL 5th Floor
person before and after class for brief
questions, or during our weekly office
                                                  (Near windows facing the Blanton)
hours (listed to the right).                          Mon., 11:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.
                                                         Wed., 9:00 a.m. – noon
Who is my instructor?
Brad Dixon: My research focuses on the experiences of Native Americans early
modern Southeast fighting for their rights and sovereignty who were vassals,
subjects, and tributaries of European empires and how they used the law to
make claims within those empires.
Who is my Teaching Assistant?
The Teaching assistant grades assignments and is your first resource for
questions and concerns. Your teaching assistant is a historian working on the
history of religions and missions in Latin America.
  Gun Office Policy               In accord with University
  regulations, I choose to prohibit firearms of any sort from        “Let this therefore
  my private university office (Garrison Hall Room 4.126).           assure you of our
  Anyone unwilling to abide by this rule may make                    loves…if you would
  arrangements to meet with me elsewhere.                            come in friendly
  Campus Carry Policy If you are licensed to carry a                 manner to see us, and
  concealed weapon and bring one to class, it must remain            not thus with your
  concealed at all times. If I see or another student sees a gun,    guns and swords as to
  or if I hear or a student hears another student talking about      invade your foes.”
  carrying a gun, I will report the matter to the University
  Police (as per President Fenves’s instructions to the faculty).    -- Wahunsonacock,
  If you see another student either carrying a gun or speaking       Mamanatowick of
  about carrying one, I urge you to contact me, or call the          Powhatan to John
  campus Behavioral Concerns Advice Line (512-232-5050).             Smith, 1608.
  The caller can remain anonymous.


How is my performance assessed?
Student grades will be based upon a number of assignments, including two exams.
REMEMBER: Please purchase at least two blue books at the start of the semester in
preparation for the exams. Do not forget your blue books on exam day.
The Midterm exam will follow a two-part format:
Part I: Short Answer Identification Terms (20%). At the beginning of the exam
period, the instructor will display ten terms for students to identify. Students will select any
five terms of their choice from the list of ten and provide short answers of roughly two to
three sentences each. A correct answer identifies what the term means and states its
significance to the overall course.
Part II: Short Essay (80%). Three short essay questions will circulate in a study guide one
week prior to each exam date. Students should prepare outlines for at least two prompts that
they would prefer to answer. On the day of the exam, the instructor will roll the dice to select
two of the three prompts. Students will then choose one of the selected prompts to answer.
Responses should be in the form of any essay. Good essays will draw in materials from the
lectures, discussions, and primary source readings to answer the question.
The Final Exam will follow an essay format: One week prior to the final exam, the
instructor will circulate a final exam study guide with five possible prompts. On the day of the
exam, the instructor will roll the dice to select two of the three prompts. Students will then
choose one of the selected prompts to answer. The final exam essay prompts will draw from
themes students have encountered throughout the course. The final exam is the students’
opportunity to synthesize what she has learned throughout the course.
                                                                               Red Cloud woman in
  Grade     Cutoff                                                             a beauty shop, 1941
  A        94-100%            Grading Guide
  A-       90-93%              Assignment         Grade %
  B+       87-89%
                        Map Quizzes               5%
  B        84-86%
                        Challenge Statements      10%
  B-       80-83%
  C+       77-79%       Primary Document Analysis 15%
  C        74-76%
                        Midterm Examination       20%
  C-       70-73%
                        Online Journal            20%
  D+       67-69%
  D        64-66%       Final Examination         30%
  D-       60-63%
  F        0-60


What is our make-up policy for exams and other
assignments?
In the event your are unable to be present for an assignment, please
inform us in advance if possible. With a documented absence or illness,
we can schedule a make-up examination or make alternative
arrangements.
                                                     Never Miss a Due Date
                                                      …with our handy guide!
                                                CS 1: February 1, 2019
                                                CS 2: February 15, 2019
                                                Midterm Exam: March 8, 2019
                                                CS 3: March 1, 2019
                                                CS 4: March 15, 2019
                                                CS 5: April 1, 2019
                                                CS 6: April 22, 2019
                                                Prim. Source Analysis: April 26,
                                                2019
                                                Final Exam: TBA
   What is the appeals process for grading?
   Before making an appeal about the grade you received on an
   examination, please wait 48 hours before beginning the process.
   This will give you time to look closely over your work and the
   grader’s comments. If you wish to have your grade altered, please
   submit a 500-word statement explaining why you should receive a
   higher grade to the teaching assistant and the professor. We will
   then schedule an office-hours visit to discuss the appeal and
   provide a resolution.


What are Discussion Readings                                            Challenge
and Flashback Friday Readings?                                         Statements
                                                             Being able to read, digest, and
Throughout the course, we’ll read selected works             analyze a large amount of written
by historians and other scholars and then discuss            information in a short time is a
them in class. To help you improve your reading              valuable skill in every profession.
and analytical skills, you will write summaries or,          With Challenge Statements, you’ll
Challenge Statements, for some of these works.               learn to distill the main idea of a
                                                             discussion reading into a 50-word
                                                             summary.
On Flashback Fridays, we’ll open a cache of
documents online and sift through them to answer             You will receive a grade of 0, 1
your questions about that day’s theme. These                 (satisfactory), or 2 (outstanding) for
exercises are specifically designed to prepare you           each Challenge Statement. You will
for your own Primary Source Analysis.                        have 6 Challenge Statement
                                                             assignments, uploaded to Canvas by
                                                             11:59 p.m. on the due date. Grades
What’s a primary source?                                     will be assessed as follows:
A primary source is an original document                      8 pts = 100                4 pts = 80
produced by historical actors and studied by                  7 pts = 95                 3 pts = 75
                                                              6 pts = 90                 2 pts = 70
historians. Primary sources can include
                                                              5 pts = 85                 1 pts = 65
everything from videos to manuscripts.                                       0 pts = 0
                                      Discussion Reading Strategies
                                      You’ll be reading a lot in this class but we’ll teach you
                                      strategies to read more and get more out of what you
                                      read. Essentially, you’ll learn to read more like a
                                      graduate or professional student than an
                                      undergraduate. That means reading with goals or
                                      questions in mind. Here are the basic questions to
                                      get your started:
                                      1. What is the author’s Main Idea?
                                      2. What are the Sources the author uses and the
                                          Method she employs to analyze them?
                                      3. How does the author address the
                                          Historiography, or the ongoing conversation
                                          with other scholars on this topic?
                                      4. What is the Chronological Scope and
                                          Geographic Scale of the work? In other words
                                          what is the time period and area covered in the
                                          reading?
                                      5. What is the Impact of the author’s argument—on
                                          the historiography, on your interpretation of the
                                          subject?


TimePortal
Analysis of a Primary Source
Detail from the petition of John Hiter, Chowan Indian, c. 1705
How will the assignment work?                                     Key Questions
The laws of physics prohibit time travel but                     Who wrote the document
historical documents bring us close to the past. You             and why?
will select a primary source from a time period,
place, or people that has attracted your attention               What does the language
                                                                 and approach suggest? Is
during the course. You might select a set of                     the document internally
photographs, a treaty, a petition, a letter, or a map.           consistent?
It’s up to you. Be sure to consult with the professor
and teaching assistant about your choice.                        How does the document
                                                                 fit in its wider context?
The full assignment and a detailed rubric will be
                                                                 How does the document
available on Canvas.                                             affect you?
Where can I find primary sources?
On-campus centers and archives with materials related to Native American
history include the Benson Latin American Collection, the Briscoe Center for
American History, and the Harry Ransom Center. For online resources, a good
place to start is the UT Libraries page. UT has access to a number of digital
archives containing materials relevant to Native history. Below is a selection of
resources available to you. A complete guide will be available during class.
For expert support, contact PG Moreno, UT’s Native American and Indigenous
Studies Librarian. Check out his website for more resources.
 Selected UT Libraries Databases                      From Around the Internet
•  American Indian Histories and Cultures          • Southeastern Native American
•  North American Indian Thought and Culture         Documents, 1730-1842
•  Digital Public Library                          • Plains Indian Ledger Art
•  Sabin Americana                                 • Treaties Between the U.S. and Native
•  Early Encounters in North America                 Americans (Avalon Project)
                                                   • American Indians of the Pacific
                                                     Northwest Collection


               Masthead from the Cherokee Phoenix & Indians’ Advocate, 1831.
       May 2019 Issue of Fourth Part of the World
You will publish an issue of
an online magazine!
At the end of this course, you will have a
publication in an online journal exploring
the intersections of Native American and
African American history and other unique
topics in North American history.
How will it work?
You’ll be part of a team of roughly 4 students
who will be responsible for producing either
an article (1,500 words maximum), a spread
of shorter articles and photos, a 5-6 minute
video, or an interview related to Native
American and Indigenous history. Detailed
guidelines will be available the third week of                  Sampling of
class.
                                                       Native News Outlets
Who is my editorial advisor?                               Indian Country Today
                                                           Chickasaw.tv
Graduate students from UT-Austin, who are                  Mvskogee Media
working on topics in Native American                       Navajo Times
history, will serve as your editorial advisors,            Sho-Ban News
working with your teams to plan, research,
write, and hone your pieces for the journal.


  Course Schedule
                                                              The ”Woodhenge,” at
                                                              Cahokia, depicted here
                                                              at the winter solstice,
                                                              likely served as a solar
                                                              calendar. Artist’s
                                                              rendering.
 Ancient and Medieval America
Week One. Introduction to Native American Histories
Wednesday, January 23rd, “Introduction to Native American Histories.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Introduction: American Indians in American
History,” pp. 1-13. Primary Source: Native American Languages. (In-Class
Audiovisuals.)
Friday, January 25th, “Native Americans and Their Histories.” Flashback Friday:
Images of Native American Cosmoi. (In Class.)
Week Two. Histories of Turtle Island: Ancient North America
Monday, January 28th, “Diverse, Populous, Urban: North America to 1491.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 1: American History before
Columbus,” pp. 14-39; Calloway, FP, “Picture Essay: Early American Cities,
Settlements, and Centers,” pp. 62-68. Discussion Reading: Richter, Ch. 1, Before
the Revolution (Available on Canvas.)
 Wednesday, January 30th, “Transatlantic Exchanges:
 The Making of ‘Early Modern’ North America.”
 Flashback Friday (early edition): Tobacco,
 Chocolate, and Cassina: From Sacred Items to Saleable
 Commodities. Images and aromas of Native goods from
 North America. (In-class.) Facilities permitting we will
 brew cassina tea—from the leaves of the yaupon holly—
 during the class with discussion of yaupon’s other role in
 the Black Drink.
 Friday, February 1st, NO CLASS. CS #1 due.                 Craig Style Gorget, 1200-1350 CE
                                                                Spiro Mounds, Oklahoma.


Invasions and Adjustments
Week Three. European Invasions of North America
Monday, February 4th, “Mexico: Conquest and Its Effects
with Some Comparisons.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 2: The
Invasions of America, 1492-1680,” pp. 72-82.
Wednesday, February 6th, “Tsenacommacah, Apalachee,
the Pueblos, and the Caddos.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 2,” pp. 90-
100. Flashback Friday: Petition of Apalachee Caciques,
1688; and Petition of Chickahominy Indians, 1689.
(Available online.)
Friday, February 8th, “Fourth Part of the World: Special
Projects in Native American History.” (In-Class)
                                                              Tupac Amaru I, 1545-1572,
                                                               painting ca. 18th Century.
Week Four. The Indians’ New World
Monday, February 11th, “Three Seventeenth-Century Revolutions: King Philip’s War,
Bacon’s Rebellion, and the Pueblo Revolt.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 2,” pp. 87-90, 100-104, 121-126.
Wednesday, February 13th, “Indians, Politics, and the Law in Colonial America.”
Discussion Reading: Martha McCartney, “Cockacoeske, Queen of
Pamunkey: Diplomat and Suzerain,” in Powhatan’s Mantle, available on Canvas; The
Treaty of Middle Plantation (1677), available on Canvas.
Friday, February 15th, “Indian Slavery and the Indian
Slave Trade.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 3: Indians
in Colonial Worlds, 1680-1763,” pp. 138-149.
Flashback Friday: Tuscarora Petition to Pennsylvania
authorities, 1710. (Available as pdf on Canvas.) CS #2 Due.
        Seneca representation of captive-taking, ca. 1666         Matoaka, ca. 1616


Empires and Cosmopolitans
                       Four Indian Kings, (Mohawks), Jan Verelst, 1710.
Week Five. Natives in the Atlantic World
Monday, February 18th, “Indigenous Cosmopolitans.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Picture Essay: Atlantic Travelers: Indians in
Eighteenth-Century London,” pp. 188-193.
Wednesday, February 20th, “Native Religions and Religious Revivals.”
Friday, February 22nd. SPECIAL CLASS EVENT. Please attend the lecture by our special
guest, Alejandra Dubcovsky, today (Location TBA). This is an opportunity to earn extra
credit. Event Reading Assignment: Alejandra Dubcovsky, “‘All of Us Will Have to Pay
for These Activities’: Colonial and Native Narratives of the 1704 Attack on Ayubale,” Native
South, Vol. 10 (2017): 1-18. (Available through Project Muse.)
Week Six. Empires: Native and European
Monday, February 25th, “The Treaty Grounds: Negotiating Alliances and
Talking Politics in the Eighteenth Century.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 3,” pp. 149-155.
Wednesday, February 27th, “Comanches, the Haudenosaunee, and Other
Native ‘Empires.’”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 3,” 155-172.
Discussion Reading: Pekka Hämäläinen, “The Rise and Fall of Plains Indian
Horse Cultures,” The Journal of American History, Vol. 90, No. 3 (Dec., 2003):
883-862 (Available through JSTOR.)
Friday, March 1, “Native American Women in the Age of Empire.”
Flashback Friday: Documents related to Mary Musgrove (Available on
Canvas.) CS #3 Due.


 Revolutions and Removals
 Week Seven. Native American Revolutions
 Monday, March 4th, ”Indigenous Revolutions and
 the American Revolution in Native America.”
 Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 4,”
 pp. 200-213. Primary Sources: Selections from the
 Prophets: Neolin, Tenskwatawa, Tecumseh, and the
 Red Sticks. (Available on Canvas.)
 Wednesday, March 6th, “Dealing with the ‘Great
 Father’: Indian Nations and the Early United States.”
 Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 4,”
 pp. 214-232.
 Friday, March 8th, Midterm Examination
                              Tenskwatawa, Prophet of the Shawnees.
Week Eight. Indian Republics and the Early Republic
Monday, March 11th, “Change and Native Activism in the Northeast.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 5: American Indians
and the New Nation,” pp. 254-281.
Discussion Reading: Nancy Shoemaker, “Mr. Tastego: Native American Whalemen in
Antebellum New England,” Journal of the Early Republic, Vol. 33, No. 1 (Spring 2013): 109-132.
(Available through JSTOR.)
Wednesday, March 13th, “The ‘Five Civilized Tribes’ of the South: Case Studies.”
Friday, March 15th, “Indian Removal, Slavery, and U.S. Expansion.”
Flashback Friday: Selected documents of Cherokee, Choctaw, Chickasaw, Creek and Seminole
Removal. (Available in pdf format on Canvas.) CS#4 Due.
Week Nine – Spring Break – No Class – March 18th through 22nd


                                              Ely S. Parker (Seneca),
                                          on the staff of Gen. U.S. Grant.
Week Ten. Facing East from the Trans-Mississippian West
Monday, March 25th, “Encounters from the Mississippi to the Pacific.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 5,” pp. 282-286.
Wednesday, March 27th, “Slavery and Nation in Indian Territory after Removal.”
Special Guest: Dr. Nakia D. Parker, The University of Texas at Austin.
Friday, March 29th, “The American Civil War and Reconstruction in Indian
Country.”
Discussion Reading: Lawrence M. Hauptman, “Chapter 4: River Pilots and
Swamp Guerillas: Pamunkey and Lumbee Unionists,” in Between Two Fires:
American Indians in the Civil War, pp. 65-85. Flashback Friday: The Cherokee
Declaration of Causes, 1861. (Source: Cherokee Nation.)


Struggles for the Continent
Week Eleven. At the Heart of the World
Monday, April 1st, “Resisting Westward U.S. Expansion I: Native Peoples and
Texas.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 6,” pp. 310-335. CS #5 Due.
Wednesday, April 3rd, “Resisting Westward U.S. Expansion II: Fight for the
Black Hills.”
Friday, April 5th, “Indigenous Cartography and Astronomy.” Flashback
Friday: Maps and Land Records. (In-Class)
Week Twelve. Confinement, Reservations, Allotment, Citizenship
Monday, April 8th, Editorial Meetings with Your Editorial Advisors for Fourth
Part of the World (online magazine).
Wednesday, April 10th, “Histories of Confinement: Reservations, Boarding
Schools, and the Resistance to Attacks on Native Cultures.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 7,” pp. 378-413.
Friday, April 12th, “Changing Relationships, Shifting Grounds: From Allotment
to Citizenship.” Flashback Friday: Pictures from Carlisle Indian School.


Change and Renewal
Week Thirteen. Midcentury Transformations
Monday, April 15th, “The Indian New Deal and the Second World War.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 8,” pp. 444-455, 492-498.
Wednesday, April 17th, “The Termination Era.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 8,” pp. 455-459.
Friday, April 19th, “Urban Indians.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 8,” pp. 460-470, 481-485. Flashback
Friday: Flashback Friday: Vine Deloria, Jr., “Ch. 7: Indian Humor,” in Custer Died for
Your Sins (Available on Canvas.)
Week Fourteen. The Fight for Sovereignty.
Monday, April 22nd, “Native American Activism and Leadership in the 1960s and ‘70s.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 9,” pp. 502-534. CS #6 Due.
Wednesday, April 24th, “‘Blood Struggle’: Rebuilding Nations after Termination.”
Friday, April 26th, “Sovereignty, Land, Resources, and the Environment.” Flashback
Friday: “Pamunkey and Mattaponi Wrestle with Fishing Rights in Virginia,” Indian
Country Today, 2014 (Available online.) Primary Source Analysis Due.


Week Fifteen. Nation to Nation.
Monday, April 29th, “Economics and Gaming.”
Background Reading: Calloway, FP, “Chapter 10,” pp. 572-617.
Wednesday, May 1st, “Native American Nations and the States.”
Friday, May 3rd, “NAGPRA, Repatriation, and Fights for Native History.”
Flashback Friday: Documents and Articles Related to Protests and Human Remains at Fort
Neoheroka in North Carolina (Available on Canvas.)
Week Sixteen. Indian Country in the Twenty-first Century
Monday, May 6th, “From Voting to Climate Change to Water: Current Political and
Constitutional Issues in Native America.”
Wednesday, May 8th, “The Rights of American Indians in a Global Context.”
Friday, May 10th, “The Sweep of Native American History: Some Tentative Conclusions.”
Flashback Friday: Indigenous Futures: Native Voices in Speculative and Science Fiction
(Available on Canvas.)


University Policies



