History 317, Introduction to American Indian History                                                        Fall 2019
Dr. E. Bsumek, Office: GAR 2.104 C
Unique: AMS 30525, HIS 38095
Office hours: Friday 1:00-3:00 and/or by appointment.
475-7253, email: embsumek@austin.utexas.edu
Meeting times: M,W,F 10-11am
Meeting Place: GAR 0.102
TAs: TBA
*Syllabus is subject to change.
Kevin Red Star (Crow), “Tea Party” 1986        Silver Horn, 1840-41, Black Bear Died Jeffery Gibson (Choctaw/Cherokee), Alive, 2016
Mapping Resource: https://native-land.ca/
Interactive Map: Land and Native Americans
Course Description: This survey course will examine the history of Native American societies in North
America from the earliest records to the present. We will explore the diverse ways in which Indian societies
were structured, the different ways that indigenous peoples have responded to colonization and the complex
history of European/Indian relations. Attention will be paid to political, social, economic and cultural
transformation of Native American societies over time. We will cover, among other things, the following
topics: disease, religion, trade, captivity narratives, warfare, diplomacy, removal, assimilation, education, self-
determination, gaming, as well as race and gender relations.
My aim is for students to Engage with material; be able to place the people, places and events we study
within a broader Context; be able to fully Historicize people, places, and events; and finally, to Organize
the material we cover in a historical narrative in papers, exams, and short writing assignments. I will also draw
comparisons with contemporary events as they occur.
To meet U.S. History Core Component requirements, this course will help students develop their critical
thinking and communication skills. Students are personally responsible for their behavior in class and the
work that they produce. This course will also cover the ways in which individuals have worked together to
create responsible societies.
Required Texts:
1. Colin G. Calloway, First Peoples: A Documentary Survey of the American Indian History (Boston: Bedford St.
Martins) – forth, fifth, or sixth Edition. (Assignments are based on the 6th edition, so some page numbers
                                                                                                                                  1


may have changed. If you have a version that is not the 6th edition and a particular reading is missing, please
email me.)
2. Mary Crow Dog, Lakota Woman (New York: Harper Collins, 1990)
3. David Grann, Killers of the Flower Moon: The Osage Murders and the Birth of the FBI (Vintage, 2017)
4. David Edmunds, Tecumseh and the Quest for Indian Leadership (Pearson, 2006) 2nd edition.
Books are available at the UT Co-op or from Amazon, half.com, Half Price books, etc.
Films and Videos:
We will be watching a number of documentaries in the course. You will be responsible for the material
presented in these films and will be tested on them as well as the lecture material and assigned readings. In
other words, take notes on the movies.
Flag: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. As noted by the College of
Liberal Arts: “Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness
of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization.”
Assessment: Assessment for this class will be based on in-class participation, a mid-term examination, one
short paper, 2-4 reading quizzes, a short, 500-word book review, and a final examination.
The final grade breakdown is as follows:
Midterm: 100 points
Paper: 25 points
Final exam: 100 points
ClioVis, group assignment, 20 points (10 for individual/10 as a group.)
Book Review: 25 points
Reading quizzes: 10 points each
In class participation: 25 points.
Students will be graded based on the percentage of points they earn in the class.
93-100 = A
90-92 = A-
87-89 = B+
83-86 = B
80-82 = B-
77-79 = C +
73-76 = C
70-72 = C-
67-69 = D+
63-66 = D
60-62 = D-
Below 60: F
Class Participation: Students are required to attend class. You should come to class prepared and ready to
speak about the readings, lectures, and issues presented in the course. Students are expected to participate in
both smaller group work and larger class discussions. You will also be completing a number of “in-class”
writing assignments. These are designed to prepare you for exams. Your participation grade will be based on
2


in-class assignments and your overall engagement with the course. I will take roll every day. On days when
we have discussions or group work activities, your group will turn in the assignment. Names of
group members should be recorded on this sheet. The Teaching Assistants will hold office hours for
consultation and will occasionally may lead discussion. We encourage you to come to either Dr. Bsumek’s
office hours your Teaching Assistants’ office hours over the course of the semester.
One short paper: 3-5 pages each.
Paper Assignment: There are two topics that you can write on. You must write about one of the two topics
and turn in a paper on the scheduled a specific due date. If you pick Paper topic #1, it will be due on 10/11.
If you pick paper topic #2, it will be due on 11/11.
Short Paper Topics: You must choose ONE (and only one) of the following two topics to write on.
In addition to the assigned reading, you must utilize two other secondary sources (e.g. scholarly
books or articles found in UT’s Library.) You can access the library remotely. If you need
suggestions for sources, feel free to reach out to myself or one of the TAs.) Use Chicago Manual of
Style to cite all of your sources. Do not use Wikipedia or another encyclopedia as a source.
PICK ONE OF THE FOLLOWING PAPER TOPIC ASSIGNMENTS:
Due Date: 10/11 David Edmunds, Tecumseh. Shawnee Tecumseh and his brother, Tenskwatawa, were
important historical actors in both the creation of a pan-Indian movement and a return to traditional
American Indian [Shawnee] culture. If you write about Tecumseh you must answer the following questions.
1) How did Tecumseh’s own history shape his role as a leader? 2) How did his brother, Tenskwatawa,
become a prominent figure in American Indian society? 3) Compare and contrast the decisions the brothers
made. Use at least three different incidents to make your comparison. 4)How did each man try to defend
Shawnee (and other Native Americans’) way of life? Finally, 5) How has each man been portrayed in the
historical literature and why do those portrayals matter? You must use two other sources, in addition the
Edmunds book to answer these questions.
Due Date: 11/11: David Grann, Killers of the Flower Moon Westward Expansion, Indian Removal, and
the relocation of different tribes led to dramatic changes for many Native American communities. 1) Using
the events covered in the book as a case study explain how larger historical forces shaped the lives of the
Osage Indians. 2) Discuss how did non-Indians and wealthy Osage interacted during the period covered in
the book? (Use three different examples that each show us a different kind of interaction.) 3) Address how
violence (toward people, animals and land) and the idea that American Indians were racially inferior become
core parts of Indian/white interactions? 4) What role did the federal government play in both facilitating the
larger shifts that led to the Osage being in Oklahoma and in solving the murders of wealthy Osage Indians? 5)
Finally, how did Osage Indians attempt to control their own fate and express their agency during this period?
You must use two other sources, in addition the Edmunds book to answer these questions.
Book Review: Due 12/09
We will also be reading Mary Crow Dog’s autobiography, Lakota Woman. Part of the final exam will feature a
500 word “take-home” review of this book to be turned in the last day of class. In the review you must
describe the economic and political factors that influenced Mary Crow Dog’s activism. You must also
address the roles that violence, family structure, and educational experiences played in Mary Crow Dog’s life.
Finally, discuss the ways that Mary Crow Dog’s life experiences were representative (or not representative) of
other American Indians of the time. Why? You will turn in this book review on the last day of class.
Note: We will discuss all of the above listed books in class.
                                                                                                               3


Exams: Exams will consist of identification terms and essay questions. Terms should be fully explained in
terms of who, what, when, where, and why the term is historically important. Or, you will be expected to
match terms with statements that accurately define or describe the term in question. Long essay questions will
usually have two or three parts. You must answer the entire question to get full credit. You will receive a
study guide for the mid-term and the final.
Reading Quizzes: There will be 2 to 4 quizzes in this class. Each quiz will be based on weekly reading
assignments. Quizzes may or may not be announced in class – in other words, sometimes I will announce in
advance when a quiz is to be given and sometimes I will not. You should complete class readings and come
prepared to discuss material. Quizzes will contain multiple-choice questions, short essay questions, matching
or a combination of all three. You will not be able to make-up reading quizzes (except in cases of verifiable
emergency.)
Group Work/In-class assignments and Discussions: On days when group work, in-class
assignments or discussions are scheduled, you should BRING your books to class.
ClioVis assignment. Each group will make a timeline of events we cover on a specific week. Each
group will be assigned to make a timeline for a specific week. As a group, you will make a timeline spanning
at least a twenty-year time span we cover that week. Each group should enter the 10 most important events
related to the topic at hand. You will use your text books, lecture material, and assigned readings as sources.
Each group will have 5-6 members. Title your timeline with the following information: Week #, Group #. In
the “I” box at the top of the timeline add a short description of your timeline. Each member should “sign”
the events they add to the timeline by putting their initials (not your full name) at the end of the description
box. (We will review in class.)
Once you have populated the timeline with events, your group will make connections between the events on
your timeline in order to fully understand that week’s topic(s). Connections should be analytical and
evidenced based. We will go over how to make these timelines in class. Each week, 3 groups will make a
timeline by Friday at 10:00 am. We will then look at those timelines as a class. You will only do this once per
semester (for a grade). You can use the software as a study tool if you wish.
You will receive two grades for this timeline: One for your own individual effort and one for the timeline as a
whole (group effort).
Blanton Visit and Reflection: Jeffery Gibson, “This is the Day” Exhibition Visit. (Title comes from the
song, “This is the Day,” by The The.
Sign up to visit the exhibition with a guide. Sign up for one of the slots. You will go in groups of 16 students.
 https://doodle.com/poll/yuht6x2hhs76fdfb
Short reflection writing assignment, 250-300 words: How does the artist evoke history in his artwork?
Refer to both the objects in the exhibition and the written statements on the walls of the Blanton. Feel free to
discuss your individual response to the show after you have answered the key question. If you’d like to
include a photograph of something from the exhibit, feel free to do so. This is due Sept. 30th.
Worth 10 points.
We will be participating in PLUS Program. This means we will have study groups. Each group will
have a designated leader. See Canvas for more information.
4


THE SYLLABUS IS SUBJECT TO CHANGE, CHANGES WILL BE ANNOUNCED IN CLASS
AND CHANGES WILL BE POSTED IN THE ANNOUNCEMENTS SECTIONS OF CANVAS.
ACADEMIC HONESTY and PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY: Academic honesty is very important.
You are expected to complete your own work. If you have any questions about academic guidelines you may
call me, 475-7253, or email me at ANY time. You should follow University guidelines regarding plagiarism
and student conduct. For further information see:
http://uwc.fac.utexas.edu/~virgil/essay/research/plagiarism.html
Important Notes:
     1. Respect the classroom environment. Turn off all cell-phones while in class. Do not use
         social media platforms, search the web, or send text messages while in class (unless
         instructed by Dr. Bsumek to do so!)
     2. You can use computers to take notes in class provided you sit in the first three-five rows of
         the classroom. If we see people use their computers (or other devices) for non-class related
         matters, computers will not be allowed in the classroom. I will provide the class with
         THREE warnings. After the 3rd warning regarding misuse of computers, no computers will
         be allowed in the class. (SSD students can continue use of devices if they are necessary for
         accommodations even if the rest of the class loses this privilege.)
     3. Any handouts that you receive from the instructor or teaching assistants should be treated as
         required reading.
     4. My office is on the 2nd floor in Garrison Hall. It is accessible by elevator. If, for some reason,
         my office is inaccessible to you, I will make arrangements to meet in a different location.
     5. The University of Texas provides, upon request, academic accommodations for students
         with disabilities. For more information contact the Office of the Dean of Students, 471-6259
         or 471-4641.
     6. I will follow University standards and rules regarding academic dishonesty. You should
         familiarize yourself with these standards [link provided above] and consequences of
         violations university policy.
     7. Email policy: I will answer student emails within 72 hours of receiving them. You can turn
         papers in via Canvas. They are due by 10am on the designated date.
     8. Campus Carry policies are listed here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/ Please feel free to
         ask me about my office policy.
     9. If you need assistance with personal or emotional issues at any time please feel free to
         contact that Behavior Concerns Advice Line
         https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
     10. Class absence policy. Each student gets 2 absences. You do not need to tell me why you
         were absent. Otherwise, you must check in with me or the TA each class day unless
         otherwise noted.
     11. You can find UTs policy for missed class exemptions for Religious Holidays and Military
         Service here: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-
         procedures/attendance/
     12. Hunger and food insecurity is a problem on our campus. If you find yourself in need of some
         assistance, UT can help! UT Outpost.
         http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php
                                                                                                          5


Weekly Schedule:
Week One: Introduction to the course.
A note on reading: If you see an author’s name followed by a chapter t
itle, section title, or a series of page numbers, you are expected to read the material before you come
to class. Ex. Date, “4/27, Calloway, Chapter 1” means that you should read the first chapter of the
Calloway book before class on that day. You will find a series of primary sources at the end of each
chapter. You should read all of these. We will discuss certain documents on specific dates. I have
listed these documents on the syllabus.
8/28: W: Introduction to course and syllabus review
8/30: F: Terminology, Problems, and Approaches to American Indian history.
Calloway, Read the Introduction to the book.
Week Two: America Before 1500 –
9/2: Monday: Labor Day, no class.
9/4: Wednesday: The People and Different Ways of Understanding the Universe.
Calloway, Ch. 1
Possible film clips “Myths and Moundbuilders” and “The Columbian Exchange and the effects of biological
invasion of North America.”
9/6: Friday: In class discussion.
Calloway documents, “Navajo Emergence Story,” and “Iroquois Creation story”
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 1, 2, 3 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.)
Week Three: Religious Encounters, Conflicts and Transformations –
9/09: Monday: Encounters, Wars, Invasions.
Calloway, Ch. 2 “The Invasions of America”
09/11: Wednesday: Pequot War
Calloway, Picture Essay, “Early American Cities, Settlements, and Centers” at the end of Chapter 1.
09/13: Friday: Pueblo Revolt
Documents: “A Narrative of the De Soto Invasion” and “An Indian Explanation of the Pueblo Revolt” or
“Mission to the Huron” and “A Mi’Kmaq Questions French Civilization.” (Documents depend on version of
the textbook.) “ClioVis Timelines: Groups 4,5,6 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on
Friday.)
Week Four: The Indians’ New World –
09/16: Monday: Discussion on Pueblo and Pequot Wars:
Individual writing assignment, bring textbook to class. Writing will be based on assigned readings and
lecture materials.
6


Calloway Documents: “Two Indian Wars of Independence”
09/18: Wednesday: Cultural and Economic exchange
Calloway, Ch. 3, “Indians in Colonial and Revolutionary America, 1680-1786”
09/20: Friday: Lecture continued, discussion.
Documents: “A Captive with the Senecas,” “Mary Jemison, Narrative of her Life” and Joun Easton,
“Metacom Explains the Cases of King Philip’s Warre.”
Edmunds, Preface and Ch. 1
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 7,8,9 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.)
Week Five: Warfare, Diplomacy, and Captives –
09/23: Monday: Political landscapes
Edmunds, Ch. 3
Calloway Document: Picture Essay, Atlantic Travelers and “An English Treaty and an Penobscot Response”
Edmunds, Ch. 2
09/25: Wednesday: *Bring Book to Class. Indians and Revolution – Lecture and discussion
Calloway, Ch. 4
Edmunds, Ch. 5
09/27: Friday: Lecture and in-class discussion.
Edmunds, Ch. 6-7
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 10,11,12 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.)
Week Six: New Nationalisms: American and Indians –
09/30: Monday: Warfare, Diplomacy, and Captivity
Calloway documents from chapter 4, “A Revolution Divides the Iroquois and the Cherokees” and “A
Solution to the Conflict over Indian Lands” “Small pox strikes the Blackfreet.”
*Blanton Exhibition Response paper due.
10/02: Wednesday: Tom Quick’s War
Edmunds, Ch. 8
10/04: Friday: Calloway document: “Picture Essay: Northwest Coast Indians on the Brink: The Drawing of
John Webber”
*Class discussion/group activity or individual writing exercise
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 13, 14, 15 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.)
Week Seven: The Removal of the Cherokees and the Expanding Nation
10/07: Monday: Thomas Jefferson, 10/7 and the Indian Policies of the Era
Calloway, Ch. 5, Documents, “Foundation of Federal Indian Law and an Native Response”
 Edmunds, Ch. 9
10/09: Wednesday:
                                                                                                       7


The Transformation of the Cherokees, Possible showing - Film clips: “Cherokee Removal”,
Calloway document, Ch. 5 “A Double Homicide at Two Medicine”, “A Vision of Tecumseh,”
And “Cherokee Women Oppose Land Sales and Removals,”
10/11: Friday: Edmunds Paper due.
Calloway, Ch. 5 Picture essay, “Indian Life on the Upper Missouri: Catlin/Bodmer Portfolio”
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 16, 17, 18 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.)
Week Eight: Mid-term Exam
10/14: Monday: Exam Prep and review
Remember: you can use the timelines to study.
10/16: Wednesday: Mid-term, Part 1.
10/18: Friday: Mid-term, Part 2 Essay Section
Week Nine: Reservations and Resistance
10/21: Monday: Theme: The West
Calloway, Ch. 6
Lecture: The Great Sioux Wars
Calloway Documents: “Treaty at Fort Laramie”, “Chief Joseph’s Plea for Freedom”
Grann, Ch. 1-4 (p. 5-40)
10/23: Wednesday: Lecture: The Contested Plains
Visit from Professor Jen Graber
Calloway Document: “Sixty Years of Kiowa History”
Grann, Ch. 5-7
http://kiowatimeline.herokuapp.com/
10/25: Friday: Lecture continued and *Individual Writing assignment. Bring Calloway book.
Grann, Ch. 8-11
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 19, 20, 21 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.)
Week Ten: The idea of “Vanishing” Indians 10/24-28
10/28: Monday: The Southwest and the Navajo Long Walk
Calloway, Picture Essay: The Battle of Little Big Horn in Myth and History”
Grann, Ch. 12-15
10/30: Wednesday:
The Case of Ishi, Anthropologists, and Boarding Schools
Calloway, Ch. 7
Calloway Documents: “Two Sioux School Experiences” and “American and Indian views of the Indian
Bureau – Gates and Montezuma”
8


Grann, Ch. 16-19
11/01: Friday: Calloway Documents: Picture Essay, “The Fort Marion Artists,”
In-class discussion: The different forms of resistance.
*Group work/class discussion
Grann, Ch. 20-22
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 22, 23, 24 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.)
Week Eleven: From the Progressive Era to Great Depression and WWII – 10/31-11/4
11/04: Monday: Buffalo Bill and American Indians
Calloway, Ch.8
11/06: Wednesday: Indian Policies in the 1920 and 1930s
Grann, Ch. 23-26
“The Pueblos Protest the Bursum Bill, 1922” (Class handout)
Burke, Pueblo Baseball reading, on Canvas.
11/08: Friday: Policy lecture/discussion, continued. Indian New Deal: John Collier and the New Deal
Calloway Documents: “Two views of the Indian Re-organization Act” (ch.8)
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 25, 26, 27 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.
Week Twelve: WWII, Termination, and Relocation -11/7-11/11
Grann, Paper Due on Monday
11/11: Monday: Finish Friday’s lecture and discussion
11/13: Wednesday: Patriotism and Code Talkers
Crow Dog, Lakota Woman, Ch. 1-5
11/15: Friday: *Group Work
U.S. Indians: Foreign Policy, Domestic Policy
Calloway documents from Ch. 8, “Documents of Indian Militancy” and “Picture Essay, WWII.”
Crow Dog, Ch. 6-10
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 28, 29, 30 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.
Week Thirteen: Rising Militancy – 11/14-11/18
11/18: Monday: Indian Militancy and AIM
Calloway, Ch. 9
11/20: Wednesday: Militancy continued.
Crow Dog, Ch. 11-13
*Class discussion.
“A Woman’s View of Wounded Knee”
11/22: Friday: The importance of Indian Radicalism
                                                                                                       9


Crow Dog, Ch. 14-Epilogue
Documents, “The Supreme Court and Tribal Sovereignty” and “Wilma Mankiller, Rethinking the Balance.”
Film Clips: “Incident at Oglala”
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 31, 32, 33 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.
Week Fourteen: Cultural Conflicts – 11/21-25
 11/25: Monday: Indian Politics and Indian Gaming
Calloway Documents, “Indian Leadership for the Modern World,” and “Picture Essay: Indian Artists Depict
Modern Indian Life”
11/27-29: Thanksgiving Holiday
Week Fifteen: Final Questions and contemporary issues – 11/28-12/2
12/02: Monday: Politics and Gaming continued.
Discussion: What were the lasting effects of Indian Radicalism?
12/04: Wednesday: Self-Determination and World Affairs
Calloway, Ch. 10
Calloway Documents: Ch. 10, “U.S. Indian Relations on the World Stage” and “Protecting Nature, Pipelines,
and Treaties.”
12/06: Friday: From Global Affairs to National Controversies.
Moving beyond Mascots: The Fightin’ Whites and Other Critiques and Contemporary Issues.
Film clips: In Whose Honor?
ClioVis Timelines: Groups 34, 35, 36 post your timelines (see assignment above) by 9:30 am on Friday.
Week Sixteen
12/09: Monday: Last class day: Review
 final review.
Final: TBD (when registrar releases exam schedule, I will post it on Canvas.)
Final time. TBA
10


Sample Rubric: Tecumseh Paper
 Name
 Topic: Edmunds, Tecumseh. (See prompt in syllabus)
 Did the student address the assignment in its entirety? Evaluate the degree to which the student addressed the
 assignment using the following categories.
 Introduction and Thesis statement:                                                                             7.5
 Is the thesis statement clearly stated?
 Does the thesis statement make a strong
 argument?
 Topic sentences, Organization, Spelling                                                                         5
 and Grammar:
 Is the paper clearly organized? Does the
 body of each paragraph do what the topic
 sentence says it will do?
 Use of Evidence:                                                                                               15
 Is evidence clearly and effectively used to
 identify the key points of the document?
 Did the student use assigned readings and
 lecture material to address the topic in
 addition to the Edmunds book?
 Analysis:                                                                                                      15
 Did the student provide the necessary
 analysis? Did the student answer all the
 posed assignment questions?
 Conclusion:                                                                                                    7.5
 Did the student prove their thesis
 statement and answer the question within
 the page limit?
 Grade – Total points                                                                                           50
                                                                                                           11
