      AMS 310 / HIS 315G: Introduction to American Studies
                                                                                                  1
                              Unique #s 31060 & 38490
            Spring 2020, Tue/Thu 9:30-11:00 am, GAR 0.102
Instructor: Dr. Marvin Bendele
Office: BUR 414
Email: mcbendele@austin.utexas.edu
Telephone: 512-471-3037
Office Hours: W, 1:30 p.m.‐4:30 p.m.
Teaching Assistants:
Holly Genovese (Supplemental Instructor) - BUR 436, hollygenovese@utexas.edu
Hartlyn Haynes - BUR 436, T 11 am – 2 pm; hthaynes@utexas.edu
Whitney May - BUR 436, T TH 11 am – 12: 30 pm; w.may@utexas.edu
Cooper Weissman - BUR 436 , T 11 am – 2 pm; cooperweissman@utexas.edu
Course Description:
AMS 310 /HIS 315G is an introductory course covering the field of American Studies – the
interdisciplinary study of American history, culture, and society. Though not a comprehensive
U.S History survey, this course will cover a very broad time period, beginning with European contact
in the Caribbean and extending through the beginning of this century. The course will proceed
chronologically, but we will jump around while we focus on specific events (King Philip’s War, The
Gold Rush, etc.) throughout American history. I have organized these topics in conjunction with
four separate themes: food and foodways, power, mobility, and cultural geography (space,
place, and landscape). We will also pay attention to the ways in which various communities,
broadly defined by differing variables like age, geography, gender, race, ethnicity, class and
political persuasion have wrestled with questions about identity, inclusion and exclusion in
American history. We will use an interdisciplinary approach as we draw upon history,
literature, geography, and popular culture, among other fields.
Class format: This is primarily a lecture course, but you should feel free to ask questions
during lecture.
Supplemental Instruction:
Section 1:_Monday, 4:00 - 5:00 p.m., GDC 2.410
Section 2: Wednesday, 11 a.m. - 12 p.m., GAR 0.120
This course offers an optional Supplemental Instruction (SI) discussion sections in conjunction
with the Sanger Learning and Career Center. Teaching Assistant Holly Genovese will hold this
discussion section twice a week for one hour (Note: the same material will be covered in both
sections). The section will cover course material as well as other skills that are vital for college
success such as how to organize information, test prep and test taking skills, and critical
thinking and writing skills. There is a consistent and strong correlation between grades and SI
attendance in this and/or other classes and you are highly encouraged to take advantage of this
opportunity. Please note: Students who are unable to attend these sessions due to scheduling
conflicts are more than welcome to make use of TA and professor office hours to discuss class
material.


Required Reading:                                                                           2
Reading will be posted for download on Canvas.
Grading:
Exam 1                          25%    Thu, Feb 27, in class
Analysis Paper (3 pgs.)         15%    Thu, Mar 26, in class
Exam 2                          25%    Tue, Apr 07, in class
Exam 3 (final)                  25%    Sat, May 16, location, time TBD
Reading Quizzes                 10%    Varied, in class
Grading scale: 93-100 = A; 90-92 = A-, 87-89 = B+, 83-86 = B, 80-82 = B-; 77-79 = C+, 73-76 =
C, 70-72 = C-; 67-69 = D+, 63-66 = D, 60-62 = D-; below 60 = F. There is no scaling of
grades. You are expected to attend class regularly and to participate in discussion. In
general, I do not “bump” up final grades that are borderline. An 89 is a B+, a 79 is a C+,
etc. I may make exceptions for students who have been regular contributors to class
discussion.
Exam Format: All exams will closed book/notes. Each exam will consist of 10-15
identification questions and 1-2 short essay questions. I expect you to support your essays
with evidence from the reading or lectures, so it’s a very good idea to attend class
regularly. I will post slides to Canvas, but my slides usually consist of images and keywords
and are not usually an adequate substitute for notes.
Class Policies
Exam make-up policy: Failure to take a scheduled examination without making prior
arrangements with the Teaching Assistants or me will result in an automatic zero for that
exam. I will allow you to take a make-up exam only in the event of a documented medical or
family emergency, or if you have official, documented University of Texas at Austin business
outside of campus. In both cases, you must notify the TAs or me BEFORE the scheduled
exam, unless extraordinary circumstances while traveling to the exam dictate otherwise, in
which case we will still require official documentation. All make-up exams must be taken
within one week of the scheduled exam, unless special conditions warrant an extension.
Post-exam protocol: If you would like the teaching team to review your exam after it has been
graded, please carefully review the comments of the TA who graded your exam and wait a
minimum of 24 hours before contacting the TA. Please contact your TA by email to make an
appointment during or outside of office hours to discuss your exam. Thereafter, you should
make sure to address all questions about your grade WITHIN ten (10) days after you have
received your exam back. If you do not reach an understanding with your TA, then I will be
happy to review your exam, as well. Please bear in mind that this process—including my
review—should occur within this same 10-day period. Please keep your old exams (i.e. do not
throw them away): they will help you as you review larger historical themes throughout the
semester.
Late work policy: Any work turned in beyond the due date will lose 5% per day after the first
day.


Attendance and Participation: Attendance is required in this class in order to succeed. All 3
material on the exams will be taken directly from both the readings and the lectures in equal
measure, so it is in your best interest to attend the class regularly and keep up with the
assigned reading. In addition, I will give twelve pop reading quizzes, of which ten will count
toward your quiz grade.
Devices: All hand-held devices (cell phones) should be placed on silent and put away during
class. If you use a tablet or laptop to take notes in class, please sit in the first three rows of the
classroom so the TAs can look over your shoulder and monitor your use. You will receive a
warning the first time you use a device for anything other than class-related tasks – the second
offense will result in the revocation of in-class device privileges.
Canvas: Course communication will occur for the most part in the Canvas site. All readings and
assignments will be posted there as well.
Classroom Conduct: This course is built upon discussing topics that are often controversial and
difficult. I encourage all of you to share your informed opinions, feeling, and experiences, and
to engage in conversations that invite productive and respectful disagreement. As such, we all
must maintain respect for the classroom environment and for our colleagues. Be willing to have
your own points of view challenged and be willing to respectfully challenge others. The most
productive and exciting intellectual growth emerges from engaging with diverse opinions.
Religious Holidays: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class schedules. If you miss a
class, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will
either be excused from the class or will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed
within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin
that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen (14) days prior to the classes
scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
Scholastic Honesty: In this course, you are a public scholar and writer. All sources used in any
of your assignments (directly or indirectly) must be cited; use a standard style for
documentation, preferably Chicago or MLA. As per university guidelines, scholastic dishonesty
“includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records, and
any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student.” Most cases of academic
dishonesty will result in a zero (0%) on an individual assignment and will be referred to the
Dean of Student’s office. For more information, see the University website at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information,
visit the Student Judicial Services web site at www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs. We
will discuss plagiarism in more detail when we come to the first writing assignments.


Students with Disabilities: In compliance with the UT Austin policy and equal access laws, I 4am
available to discuss appropriate academic accommodations that may be required for students
with disabilities. Students who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of
the Dean of Students (471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). This letter should be presented to me at the beginning of the semester (within the
first two weeks of class) and needed accommodations should be discussed at that time.
For more information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php.
Cultural Diversity in the United States: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the
United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the
variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
CLASS SCHEDULE
Thurs, 1/23      Introduction to the Course & Syllabus
Part 1. Food & Power
Tues, 1/28       European Contact: Exploring the Landscape
                 Read: American Appetites p. 8-22
Thurs, 1/30      European Contact: Barbacoa and Slippery Language
                 Read: Bon Appetite barbacoa article
Tues, 2/4        Colonial Conflict
                 Read: American Appetites p. 31-32, 37-38
Thurs, 2/6       Colonial Food
                 Read: American Appetites p. 33-36, 38-40
Tues, 2/11       Slavery in the Colonies
                 Read: American Appetites p. 26-31
Thurs, 2/13      Food and Power: Control
                 Read: Selections from Sidney Mintz
Tues, 2/18       The Gold Rush
                 Read: Roaring Camp Prologue
Thurs, 2/20      Chinese Food Sojourning in America
                 Read: Selections from Bayard Taylor
Tues, 2/25       Food and Power: Marginalization & Appropriation
                 Read: 19th-century travel writings; Selection from Toni Tipton-Martin


Thurs, 2/27   Exam 1                                                       5
Part 2. Food & Mobility
Tues, 3/3     What is American Food? - Moving Food Through the Landscape
              Read: Lucy Lippard Ch. 3
Thurs, 3/5    Port Cities
              Read: Selections from Mark Kurlansky, Erik Larson
Tues, 3/10    The Railroad
              Read: Stanford University's Chinese Railroad Workers Project
Thurs, 3/12   Geography, Food, and Mobility
              Read: Turner, Significance of the Frontier
Tues, 3/17    No Class
Thurs, 3/19   No Class
Tues, 3/24    Social Mobility / The Restaurant
              Read: Selections from Thorstein Veblen
Thurs, 3/26   Analysis Paper (in class)
Tues, 3/31    Progressive Era Social Dynamics
              Read: Selections from Laura Shapiro
Thurs, 4/2    The Rise (and Fall) of Home Economics
              Read: Selections from Harvey Levenstein
Tues, 4/7     Exam 2
Part 3. Food & Geography
Thurs, 4/9    What is American Food? - Food, Space, & Place
              Read: Selections from Lucy Lippard
Tues, 4/14    Post WWII Conflict and Politics
              Read: TBD
Thurs, 4/16   Food, Place, Protest
              Read: Selections from Frederick Douglas Opie
Tues, 4/21    Concern with the Environment
              Read: TBD
Thurs, 4/23   The Green Revolution
              Read: Selections from James McWilliams


                                                                                     6
Tues, 4/28     Suburbia
               Read: Selections from Andrés Duany
Thurs, 4/30    The Local Food Movement
               Read: Selections from James McWilliams
Tues, 5/5      Food as Entertainment
               Read: TBD
Thurs, 5/7     What is American Food? – Eating American
Sat, 5/16      Final Exam
DISCLAIMER: THIS SYLLABUS IS SUBJECT TO CHANGE DURING THE COURSE OF THE SEMESTER, IF
NECESSARY.
