 Introduction to Traditional Africa
HIS 311K (39245) — AFR 310L (30375) — AHC 310 (32927)
       Class hours: Tuesday & Thursday 11.00–12.30
                      Venue: UTC 3.112
                   Instructor: Toyin Falola
           Email: Toyinfalola@austin.utexas.edu
     Office hours, Instructor: T & TH 2.00p–3.00 in GAR 2.142
              Teaching Assistant: Abikal Borah
              Office hours: Thursday 1.00-3.00
                 Email: aborah@utexas.edu


Course Description:
         This is an introductory, inter-disciplinary course on the peoples and cultures of
Africa, designed for students with a limited background in African studies as well as
those who want to improve their understanding of this huge continent. The course is
divided into two parts, one on a survey history and the other on aspects of culture. The
subjects cover the long historical era known as the precolonial, which terminated at the
turn of the twentieth century when Africa came under European rule. Among the main
themes are: early history, kingdoms, interactions with external agencies, and various
institutions and customs of society. Readings are drawn from two textbooks, two
monographs. The books deal with essential outline histories and dense interpretive
literature on a few issues. Films provide visual illustrations and additional perspectives.
Goals:
     1) To use a combination of films, lectures and reading materials to introduce
         students to a number of themes in African history and cultures.
     2) To enable students to reflect on a number of issues in order to reach independent
         conclusions.
     3) To provide an adequate background that will prepare students for other courses on
         Africa.
     4) To improve the writing and analytical skills of students, by introducing them to
         the craft of history writing.
Required Materials
Toyin Falola, ed., Africa, Vol. 1, African History Before 1885, Durham: Carolina
         Academic Press, 2000.
Toyin Falola, ed., Africa, Vol. 2, African Cultures, and Societies Before 1885, Durham:
         Carolina Academic Press, 2000.
*** Books are available at Co-op. Students can also use the Internet to order direct from
the publishers or through Amazon.com
                                              2


Evaluation and points--100%
   1) Community Project                                             25%      September 18
   2) Mid-Term Examination—Take Home                                25%        October 18
       (Two essay questions, at least three pages on each)
   3) Class attendance and participation                            20%
   4) Final examination—Take Home                                   30%      December 10
        (Two essay questions, at least three pages on each)
Part A: Historical Themes
August 30      Introduction
About the course:
Geography and the concept of Africa
Reading: Africa vol. 1, Chapter 2: “The Geography of Africa.”
September 4 The Study of Africa
Discuss the growth of African studies and the various approaches to the understanding of
Africa.
Reading: Africa vol. 1, Chapter 1: “The Study of Africa in Historical Perspective.”
September 6: Understanding the early period: methods and issues
Reading: Africa vol. 1, Chapter 3: “Early History: Traditions of Origins and
Archaeological Interpretations.”
                                             3


September 11 and September 13: Video illustrations
Students will visit a local museum in Austin during this week.
Each student will choose an African object/artifact/
monument and will write an one page long essay.
Recommended museums are: Blanton Museum of Art and
George Washington Carver Museum.
September 18 Upper Nile and North Africa
Reading: Africa vol. 1, Chapter 4: “Civilizations of the Upper Nile
and North Africa”
Community project due.
September 20 Kingdoms of West Africa
Reading: Africa vol. 1, Chapter 6: “Sudanese Kingdoms of West
Africa.”
Reading: Africa vol. 1, Chapter 7: “Kingdoms of West Africa:
Benin, Oyo and Asante.”
September 25 Kingdoms of East Africa
Reading: Africa vol. 1, Chapter 8: “East African
States.”
September 27 Africa and Europe
Reading:
Africa vol. 1, Chapter 17: “Africa and the Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade.”
Africa vol. 1, Chapter 18: “Euro-African Relations to 1885.”
October 2 Mfecane and the Southern African States
Africa vol. 1, Chapter 16: “The Mfecane and South Africa”
October 4 Pastoralism and peasant economy
Reading: Africa vol. 2, Chapter 10: “Pastoralism”
                                             4


October: 9 Video illustration and discussion
Basil Davidson, Africa.
       Episode 4: “Kings and Cities”
October 11 Video illustration and discussion
Basil Davidson, Episode 3, Africa: “Caravans of Gold”
October 16 The idea of Culture
Reading: Africa vol. 2, Introduction & Chapter 1: “The Study of Culture.”
***Mid-Term Exam distributed
October 18 Video illustration and discussion
Basil Davidson, Africa
       Episode 5: “The Bible and the Gun”
Take Home Mid-Term Examination due in Class
                                             5


                                  Part B Themes on Culture
October 23 Cities and architecture
Reading: Africa vol. 2, Chapter 13: “Cities and Architecture”
October 25 Economy
Africa vol. 2, Chapter 11: “Agriculture, Trade and Industries.”
October 30 & November 1 Intellectual History and Education
Keita: Heritage of the Griot DVD 7018 (VIDCASS 5267)
   https://utexas.kanopystreaming.com/video/keita-heritage-griot
Reading: Africa vol. 2, Chapter 4: “Education.”
November 6 Marriage and kinship
Guest Speaker: Dr. Olajumoke Yacob-Haliso, Babcock
University, Nigeria
Reading: Africa vol. 2, Chapter 3: “Social Institutions.”
November 8 & 13 Religions of Africa
Africa vol. 2, Chapter 5: “Indigenous Religions.”
__. Chapter 6: “Talking to God: Divination Systems.”
__. Chapter 7: “Islam.”
__. Chapter 8: “Christianity.”
November 18 Explorations in Culture
Africa vol. 2, Chapter 14: “Art”
November 20 Video illustration and class discussion
Screening: The Manuscripts of Timbuktu
Thanksgiving break:
November 27 Music
                                                 6


Africa vol. 2, Chapter 15: “Music”
November 29 Video illustrations
Ali Mazrui, The Africans
Part 8: “Clash of Culture”
December 4 Oral Literature
Africa vol. 2, Chapter 16: “Written and Oral Literature.”
December 6
Review Class for the Final Exam.
***Final Exam distributed
December 10
Turn in Take Home Final Exam in class.
                         Instructions for community project essay
    1) Click a photograph of the object that you will choose to write about. Your essay
        should be analytical in nature. First, describe the object with in precise language.
        Second, give your opinion about the object. Third, ask yourself a set of questions:
        What are your overall impressions? How would you connect to object to the past
        of African continent? Why did the object find a place in the museum? Try to
        answer these questions in your essay.
    2) You are most welcome to do research on the object and use the available
        secondary literature on the object you will choose to write about. Please use
        citations to refer to the secondary sources.
    3) The word limit for the essay is 700 words. It should be typed in Times New
        Roman and double space. Proofread your essay before submitting it.
    4) Turn your essay in on time because late reviews will be penalized.
                                              7


                                   Attendance Policy
        The class attendance will be counted from the 4th of September. It will be counted
based on the total of 24 classes. This is excluding September 11 and 13 when students
will be watching the films for review at home. So for each absence, students will lose
approximately 0.83 points from the final grade. Absences will be excused if a student
provides documentation of emergency health situation, death in family, job interviews,
etc. However, without documentation no excuses will be granted.
                            Midterm and final exam essays
        For the mid-term and final exam essays, students will receive additional
instructions on canvas. Canvas will be widely used post information related to class. So
please keep an eye on Canvas regularly.
                                            8
