                                                                           Instructor: Dr. Claire Maes
                                                                Email: Claire.Maes@austin.utexas.edu
                                                                 Office Hours: Tues/Thurs 12-1:30PM
           ANS 340/RS 364: Hinduism in US Popular Culture
                               The University of Texas at Austin
                                           MW 2:30-4PM
                                              JES A205A
                                               Fall 2018
   “The seduction lay in the chaos. They thought they were simple. We thought they were neon.
  They thought we were profound. We knew we were provincial. Everybody thought everybody
                     else was ridiculously exotic and everybody got it wrong.”
                                        - Gita Mehta, Karma Cola
Course Description:
Postural yoga, personal mantras, Ohm tattoos, the Color Run™, American-born gurus, and
spiritual tourism to India: all are testament to the fact that religious symbols and beliefs derived
from Indian culture have found new and re-imagined life in contemporary America. In this
course we will examine this process of transmission and exchange, with a focus on
understanding how religious ideas and symbols take on new meaning as they spread to new
geographies. We will critically examine key terms and lenses (ex. popular culture, Hinduism,
orientalism) challenging ourselves to reflect on the cultural, political, and historical processes
that have impacted Americans’ views of South Asia and South Asians. In this respect, we will
have occasion to consider aspects of culture that are not distinctly “Hindu,” but nevertheless
teach us something about how Western popular culture imagines the “Mystic East” at various
points. Our snapshots of American culture range from the 18th century to the present, focusing on
first encounters, media representations, literature, charismatic leaders, and consumer culture.
                                                                                       Page 1|5


Course Objectives:
    1. Learn to use critical theory to analyze culture. In particular, develop an understanding of
        Said’s Orientalism (1978). We will examine its import and usefulness for the study of
        South Asia, as well as consider critical responses to it;
    2. Introduce students to the primary sources from which numerous cultural and religious
        symbols associated with South Asia in contemporary America are drawn.
    3. Challenge students to reflect on how and why elements of classical texts and Indian
        religious practices have been embraced, adapted, exoticized, and in some cases, rejected,
        by American audiences at different points in time. In particular, students will be asked to
        consider how social sensibilities and political climates mediated Americans’ responses to
        these ideas and practices;
    4. Challenge students to reflect on definitions of religion and consider the processes through
        which religious ideas and symbols spread to new locations.
Required Texts:
Iwamura, Jane Naomi (2011). Virtual Orientalism: Asian Religions and American Popular
        Culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jain, Andrea R. (2015). Selling Yoga. From Counterculture to Pop Culture. Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.
Mehta, Gita (1994, reprint). Karma Cola. New York: Vintage International.
Miller, Barbara Stoller, trans. (1986). The Bhagavad-Gita: Krishna’s Counsel in Time of War.
        New York: Bantam Books.
Course Pack available from: https://squareup.com/store/paradigmbooks/
Course Requirements:
Attendance and Participation: 25%
Reading Responses (10): 30%
Tumblr Posts (5): 10%
Final Paper (proposal, draft, final, peer review): 25%
Book Review: 10%
University Policies:
Honor Code: The core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty and Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for
academic credit will be the student's own work. Students who violate University rules on
academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. “Scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited
to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to give unfair
academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of essentially the
same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor,
providing false or misleading information in an effort to receive a postponement or an extension
                                                                                     Page 2|5


on a test, quiz, or other assignment), or the attempt to commit such an act. For further
information      please      visit     the     Student      Judicial   Services     Web       site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Documented Disability Statement: UT Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Observances: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Mental Health Resources: Mental health concerns such as anxiety, stress, and depression are very
common among college students. If you are struggling with any of these or other mental health
concerns, you are not alone! I encourage you to seek help and to encourage others who need
help to do so. There is a 24/7 Crisis Line for UT students: 512-471-CALL (2255). Additionally, the
UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) can be reached at 512-471-3515 during regular
hours. There are a variety of self-care programs (MindBody Labs, etc.) available to students in
addition to more traditional counseling services.
                                       COURSE SCHEDULE
 DATE               TOPIC
 W, 8/29            Introduction
                    UNIT 1: Guiding Questions & Theory
 M, 9/3             Holiday, No Class
 W, 9/5             What is Popular Culture?
 M, 9/10            What is Hinduism? Part 1
 W, 9/13            What is Hinduism? Part 2
                                                                                   Page 3|5


M, 9/17  Orientalism
W, 9/19  Intro to “The Oriental Monk”
M, 9/24  The Oriental Monk: D.T. Suzuki
W, 9/26  Visions of Zen & Vedanta: 1950s
M, 10/1  The Oriental Monk: Maharishi
W, 10/3  Euro-American Visions of the Maharishi
         UNIT 2: The Yogas: Jñāna, Karma, Bhakti, Postural
M, 10/8  The Bhagavad Gita
W, 10/10 Jñāna Yoga & Ralph Waldo Emerson
M, 10/15 Karma Yoga & Henry David Thoreau
W, 10/17 Bhakti Yoga & Walt Whitman
M, 10/22 Krishna Bhakti: Early Sources
W, 10/24 Krishna Bhakti: ISKCON & Hare Krishnas
M, 10/29 History of Yoga
W, 10/31 Postural Yoga as Religious Practice
         UNIT 3: The Guru
M, 11/5  Tantra
W, 11/7  Rajneesh / OSHO
M, 11/12 Role of the Guru
W, 11/14 Guru in America
M, 11/19 The Guru in film
                                                           Page 4|5


W, 11/21 Holiday, NO CLASS
         UNIT 4: Spiritual Tourism & Voices of Protest
M, 11/26 Karma Cola
W, 11/28 Spiritual Tourism
M, 12/3  Voices of Protest
W, 12/5  Critiquing Images of Hinduism in Popular Culture
M, 12/10 Thoughts for the Future:
         Looking Back, Moving Forward
F, 12/14 EXAM
                                                          Page 5|5
