                                                                                                               1
                                           Numbering Race
                                             (AFR 302M/ SDS 310T)
                                                       Fall 2018
                                         Flag: Quantitative Reasoning
                                                  Mathematics (I)
Dr. Marcelo Paixão – African and African Diaspora Studies Department (AADS) / Teresa
                          Lozano Long Institute of Latin American Studies (LLILAS)
               Tarsila do Amaral (Brazil 1886-1973) – Central do Brasil [Central Station] (1942). Contemporary
               Art Museum of São Paulo. The UT Art & Art History Visual Resources Collection


                                                                                                2
1. Course Instructor and TA
Instructor: Dr. Marcelo Paixão
Email: marcelopaixao@utexas.edu
Office Hours: By appointment
2. Objectives of the course
In this course, the students will learn about quantitative methodology and statistics through the
lens of race relations. All of you will have the opportunity to examine, analyze, and critique
real-world data, quantitative research, and public discourse concerning race in America and, as
much as possible, in Latin America. Some empirical and quantitative skills that the students will
learn this semester include: i) conceptualization and operationalization in quantitative
measurement; ii) the calculation and interpretation of descriptive statistics and statistical
relationships; iii) the application of statistical techniques to understand social phenomena; and
iv) techniques for presenting results from quantitative analysis.
We will discuss critical quantitative methods as they apply to the study of racial and social
injustice and inequality. As we cover various statistical techniques, you will also be introduced
to the origins of the term race, the quantitative actions that justify racial thinking and impact
our current collective and individual understandings of race.
This course satisfies the core math requirement and carries the quantitative reasoning flag.
3. Course Requirements
3.a. Required Readings/ Materials
     ü Leon-Guerrero, Anna, and Chava Frankfort-Nachmias. 2015. Essentials of Social Statistics
        for a Diverse Society. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc. (LGFN);
     ü Scientific calculator;
     ü Basic knowledge of Excel Microsoft
     ü Optional: Wagner, William E. – Using IBM SPSS Statistics for research methods and
        social science statistics. Los Angeles: SAGE, 2017, 6th edition.
     ü Optional: IBM SPSS Statistics Standard Grad Pack 23.0 or 24.0 Academic (12 Month
        License) available for purchase through UT’s Campus Computer Store;
     ü Short substantive readings will be assigned throughout the semester. These required
        readings will be available online through Canvas. Additional readings, exercises,


                                                                                                  3
        information sheets, guides, and links to websites will also be posted to assist you in this
        course and enhance your class experience.
3.b. Assignments and Assessments
Weekly Assignments
Weekly assignments are out-of-class and in-class quizzes that include questions designed to
gauge the students´ understanding of the methodological and statistical concepts and other
material covered in the readings covered throughout the semester.
Out-of-class quizzes will be posted on Canvas every week by Friday (of the prior week). The
due date is Friday (at 11:59 p.m.). Late assignments will result in a 10-point deduction per day
of delay in the grade. Out of a total of eleven quizzes, we will drop the three lowest graded
quizzes.
In-class assignments will be made by three-student groups on the topic of the week. Those
assignments will be uploaded to Canvas after completed to be graded.
All quizzes and assignments upload to Canvas must be typed. We will not accept handwritten
assignments.
Students must include in the quiz/assignment all intermediate computations / step-by-step
calculations and/or SPSS syntax to receive full credit.
Exams
There will be two in-class exams, 1:15 hour each. They may include a combination of multiple
choice, definition, calculation/interpretation, or short essay questions on the topics covered for
that section of the course.
4. Grading Method
4.1. Weights
     ü  First-exam (30% of the final grade);
     ü  Second-exam (30% of the final grade);
     ü  Out-of-class Assignments (30% of the final grade);
     ü  In-class Assignments (10% of the final grade)
4.2. Grading Scale (valid for each assignment and the final grade)


                                                                                                      4
     Approving:
     A = 94-100 / A- = 90-93 / B+ = 87-89 / B = 84-86 / B- = 80-83 / C+ = 77-79 / C = 74-76 / C-= 70-73
         /
     Failing:
     D+ = 67-69 / D = 64-66 / D- = 60-63 / F = 00-60
5. Classroom Dynamics
Every Tuesday and Thursday the Instructor will use the first 45 minutes to present, show the
step-by-step calculation and explain the content and practical application of the topic of the
week.
On Tuesdays, in the next 30 minutes, the students will be familiarized with estimation,
interpretation, and presentation of quantitative data using SPSS. On Thursdays, the last 30
minutes will be used to make an in-class assignment.
All students are expected to have all assigned readings before the class in which they will be
discussed. Come to class prepared to summarize, comment on, and ask questions about what
you read and what we have covered in previous classes. If something from the text confuses
you or you would like to discuss it more fully, please ask at the beginning of class to make sure
we cover the topic or address your question in more detail.
By default, all devices must be placed offline, unless when we need to access some online
resources. It is not allowed to use the electronic devices to surf the web or for any other purpose
not strictly related to class learning and assignments.
It is strictly forbidden the use in the classroom of cell phones, apps, or electronic devices that
can produce noises, divert attention or disturb in any way the lecture. In the case of
unauthorized use of an electronic device, the student will be invited to leave the classroom and
his/her attendance will be considered an unexcused absence.
6. Class Materials and Communication
Canvas will be the main tool for the development of the course (http://canvas.utexas.edu/). Log
into the Canvas system with your UT EID, click on the class link under “Courses”. If you have
any problem to access the materials, please contact the TA or the Professor. You can find
support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6
p.m.


                                                                                                                       5
All reading materials, quizzes, surveys, databases, post grades, announcements, and other
requested materials will be uploaded to Canvas. The student also will have to upload all the
assignments to Canvas.
                                           Attendance Rules and Delays
  Attendance is defined as the physical presence of the student in the classroom for the entire scheduled class time. It
  is expected that all students to attend class, be on time, and not leave class early. Attendance will be taken each
  class.
  At the beginning of each class the Instructor will open a sign-in sheet to be signed by each student. This list will
  be available for the next ten minutes. If a student needs to leave class early, the Instructor must be informed at the
  beginning of class. If not, student attendance will be nullified. Students who arrive more than five minutes late, or
  who leave class early without talking to the Instructor first will be marked as tardy. Three tardies equal one
  absence.
  Attendance is mandatory, and the maximum number of unexcused absences is seven (7) classes. After this, the
  student will have a penalty of 1.5 points per absence in the final grade (read grading method in section
  4). A student will automatically be failed if he/she has more than twelve (12) unexcused absences. We
  consider an excusable absence the impossibility to attend the class for legal or health problems. As such, it must be
  justified followed by medical or legal documentation within one week from the absence.
  The exam and assignments are also mandatories. Deadlines and exam dates are no-negotiable. If you are ill or
  have an emergency that prevents you from being present in lab, or from taking an exam, you must communicate
  this information to your instructor in advance of the due date and request a make-up lab and/or exam. However,
  opportunities to make up labs or exams is the prerogative of the instructor and are not guaranteed. Please take
  your course responsibilities seriously.
  If a student has any restriction to attend class, deliver the assignment or make an exam by the appropriate
  deadline due to religious, civil, or political reasons; please inform the Instructor and the TA by the end of the
  second week of class.
The Instructor can be contacted by e-mail at marcelopaixao@utexas.edu. He will answer every
message within 48 hours. A face-to-face appointment with the Professor can be scheduled by e-
mail. We ask you not to feel intimidated to contact the Instructor. We are very receptive and
open to hearing your questions, doubts, problems, and suggestions. We also encourage all of
you to be in permanent contact with the TA.
7. What are the classroom and university rules?


                                                                                                  6
Classroom conduct. The Instructor is committed to creating a class environment framed on the
student participation, creativity, critical thinking, respect and mutual understanding. The
Professor will also attempt to guarantee a respectful and cheerful space of work and discussion.
As such, it is expected that the students - and the Instructor and TA as well - attend the classes
with a high spirit of tolerance, understanding, and openness to hear divergent opinions in the
debate.
Based on these principles, the Instructor encourages all the students to participate in the
classroom exposing honestly their ideas and doubts, asking questions, and expressing their
opinions regarding each subject under discussion. Actually, participation and questioning will
be very positively evaluated. Based on those same principles, the Instructor will not accept any
kind of derogatory or inappropriate behavior directed at classmates. Any student who gets out
of hand will be asked to leave and marked absent for that class day. Moreover, all forms of
discrimination based on gender, sexual orientation, ethnic, color, race, nationality or any other
kind of intolerance and mistreatment are strictly forbidden. The Instructor also asks the
students to avoid napping or dozing off during the classes.
Policy on scholastic dishonesty. Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, please visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
Students with disabilities. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information,     contact     the    Services   for    Students      with    Disabilities    website:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/    and/or    http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-
register-with- ssd/
Religious holy days. A student who misses an examination, work assignment, or another
project due to the observance of a religious holy day will be given an opportunity to complete
the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence, provided that he or she has
properly notified each instructor. The policy of the University of Texas at Austin is that the
student must notify each instructor at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on
dates he or she will be absent to observe a religious holy day. For religious holidays that fall
within the first two weeks of the semester, the notice should be given on the first day of the
semester. The student may not be penalized for these excused absences but the instructor may
appropriately respond if the student fails to complete satisfactorily the missed assignment or
examination within a reasonable time after the excused absence.


                                                                                                                   7
Unauthorized attendance. Except previously and expressed allowed by the Instructor, no one
else but the Instructor and the TA and the enrolled students in the course “Numbering Race” is
authorized to stay in the classroom during the classes. In case of any unauthorized presence,
this person will be summoned to leave the classroom.
Notification policy. All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail
student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as
to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check email on a frequent and
regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that
certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail is checked daily,
but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for
updating your email address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564.
8. Course schedule
Note Regarding Syllabus Changes- The following schedule is tentative and may vary depending on class
discussions and feedback. I reserve the right to make changes to the schedule of readings and/or lectures during the
course of the semester and will announce these changes both in class and on Canvas. All new readings are
highlighted in green.
Week 1 (August 30) – Introduction of the course´s Syllabus, the Instructor and the Students.
Reading -Syllabus of the course.
Week 2 (September 4 and 6) - The What and the Why of Statistics.
Leon-Guerrero, Anna, and Chava Frankfort-Nachmias. 2015. Essentials of Social Statistics for a
Diverse Society, Chapter 1, p. 1-22 (from now on just ESSDS, Chapter, and range of pages).
Frank, Reane. 2001. “The misuse of biology in demographic research on racial/ethnic
differences: A reply to van den Oord and Rowe,” Demography 38(4): 563-567.
Racial and ethnic inequality in America (Part I).
(Watch the Video, 13:50 min.)
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sagSyRHRHF4
Week 3 (September 11 and 13) - The organization and graphic presentation of data
ESSDS, Chapter 2, p. 23-68
Wagner, William E. – Using IBM SPSS Statistics for research methods and social science
statistics. Los Angeles: SAGE, 2017, 6th edition. (from now on just Using IBM SPSS, Chapter, and
range of pages), Chapter 1, p. 1-14


                                                                                                 8
“A Growing divide on race” - The New York Times.
https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/20/upshot/americas-racial-divide-charted.html
Trawalter Sophie, Hoffman Kelly, Waytz Adam. 2012. “Racial Bias in Perceptions of
Others’ Pain”. PLoS ONE 7(11): e48546. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0048546
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0152334
“Why we think black people feel less pain than white people and how it affects
society” (Watch the Video, 4:22 min.)
https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/10/17/racial-empathy-gap_n_4118252.html
Week 4 (September 18 and 20) - Measures of central tendency
ESSDS, Chapter 3, p. 69-94
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 4, p. 41-51
Semega, Jessica L., Kayla R. Fontenot, and Melissa A. Kollar. 2016. “Income and Poverty in the
United States: 2016, Current Population Reports”. The United States Census Bureau, p. 5-20.
https://www.census.gov/content/dam/Census/library/publications/2017/demo/P60-259.pdf
Week 5 (September 25 and 27) – Measures of variability
ESSDS, Chapter 4, p. 95-118
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 4, p. 41-51
Dubrow, Joshua. 2013. “Why should social scientists account for intersectionality in quantitative
analysis of survey data?” pp. 161-177. In Intersectionality and kritik, Kallenberg, Vera, Jennifer
Meyer, and Johanna M. Müller, Springer VS.
Week 6 (October 2 and 4) – The normal distribution.
ESSDS, Chapter 5, p. 119-138.
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 5, p. 52-77.
Plucker, J. A., & Esping, A. (Eds.). (2014). Human intelligence: Historical influences, current
controversies, teaching resources. Retrieved [insert on September 1, 2018], from
http://www.intelltheory.com. http://www.intelltheory.com/bellcurve.shtml#part1, 16 p.


                                                                                              9
Week 7 (October 9 and 11) Sampling and sampling distribution; 1st In-class Exam.
ESSDS, Chapter 6, p. 139-156.
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 5, p. 52-77.
It will not have in-class assignment, no reading.
                              October 11 – First In-class Exam
Week 8 (October 16 and 18) – Estimation.
ESSDS, Chapter 7, p. 157-178.
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 5, p. 52-77.
Traub, Amy, Laura Sullivan, Tatjana Meschede, and Tom Shapiro. The asset value of whiteness:
understanding the racial wealth gap. Institute for Assets and Social Policy (IASP), Brandeis
University. 17 p.
Week 9 (October 23 and 25) - Testing Hypothesis.
ESSDS, Chapter 8, pp. 179-190 (exercises p. 206-208).
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 6, p. 78-91.
Race and Ethnicity          Polling  Results;  Gallup.  https://news.gallup.com/poll/1687/race-
relations.aspx.
Week 10 (October 30 and November 1) – Testing Hypothesis & Bivariate Table.
ESSDS, Chapters 8, pp. 190-211 and 9, pp. 212-227 (exercises p. 252-255).
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 6, pp. 78-91; and Chapter 7, p. 92-103.
Boshara, Ray, William R. Emmons and Bryan J. Noeth. 2015. “The demographics of wealth: how
age, education and race separate thrivers from strugglers in today’s economy”. Central Federal
Reserve Bank of Saint Louis.24 p.
Week 11 (November 6 and 8) – Bivariate Table.
ESSDS, Chapter 9, p. 227-260.


                                                                                              10
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 7, p. 92-103.
Chandi Wagner. 2017. School segregation then & now: how to move toward a more perfect
union. Center for Public Opinion. 22 p.
PBS News Hour. 2018. “Poverty, segregation persist in U.S. schools, report says.”
(Watch the Video, 6:46 min.)
https://www.pbs.org/newshour/education/poverty-segregation-persist-in-u-s-schools-report-
says
Week 12 (November 13 and 15) – Analysis of Variance
ESSDS, Chapter 10, p. 261-280.
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 10, p. 131-137.
Nellis, Ashley. 2016. “The color of justice: racial and ethnic disparity in State prisons.” The
Sentencing Project: research and advocacy for reform. 25 p.
Week 13 (November 20 and 22) – Thanksgiving (no class).
Week 14 (November 27 and 29) – Introduction to Correlation.
ESSDS, Chapter 11, pp. 281-301 (exercises p. 309-313).
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 8, p. 104-114.
Galton, Francis. 1907. Probability: the foundation of eugenics. The Popular Science Monthly, vol
LXXI, p. 165-178.
Holland, Paul. 2003. “Causation and race”. Research report. Educational Testing Service,
Research & Development Division, Princeton, NJ, p. 26.
Week 15 (December 4 and 6) – Introduction to Regression; 2nd In-class Exam.
ESSDS, Chapter 11, p. 301-318.
Using IBM SPSS, Chapter 9, p. 115-130.
It will not have in-class assignment, no reading


                                                                                              11
                           December 6 – Second In-class Exam
Appendix: The Meaning of Grades
For students, the grading process can be a mystery. After completing your essay or exam, it
may seem that they are sent off to a place where grades magically appear at random. I want to
assure you that this is not the case. Just as you put time and effort into completing your
assignments and exams, I put time and effort into grading them. This means that I do read every
word of your essays, papers, and exam answers. Whenever possible, I will have detailed
grading rubrics that allow me to deduct points in the same way from each student’s exam. In
the case of response essays, in which a specific grading rubric is not practical, the following
describes my view on what makes an answer worth each letter grade:
A Work surpasses the requirements of an assignment by adding new insights, creativity,
    and/or particularly thoughtful analysis or applications.         In “A” answers, students
    demonstrate a complete understanding of the course material, have clearly stated purposes,
    and support their ideas with examples when appropriate. Few changes, corrections, or
    suggestions can be made regarding the accuracy of information or the effectiveness of
    communication;
B   Work meets the requirements of the assignment. In “B” answers, students demonstrate a
    solid command of the course material, support their ideas with examples when appropriate,
    state their purposes, and apply concepts to another context if applicable. “B” work is clear
    and effective, has good organization, and has clearly expressed ideas;
C Work partially meets the requirements of the assignment. In “C” answers, students
    demonstrate an acceptable command of the course material and a basic ability to apply
    concepts, support their ideas, and state their purposes. A “C” may indicate work that has
    some gaps and errors or communication that is inconsistent or difficult to follow;
D Work marginally meets the requirements of the assignment and has many areas that need
    improvement. Often “D” work indicates an attempt to merely repeat the material from class
    discussions without further insight or consideration;
F   Work does not meet the requirements of the assignment. “F” work is consistently weak,
    reflecting little thought or effort.
