                 The  University  of  Texas  at  Austin  
                 McCombs  School  of  Business  
                 Foundations  of  Accounting  (ACC  W310F),  Unique  #71125  
Course  Syllabus                                                                                    Summer  2019  
  
Instructor  
David  Verduzco                  david.verduzco@mccombs.utexas.edu    
  
Course  Description    
This  course  provides  an  introduction  to  financial  and  managerial  accounting  with  emphasis  on  the  
content,  interpretation  and  uses  of  accounting  reports.    It  explores  the  determination  and  
reporting  of  net  income,  financial  position,  the  theories  underlying  business  financial  statements  
as  well  as  managerial  accounting  topics  designed  to  extend  the  student's  knowledge  of  planning  
and  controlling  business  operations.    There  are  no  course  prerequisites  for  this  class.  The  subject  
matter  for  each  unit  is  in  the  Course  Outline  at  the  end  of  this  document.      
  
Course  Outcomes    
Upon  successful  completion  of  this  course,  each  student  should  be  able  to:    
1.   Demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  role  of  accounting  and  its  importance  in  making  
      effective  and  informed  business  decisions.        
2.   Demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  three  main  financial  statements.    
3.   Demonstrate  an  understanding  of  the  basics  of  accrual  accounting.    
4.   Apply  forecasted  financial  statements  to  a  business  plan  in  order  to  help  secure  funding  for  a  
      business  venture.        
  
Course  Access    
This  is  an  entirely  web-­based  course  that  will  be  accessed  and  completed  using  Canvas.        
  
Required  Materials    
The  following  e-­texts  are  embedded  in  the  class  website  and  must  be  purchased  using  the  
“Course  Materials  Fee”  link  in  the  Getting  Started  module  in  Canvas:      
  
           Managerial  Accounting:  Tools  for  Business  Decision  Making  by  Jerry  J.  Weygandt,  
           Donald  E.  Kieso,  and  Paul  D.  Kimmel  Copyright  ©  2011,  ISBN:  978-­1-­118-­09689-­5    
             
           Managerial  Accounting  by  Ramji  Balakrishnan  Copyright  ©  2012,  ISBN:  978-­
           1-118-38538-­ 8  
             
           Financial  Accounting  by  Jerry  J.  Weygandt,  Donald  E.  Kieso,  and  Paul  D.  Kimmel  
           Copyright  ©  2013,  ISBN:  978-­1-­118-­33432-­4  
  
There  are  no  refunds  for  your  purchase  of  the  course  materials  once  you  have  paid  for  them.  
Therefore,  it  is  strongly  suggested  that  you  carefully  read  this  syllabus  to  fully  understand  the  
policies  and  procedures  of  the  class  before  you  make  a  final  decision  to  purchase  the  course  
materials.  
  
If  you  run  into  any  problems  while  trying  to  purchase  your  course  materials,  you  should  contact  
execed@mccombs.utexas.edu  for  help  or  call  at  512-­471-­5893.


Grading  Criteria  and  Course  Components  
                                                                          Letter         Course  Average  
   Grade  Component  and  Weight                                          Grade               Range  
   Practice  Exercises                           10%                      A               100%  -­  94.0%  
   Ribs  on  the  Run  (ROTR)                    10%                    A-­             <  94.0%  -­  90.0%  
   Practice  Unit  Quizzes                       20%                    B+              <  90.0%  -­  87.0%  
   Exams  (2  highest  grades)                   60%                    B               <  87.0%  -­  84.0%  
                                               100%                     B-­             <  84.0%  -­  80.0%  
                                                                        C+              <  80.0%  -­  77.0%  
                                                                          C             <  77.0%  -­  74.0%  
                                                                          C-­           <  74.0%  -­  70.0%  
                                                                          D+            <  70.0%  -­  67.0%  
                                                                          D             <  67.0%  -­  64.0%  
                                                                          D-­           <  64.0%  -­  61.0%  
                                                                          F               <  61%  -­  0.0%  
                                                                                                    
  
        Practice  Exercises  
        Practice  exercises  are  an  opportunity  for  you  to  evaluate  your  knowledge  of  the  material  
        with  each  lesson  and  your  grade  for  these  exercises  is  intended  as  a  participation  grade.    
        Practice  exercises  are  graded,  but  you  get  an  unlimited  number  of  attempts  to  complete  
        them  and  your  highest  score  will  be  used  to  determine  your  grade  for  each  exercise.    
        Accurate  completion  of  the  practice  exercises  is  critical  to  your  success  on  subsequent  
        assignments.  
  
        Ribs  on  the  Run  
        Ribs  on  the  Run  (ROTR)  is  a  series  of  exercises  based  on  a  food  truck  and  includes  
        concepts  from  the  entire  unit.    You  get  two  attempts  at  each  exercise  and  your  highest  
        grade  from  these  attempts  will  be  used  to  determine  your  grade  for  that  ROTR  exercise.        
  
        Practice  Unit  Quizzes  
        Each  unit  has  a  practice  quiz  consisting  of  ten  questions;;  the  questions  will  be  a  
        combination  of  multiple-­choice  and  fill  in  the  blank  style  questions  on  concepts  covered  in  
        the  unit.      
          
        You  get  two  attempts  at  each  practice  unit  quiz  and  your  highest  score  will  be  used.    
        Each  quiz  has  a  twenty-­minute  time  limit  so  a  reliable  internet  connection  is  required;;  you  
        should  use  a  longstanding,  proven  connection  and  test  it  before  starting  each  unit  quiz.    
        Time  begins  the  moment  you  start  a  unit  quiz  and  runs  continuously;;  there  is  no  way  to  
        pause  it,  including  loss  of  connectivity  or  logging  out,  so  please  plan  accordingly.    Delays  
        due  to  a  connection  failure  are  not  an  excuse  for  missing  or  retaking  a  unit  quiz.  
          
        You  are  allowed  to  use  your  personal  written  and  digital  materials  as  well  as  a  calculator  
        for  each  practice  quiz.    Direct  or  indirect  assistance  from  any  individual  is  STRICTLY  
        PROHIBITED  and  is  an  unequivocal  violation  of  the  McCombs  School  of  Business  Code  
        of  Ethics  and  University’s  policy  on  Academic  Dishonesty  and  Cheating.  
          
          
        Exams  
        There  will  be  three  exams  throughout  the  semester,  which  will  contain  a  combination  of  
        multiple-­choice  and  fill  in  the  blank  style  questions.    Exam  1  will  cover  concepts  from  Unit  


          1  through  Unit  7,  Exam  2  will  cover  concepts  from  Unit  8  through  Unit  13  and  Exam  3  will  
          cover  concepts  from  the  entire  class.  
            
          You  get  one  attempt  at  each  exam,  which  will  have  a  sixty-­minute  time  limit  starting  at  
          9am  (central  time)  on  dates  noted  below.    A  reliable  internet  connection  is  required;;  you  
          should  use  a  longstanding,  proven  connection  and  test  it  before  starting  each  exam.    
          Time  begins  the  moment  you  start  each  exam  and  runs  continuously;;  there  is  no  way  to  
          pause  it,  including  loss  of  connectivity  or  logging  out,  so  please  plan  accordingly.    Delays  
          due  to  a  connection  failure  are  not  an  excuse  for  missing  or  retaking  an  exam.  
            
          You  are  allowed  to  use  your  personal  written  and  digital  materials  as  well  as  a  calculator  
          for  each  exam.    Direct  or  indirect  assistance  from  any  individual  is  STRICTLY  
          PROHIBITED  and  is  an  unequivocal  violation  of  the  McCombs  School  of  Business  Code  
          of  Ethics  and  University’s  policy  on  Academic  Dishonesty  and  Cheating.  
            
          Your  lowest  exam  grade  will  be  dropped  before  determining  your  overall  course  grade.    
          The  dropped  exam  grade  is  intended  for  an  exam  that  is  missed  for  any  reason  (such  as  
          a  general  illness  or  outpatient  medical  care,  a  job  interview  or  career  fair,  school  related  
          trip,  technical  issue,  transportation  problem,  etc.),  but  can  otherwise  be  used  for  a  low  
          exam  grade.    If  you  are  satisfied  with  your  first  two  exam  grades  you  do  not  have  to  take  
          Exam  3.  
            
          Course  Averages  
          There  will  be  no  other  course  components  (e.g.  extra  credit)  that  could  affect  your  course  
          average  other  than  those  components  noted  above.  
            
          Course  averages  will  not  be  rounded  (e.g.  a  course  average  of  86.99%  would  result  in  a  
          grade  of  “B”).      
            
          The  McCombs  School  of  Business  has  set  grading  guidelines  for  this  class  such  that  the  
          overall  grade  point  average  (GPA)  for  the  class  will  be  in  the  range  of  3.0  –  3.2  at  the  end  
          of  the  semester.    If  the  overall  GPA  is  below  3.0,  the  final  class  grades  will  be  adjusted  
          up.    Conversely,  if  the  overall  GPA  is  above  3.2,  the  final  class  grades  may  be  adjusted  
          down  although  that  is  unlikely.    Students  will  be  informed  at  several  points  throughout  the  
          semester  as  to  the  possibility  of  any  grade  adjustment.  
            
Due  Dates  
Periodically  throughout  the  semester  units  will  be  published  in  Canvas  and  the  all  of  the  related  
assignments  (i.e.  Practice  Exercises,  ROTR  and  Practice  Quiz)  for  each  unit  must  be  completed  
by  the  dates  and  times  below:  
  
                     Due Date and Time (All times are Central Time)
          Thursday, June 13 by 9:00am                                          Unit 1
          Thursday, June 20 by 9:00am                                  Unit 2 and Unit 3
          Thursday, June 27 by 9:00am                                  Unit 4 and Unit 5
          Thursday, July 4 by 9:00am                                   Unit 6 and Unit 7
          Thursday, July 11 at 9:00am                                         Exam 1
          Thursday, July 18 by 9:00am                                          Unit 8
          Thursday, July 25 by 9:00am                                          Unit 9
          Thursday, August 1 by 9:00am                                Unit 10 and Unit 11
          Thursday, August 8 by 9:00am                                Unit 12 and Unit 13
          Thursday, August 15 at 9:00am                                       Exam 2
          Monday, August 19 at 9:00am                                         Exam 3
  


The  practice  exercises,  ROTR  exercises  and  practice  quizzes  can  be  completed  at  your  own  
pace  as  soon  as  each  unit  is  published  until  the  due  date  and  time  for  that  unit.      
  
The  exams  will  be  published  at  9am  (central  time)  on  the  dates  noted  below  and  must  be  
completed  within  one  hour;;  therefore,  you  should  make  appropriate  plans  for  exam  days.  
  
                 Exam Dates and Times (All times are Central Time)
   Thursday, July 11 from 9:00-10:00am                                        Exam 1
   Thursday, August 15 from 9:00-10:00am                                      Exam 2
   Monday, August 19 from 9:00-10:00am                                        Exam 3
  
Any  assignment  that  has  not  been  completed  by  its  due  date  and  time  will  receive  zero  points  and  
as  noted  above  a  bad  internet  connections  or  other  technical  problems  with  your  system  are  not  
justification  for  a  missed  assignment.    You  should  confirm  your  connection  by  starting  activities  
with  ample  time  to  address  connection  issues  before  the  deadline.    This  is  especially  important  if  
you  are  not  using  a  familiar  and  proven  connection,  for  example  if  you  are  traveling.      
  
If  you  miss  an  assignment  or  exam  because  of  an  emergency,  you  should  notify  the  instructor  as  
soon  as  possible  and  present  written  documentation  (e.g.,  note  from  attending  physician);;  issues  
such  a  medical  concern  that  requires  hospitalization  for  multiple  days,  a  death  in  the  family  or  
other  life-­threatening  problem  would  constitute  an  emergency.    The  dropped  exam  is  intended  to  
cover  all  other  issues  such  as  a  general  illness  or  outpatient  medical  care,  a  job  interview  or  
career  fair,  school  related  trip,  technical  issue,  transportation  problem  and  so  forth.    The  instructor  
has  final  authority  to  determine  if  your  absence  is  a  justified  emergency.    To  that  end,  you  may  be  
asked  to  discuss  your  situation  with  Student  Emergency  Services;;  for  more  information  you  can  
call  (512)  471-­5017  or  visit  their  website  (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/).    
Alternate  arrangements  will  be  made  for  those  with  an  excused  absence  due  to  a  justified  
emergency.  
  
Flagged  Course  Statement  
This  course  carries  the  Quantitative  Reasoning  flag.    Quantitative  Reasoning  courses  are  
designed  to  equip  you  with  skills  that  are  necessary  for  understanding  the  types  of  quantitative  
arguments  you  will  regularly  encounter  in  your  adult  and  professional  life.    You  should  therefore  
expect  a  substantial  portion  of  your  grade  to  come  from  your  use  of  quantitative  skills  to  analyze  
real-­world  problems.  
  
Students  with  Disabilities  
Students  with  disabilities  may  request  appropriate  academic  accommodations  from  the  Division  
of  Diversity  and  Community  Engagement,  Services  for  Students  with  Disabilities,  512-­471-­6259,  
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/    
  
Religious  Holy  Days  
Given  the  nature  of  this  online  course  each  student  is  responsible  for  managing  their  time  to  
avoid  conflicts  between  coursework  and  religious  holidays  of  individual  relevance.      Accordingly,  
assignment  due  dates  will  not  be  modified  for  religious  holidays.  
  
Academic  Integrity  
Students  of  the  University  of  Texas  and  this  course  may  not  share  or  distribute  materials  that  
could  be  an  advantage  to  another  current  or  future  student.    Violations  are  indefensible  acts  of  
scholastic  dishonesty.  For  more  on  the  University  of  Texas  policy  of  Academic  Dishonesty  and  
Cheating,  follow  the  link  at  http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-­information/appendices/appendix-­
c/student-­discipline-­and-­conduct/        
  
  
  


Code  of  Ethics  
The  McCombs  School  of  Business  has  no  tolerance  for  acts  of  scholastic  dishonesty.  The  
responsibilities  of  both  students  and  faculty  with  regard  to  scholastic  dishonesty  are  described  in  
detail  in  the  BBA  Program’s  Statement  on  Scholastic  Dishonesty  at  
http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-­of-­Ethics.aspx.    
  
By  teaching  this  course,  I  have  agreed  to  observe  all  faculty  responsibilities  described  in  that  
document.  By  enrolling  in  this  class,  you  have  agreed  to  observe  all  student  responsibilities  
described  in  that  document.  If  the  application  of  the  Statement  on  Scholastic  Dishonesty  to  this  
class  or  its  assignments  is  unclear  in  any  way,  it  is  your  responsibility  to  ask  me  for  clarification.    
  
Students  who  violate  University  rules  on  scholastic  dishonesty  are  subject  to  disciplinary  
penalties,  including  the  possibility  of  failure  in  the  course  and/or  dismissal  from  the  University.  
Since  dishonesty  harms  the  individual,  all  students,  the  integrity  of  the  University,  and  the  value  of  
our  academic  brand,  policies  on  scholastic  dishonesty  will  be  strictly  enforced.  You  should  refer  to  
the  Student  Judicial  Services  website  at  http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/  to  access  the  
official  University  policies  and  procedures  on  scholastic  dishonesty  as  well  as  further  elaboration  
on  what  constitutes  scholastic  dishonesty.  
  


Course  Outline  
  
Unit         Topic                           Activities  
1            Identifying   and                  Reading  
             Measuring   Cost   Benefits        Selected   readings   from   Managerial   Accounting  by  
                                                Ramji   Balakrishnan:  
                                                    o   Four-­Step  Framework  for  Decision  Making  
                                                    o   Knowing   What   to   Measure   and   Sunk  
                                                         Costs  
                                                    o   Time   and   Decision-­Making  
                                                    o   Traceability  
                                                    o   Variability   and   Step   Costs  
                                                  
                                                Review  (points)  
                                                    o   Practice  Exercises  
                                                    o   ROTR  
                                                  
                                                Assessment  (points)  
                                                   •   Unit   1    Quiz  
2            Short-­Horizon  Decisions  I   Reading  
                                                Selected   readings   from   Managerial   Accounting  by  
                                                Ramji   Balakrishnan:  
                                                    o   Understanding  Cost  Structure  
                                                    o   Estimating  Cost  Structure  and  Account  
                                                         Classification  
                                                    o   Regression  Analysis  
                                                    o   Choosing  an  Appropriate  Method  
                                                    o   The  CVP  Relation  and  Profit  Planning        
                                                    o   Using  CVP  Relation  to  Make  Short-­term  
                                                         Decisions  
                                                    o   CVP  Analysis  -­  A  Critical  Evaluation  
                                               
                                                Review  (points)  
                                                    o   Practice  Exercises  
                                                    o   ROTR  
                                               
                                             Assessment  (points)  
                                             Unit  2  Quiz  
3            Short-­Horizon  Decisions  II      Reading  
                                             Selected   readings   from   Managerial   Accounting  by  
                                             Ramji   Balakrishnan:  
                                                    o   Characteristics  of  Short-­Term  Decisions  
                                                    o   Evaluating  Options  
                                                    o   Determining  the  Best  Use  of  a  Scarce  
                                                         Resource  
                                                    o   Qualitative  Considerations  
                                                  
                                                Review  (points)  
                                                    o   Practice  Exercises  
                                                    o   ROTR  
                                               
                                               Assessment  (points)  
                                             Unit  3  Quiz  
                                                  
4            Overview   of   Financial          Reading  
             Accounting                      Selected   readings   from   Financial   Accounting   by  


Unit   Topic                       Activities  
                                   Jerry   J.   Weygandt:  
                                         o   Intro  to  Accounting  
                                         o   Using  the  Accounting  Equation  
                                         o   Financial  Statements  
                                      
                                    Review  (points)  
                                         o   Practice  Exercises  
                                         o   ROTR  
                                      
                                    Assessment  (points)  
                                   Unit  4  Quiz  
5      The   Recording   Process    Reading  
                                   Selected   readings   from   Financial   Accounting   by  
                                   Jerry   J.   Weygandt:  
                                         o   Accounts,  Debits,  Credits  
                                         o   Steps  in  the  Recording  Process  -­  Part  I    
                                         o   Steps  in  the  Recording  Process  -­  Part  II    
                                         o   The  Trial  Balance  
                                      
                                    Review  (points)  
                                         o   Practice  Exercises  
                                         o   ROTR  
                                      
                                    Assessment  (points)  
                                   Unit  5  Quiz  
6      Adjusting   Entries          Reading  
                                    Selected   readings   from   Financial   Accounting   by  
                                    Jerry   J.   Weygandt:  
                                         o   Timing  Issues  
                                         o   Basics  of  Adjusting  Entries  
                                         o   Basics  of  Adjusting  Entries  –  Deferrals  
                                         o   Basics  of  Adjusting  Entries  –  Accruals  
                                         o   Preparing  the  Adjusted  Trial  Balance  and  
                                                Financial  Statements  
                                      
                                    Review  (points)  
                                         o   Practice  Exercises  
                                         o   ROTR  
                                                  
                                    Assessment  (points)  
                                    Unit  6  Quiz  
7      Completing   the             Reading  
       Accounting   Cycle          Selected   readings   from   Financial   Accounting   by  
                                   Jerry   J.   Weygandt:  
                                         o   Using  a  Worksheet  
                                         o   Closing  the  Books  
                                         o   Post-­Closing  Trial  Balance  
                                         o   The  Classified  Balance  Sheet  
                                      
                                    Review  (points)  
                                         o   Practice  Exercises  
                                         o   ROTR  
                                      
                                    Assessment  (points)  
                                   Unit  7  Quiz  


Unit   Topic                         Activities  
8      Long-­Term  Assets  &          Reading  
       Liabilities                   Selected   readings   from   Financial   Accounting   by  
                                     Jerry   J.   Weygandt:  
                                           o   Plant  Assets  
                                           o   Depreciation  
                                           o   Expenditures  and  Disposals  
                                           o   Accounting  for  Long-­term  Loans  
                                        
                                      Review  (points)  
                                           o   Practice  Exercises  
                                           o   ROTR  
                                        
                                      Assessment  (points)  
                                     Unit  8  Quiz  
9      Cost   Flows                   Reading  
                                     Selected   readings   from   Managerial   Accounting  by  
                                     Ramji   Balakrishnan:  
                                           o   Product  and  Period  Costs  
                                           o   Cost  Flows  in  Service  Organizations  
                                           o   Cost  Flows  in  Merchandising  Organizations  
                                           o   Cost  Flows  in  Manufacturing  Organizations  
                                           o   Cost  Allocation  
                                           o   Optional  Reading:  More  on  Cost  Allocation  
                                        
                                      Review  (points)  
                                           o   Practice  Exercises  
                                           o   ROTR  
                                        
                                      Assessment  (points)  
                                      Unit  9  Quiz  
10     Budgeting   &   Forecasting   Reading  
                                     Selected   readings   from   Managerial   Accounting:  
                                     Tools  for  Business  Decision  Making  by  Jerry  J.  
                                     Weygandt:  
                                           o   Budgeting  Basics  
                                           o   The  Master  Budget  
                                           o   Budgeting  in  Nonmanufacturing  Companies  
                                        
                                      Review  (points)  
                                           o   Practice  Exercises  
                                           o   ROTR  
                                        
                                      Assessment  (points)  
                                     Unit  10  Quiz  


Unit   Topic                        Activities  
11     Long   Horizon   Decisions      Reading  
                                    Selected   readings   from   Managerial   Accounting  by  
                                    Ramji   Balakrishnan:  
                                          o   Roles  of  Capital  Budgets  
                                          o   Elements  of  Project  Cash  Flows          
                                          o   Discounted  Cash  Flow  Techniques    
                                          o   Taxes  and  Capital  Budgeting  
                                          o   Allocating  Capital  Among  Projects  
                                         
                                       Review  (points)  
                                          o   Practice  Exercises  
                                          o   ROTR  
                                         
                                       Assessment  (points)  
                                    Unit  11  Quiz  
12     Statement   of   Cash           Reading  
       Flows                        Selected   readings   from   Financial   Accounting   by  Jerry  
                                    J.   Weygandt:  
                                          o   Introduction  to  the  Statement  of  Cash  Flows  
                                          o   Preparing  the  Statement  of  Cash  Flows  
                                          o   Preparing  Investing  and  Financing  Section  of  
                                               Statement  of  Cash  Flows  
                                         
                                       Review  (points)  
                                          o   Practice  Exercises  
                                          o   ROTR  
                                      
                                       Assessment  (points)  
                                    Unit  12  Quiz  
13     Performance                     Reading  
       E va lu a tio n              Selected   readings   from   Managerial   Accounting  by  
                                    Ramji   Balakrishnan:  
                                          o   Budgetary  Control  and  Variance  Analysis  
                                         
                                       Review  (points)  
                                          o   Practice  Exercises  
                                          o   ROTR  
                                      
                                       Assessment  (points)  
                                    Unit  13  Quiz  
  
  
