AMS 3552020231155pdf
American Studies 355/ 31155/ History 355N/ 38830 Main Currents in American
        Culture Until 1865
Spring 2020                          Dr. Mark Smith
TTh 12:30-2                          Burdine 428
Burdine 130                          Phone: office 232-2015;
                                     department 471-7277
                                     email: mcsmith@austin.utexas.edu
                                     Office Hours: TTh 11-12:15 and
                                     by appt.
Teaching Assistant: Katie Meegan
katiemeegan@yahoo.com
Office Hours: Thursday 2-4 and by appt. Littlefield Snack Bar
"Who is this new man, this American?" Hector St. John de Crevecoeur
“What do we mean by the Revolution? The war? That was no part of the
revolution; it was only an effect and consequence of it. The revolution was in the
minds of the people, and this was effected from 1760 to 1775, in the course of
fifteen years before a drop of blood was shed at Lexington.” John Adams
“Slavery...dishonors labor. It introduces idleness into society, and with idleness,
ignorance and pride, luxury and distress. It enervates the powers of the mind
and benumbs the activity of man.” Alexis de Tocqueville
        At the beginning of this course, we find scattered groups of Europeans
huddled on the Atlantic shore of North America. Nearly two hundred years
later there was still no nation called the United States and certainly no
conception of anything called "American." Yet by 1865 this geographical entity
would witness one of the most bloody and vicious wars of modern times
precisely over this identity and even a reluctant Europe would recognize the
national identity of Americans.
        Although we today think of this emerging identity in political terms, this
course will try to demonstrate that politics was only one of many developing
institutions and perspectives that formed this identity. Indeed, this course will
argue that religion was at least as important as politics. Yet, other factors such as
economics, race, gender roles, painting, architecture, literature, occupations,
philosophy, law, and social reform played important roles in this development as
well. The assigned reading throughout the course points out the interaction of
the lives of ordinary--and a few extraordinary--individuals with such ideas and
institutions and how they influenced and were influenced by these historical
events and patterns.


Course Format
       The course will be conducted primarily upon a lecture basis. I have put
suggested dates for the reading on the syllabus and we will spend small parts of
class discussing the reading. Thus, it will be beneficial to you to keep up with
the reading, but there will not be any quizzes in this course and you can all make
your own decisions on when or whether you will do the reading. One of the key
parts of the class and one of the things that many students have difficulty with is
integrating the reading material with the lectures in the exams. The readings
tend to take one theme or a specific event and discuss it in more specifics than
the lectures. Please contact Ms. Meegan or myself if you have any difficulty with
this.
       I will try to make the lectures clearer in two ways. First of all, I will send
you a list of key words for each lecture via e-mail before each lecture. I advise
you to print out a copy and take it to class. Each ID from the lectures (3 out of 5
ID questions) will come from these lists. During the class I will use an outline or
an occasional PowerPoint to provide a clear class pattern.
Required Texts
Eve LaPlante American Jezebel: The Uncommon Life of Anne Hutchinson, the
       Woman Who Defied the Puritans
Alfred Young The Shoemaker and the Tea Party: Memory and the American
       Revolution
Paul Johnson Sam Patch, the Famous Jumper
Frederick Douglass A Narrative of the Life of
Film Ken Burns “The Shakers: Hands to Work, Hearts to God”
Examinations
       There will be three examinations in the course; the first two will count
30% each and the third will count 40%. None of the exams will be cumulative
and will cover only the material after the previous exam. As of the present time,
exam dates are tentatively Thursday February 20st, Tuesday March 31st, and
Thursday May 7th. The third exam will be in the last class day, because I have
found many of you must be in jobs, at weddings, etc. during the finals period.
       Each exam will consist of three out of five identification questions and one
out of two essay questions. The essay questions will be designed to incorporate
material from the lectures and the reading. Failure to incorporate reading into
your answers will result in an essay grade of no better than a C+. I will hand out
a sample examination before the first test, and Ms. Meegan will conduct a review
session before each test. The time for the review session will be determined by a
majority vote.
       Make-up examinations are always a problem. If you absolutely have to
miss an exam, please call my office at 512 232 2015 before the regular exam and
leave a message noting your absence. You also may contact me by e-mail. Before
the make-up, you need to contact me and explain why you did not take the


exam. Make-up exams are given at 8:00 am one week after the scheduled exam.
In this case, that means Thursday February 27th and Tuesday April 7th. Meet
outside my office at Burdine 428. Missing the third exam will result in an
incomplete for the semester because there is not time to take the exam and then
grade it. People tend to do poorer on make-ups than they do on regular tests. It
may be the time factor, my grading the exam, or any number of reasons, but it is
a statistical fact so try to avoid them.
        There will be no substitutions or addition of extra work to improve your
grade. I will not scale individual sets of exams. I do, however, almost always
scale final grades by 1.5 to 2 points, especially on the B to A range. I also try to
reward consistent improvement.
        YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR KNOWING THE RULES IN THE
CLASS. NOT KNOWING THE RULES IS NOT A LEGITIMATE EXCUSE.
Rules and Regulations
        I have three rules for the class. The first is the above about makeup
exams.
        The second is just the very obvious one about coming to class late and
leaving early. If you need to do so, sit in the back. If you come in late, you forfeit
your seat in the front. Late arrivals are not only disruptive but even a little
dangerous. If you know that you will be leaving early, sit toward the back.
Especially in a steep room like this, it is distracting to me and, more importantly,
to your fellow students.
        The third is I will not permit Internet surfing during class. Again, it is
disruptive to your fellow students. You can do that anywhere. I don’t take
attendance. Check out your e-mail and YouTube before or after class. Ms.
Meegan will keep her eyes open and will patrol the room if necessary. I reserve
the right to drop any repeat offenders.
Scholastic Honesty
        Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic
dishonesty, will result in a major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. A
report of the incident will also be made to the Office of the Dean of Students.
This is the official word. The unofficial word from me is a failure is the best that
can happen. One obvious concern is people checking on their cellphones so we
will monitor those closely.
        On the other hand, studying in groups and/or establishing group study
guides is not only acceptable but encouraged.


UT Policy Statement
        Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who
requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-
4641 (TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. Again a personal
note, I am more than willing to work with any individual in such a situation.
Flag: Cultural Diversity in the United States
        This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States.
Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the
variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has
experienced persistent marginalization.


AMS 355/HIS 355N COURSE SYLLABUS
Jan  21     Introduction--Searching for a National Identity
     23    Chesapeake Society and White Slavery
     28    Race and the Emergence of Black Slavery
     30    The Slave Trade
Feb   4    The Religion of Puritanism
           American Jezebel
      6    John Winthrop and the Politics of Puritanism
             Jezebel, chapters
     11    Power and Puritanism
           Jezebel, chapters
     13    Native Americans and Colonial Societies
     18    Salem Witchcraft—One and Many
     20    FIRST TEST
           Lectures, American Jezebel
     25    America’s First Original Creations—The Religious Awakenings
     27    Science and the American Enlightenment
March 3    Tobacco, Religion, and the Revolutionary Spirit in the South
           Shoemaker and Tea Party, Part One, chaps 1-5
      5    Political Ideology of the American Revolution
           Shoemaker, Part One chaps 6-12
     10    The American Revolution—Changes in the American Mind
     12     A Changing Sense of Place—Part 1
     SPRING BREAK March 16 to 21st
      24   Sense of Place--Part 2
           Shoemaker, Part Two chaps 1-5
      26   Localism in American Political Life—The Whiskey Rebellion


           Shoemaker, Part Two chaps 6-9
       31  SECOND EXAM
           Lectures, Shoemaker and Tea Party
April    2 Westward Expansion and the Transportation Revolution
        7  Transcendentalism and American Identity
        9  Hudson River School and Romantic Painting
           Sam Patch sections 1 and 2
       14  Industrialism and the Artisan Revolt
           Sam Patch, sections 3-5
       16  Women and Work in America
       21  Slavery and the Unchanging South
           begin Frederick Douglass A Narrative of the Life, Preface-chapter 8
       23  The Politics of Slavery
           finish Douglass' Narrative
       28  Perfectionism and the Queen of Reform
       30  Perfectionism and Utopian Communities
           finish Douglass' Narrative
May    5    film “Hands to Work, Hearts to God”
           In-class or on Kanopy
      ,
         7 THIRD EXAM
           LECTURES, Sam Patch, the Famous Jumper, Douglass' Narrative,
           and Shaker film
