Mellon Mays Program Seminar | Second Summer Session 2019 | MAS s177 Unique # 82580 | Monday—Friday 9:00-12:00
Professor Almeida Jacqueline Toribio, MMUF Program Faculty Director
Office hours Monday—Thursday 12-1:00 in 3.150 Benedict
Email: toribio@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description
   • Scheduled during the second summer session, the seminar reconvenes fellows to strengthen community and scholarly interest in
     MMUF and to offer guideposts for graduate school and fellowship application processes and the honor’s thesis requirement. The goal
     for Junior fellows to have completed the initial steps (i.e., working knowledge of the literature in the chosen area of investigation and
     an outline of the project) for their research for the coming year and the capstone Honor’s thesis required of the MMUF Program. The
     goal for Senior fellows is to have the drafts of graduate school application components completed along with a draft of the
     introduction to the Honor’s thesis. Fellows will also develop key documents for graduate school applications and for the profession
     more broadly, such as the statement of purpose and the curriculum vitae. The course is essential to building trust, responsibility, and
     informed research practices in the MMUF community. These scholarly, community-building experiences are intended to make UT
     fellows the best ambassadors of MMUF possible.
Course Materials
   • All course materials will be made available on Canvas, the university course-management system.
Course Requirements
   • Attendance and Participation
     Since the summer schedule is short, attendance is mandatory. Fellows should take full opportunity to profit from the preparatory work
     as part of the graduate professionalization process.
   • Statements of Purpose and other application documents
     Fellows will study specific genres of graduate school writing, including the admissions statement of purpose and fellowship
     applications. Fellows produce and continue to revise versions of these documents throughout their career as MMUF fellows.
   • Abstract, Prospectus and Bibliography
     Junior fellows will work towards the prospectus of their proposed research design for the project to be completed as the Honor’s
     thesis: A 1-page abstract or plan of study and preliminary annotated bibliography are due August 9; the 4-to-5-page prospectus and
     bibliography are due August 19. Senior fellows are expected to complete a thesis abstract and a 4-to-5-page thesis prospectus, due
     August 9, and a draft of one thesis chapter (7-page minimum), due August 19.
   • Research Design and/or Preliminary Honor’s Thesis Presentation
     Fellows will deliver an oral presentation of the work completed during the summer. Juniors will present the prospectus, preliminary
     literature review, and preliminary research project design. Seniors will present the preliminary outline of the Thesis. Presentations are
     scheduled for 15-20 minutes.
   • Peer Review
     For peer review, fellows must post required documents to a shared Google drive folder for paired or group editing.
   • Individual Conferences
     Fellows will have mandatory conferences with the faculty director during the summer session. The aim is to help the fellow create a
     sound plan of study in preparation for graduate school, and to develop a timeline and goals for what the fellow should accomplish
     while in the UT MMUF Program.
Students with Disabilities. Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Scholastic Dishonesty and Plagiarism. Integrity is expected of every student in all academic work. The guiding principle of academic
integrity is that a student's submitted work must be the student's own. This principle is furthered by the student Code of Conduct and
disciplinary procedures established by the Texas Board of Regents, all provisions of which apply to all University of Texas students. In
simplest terms, plagiarism occurs if you represent as your own work any material that was obtained from another source, regardless how
or where you acquired it. Plagiarism can occur with all types of media—scholarly or non-academic, published or unpublished—written
publications, internet sources, oral presentations, illustrations, computer code, scientific data or analyses, music, art, and other forms of
expression. (See Section 11-402(d) of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for the University's official definition of
plagiarism.) Please see this website for further details http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php Fellows found
plagiarizing face failure of the course and further sanctions depending up on the infraction, including dismissal from the MMUF Program.
General Violations of UT Honor Code. If fellows are found to violate the University Texas System Code of Honor while enrolled in the
seminar, students may face failure of the course and removal from the UT MMUF Program.
General Violations of MMUF Program Policy. Fellows found to have violated MMUF Program Policies outlined in the program contract in
the context of this course will face failure of the course and potential dismissal from the program.


Mellon Mays Program Seminar, Summer 2019 | MAS s177 #82580
Monday-Friday, August 5-August 16, 9:00-12:00
Monday, August 5      Toward a More Inclusive Academy: MMUF at 30 [video]
                      Faculty of color in the academy
                      Guest: Dr. Luis Urrieta, Professor of Education, Department of Curriculum & Instruction
                      Guest: Dr. Ericka Roland, Postdoctoral Research Scholar, Department of Educational Leadership & Policy
Tuesday, August 6     Attending to life and academic goals
                      Guest: Kelsey Lammy, MSW, Mental Health Promotion Coordinator
                      Planning your research project
                      Junior fellows read: Sana Saboowala (2015) / Lucero Estrella (2017) / Amanda Faulkner (2017) prospectus
                      Senior fellows read: Xavier Durham (2018) / María Fernanda Palomares Carranco (2019) thesis introduction
                      Read: Badke (2017) Research Strategies: Finding you way through the information fog (6th ed.)
                      Scholarship and why it matters; Taking Charge
Wednesday, August 7   Library Work Session
                      Read: Badke (2017) Research Strategies: Finding you way through the information fog (6th ed.)
                      Database Searching with keywords and hierarchies; Bibliographic Managers; Learning How to Read for Research
Thursday, August 8    Navigating the Graduate School Application Process
                      Guest: Emily Swanson, M.A., Career Counselor, Vick Center for Strategic Advising and Career Counseling
                      Review: Admissions application instructions for two graduate programs of interest
                      Workshop: from resumé to curriculum vitae
                      Review: MMUF application resumés and current fellows’ vitas
Friday, August 9      A Campus Gem: The Harry Ransom Center
                      Meet Dr. Andrea Gustavson, Instructional Services Coordinator, Harry Ransom Center
                      [Lunch*]
Monday, August 12     Peer editing curriculum vita
                      Writing Personal Statements and Research Statements
                      Guest: Jamie Garner, Assistant Program Coordinator, The University Writing Center
                      Workshop: Statement of Purpose
                      Read: How to Write a Statement of Purpose
                      Review: Xavier Durham / Lucero Estrella / María Fernanda Palomares Carranco Statement of Purpose
Tuesday, August 13    Distinguished and Prestigious Fellowships
                      Guest: Dr. Douglas Bruster, Professor of American and English Literature; Postbaccalaureate Programs Coordinator
                      Studying fellowship applications
                      Read: Lucero Estrella / Michael Reyes Ford Foundation application essays
                      Read: Jesse Crandell / Joshua Reason Fulbright application essays
                      Read: Gualberto Guzmán / Sana Saboowala NSF application essays (and reviewers’ comments)
                      Optional: Vera (2013) Grantsmanship in support of study or research
Wednesday, August 14 Presenting your research
                      Guest: Rachel Jenkins, M.A., Academic Counseling and Tutorial Services
                      Read: How to give an Academic Talk, v5.2
                      Read: How to Create an Oral Research Presentation
                      Workshop: Visual Aids for Oral Presentations
Thursday, August 15   Fellow Presentations
                      Junior fellow presentations must include: the thesis topic and argument, proposed methods, and a sample of
                      supporting literature. Senior fellow presentations must include: the argument of the thesis project, including a
                      statement of the project’s overall aims, texts or datasets to be examined, its relationship to the fellow’s chosen
                      field, and a description and evidence or/ sections of proposed thesis chapters (e.g., concrete examples from each
                      chapter, based in evidence, demonstrating the argument of the thesis chapter)
Friday, August 16     Fellow Presentations
                      [Lunch*]
*Due by Monday, August 19: Draft of Prospectus and bibliography (Junior fellows) or Draft of Honor’s thesis chapter (Senior fellows)
