                                       The University of Texas at Austin
                                        International Political Economy
                                            Government 360N (81889)
                                         Summer 2019 Course Syllabus
Instructor: Dr. Di Wang
E-mail: diwang@austin.utexas.edu but Canvas message preferred.
Office: MEZ 3.230
Office Hours: by appointment.
Class Time and Location
MTWTHF 10:00-11:30, SZB 524
Course Description
This course is an introduction to the scientific study of international political economy (IPE), an
interdisciplinary field related to international politics and international economics. It examines how
domestic and international politics influence the economic relations between countries. Why do
governments promote or oppose globalization? Why do countries cooperate economically in some
situations but not others? Why do countries adopt bad economic policies? We will address these
questions and others with a focus on the policies of international trade (the flow of goods), foreign
direct investment (the flow and location of production), and financial and exchange rate policies (the
flow of capital). While no prerequisites are required, a familiarity with macroeconomics is strongly
recommended for success in this course.
Course Objectives
The course aims at (1) providing substantive knowledge on the political economy of international
trade, investment, and finance and (2) developing analytical skills of students to explain cause-effect
relationships in international political economy and to assess causal arguments empirically. As such,
course reading materials are theoretical or empirical (case study or statistical analysis) in nature. The
course also includes debate sessions that help students (3) develop presentation skills.
Required Textbook
The following book is required for this course and available from the University Coop Bookstore.
All other readings will be made available to students through Canvas. Readings marked with an
asterisk (*) are the required primary readings for that day; other readings listed are suggested
readings to supplement the primary readings.
Oatley, T. H. (2012). International political economy. Boston: Longman.
Student Responsibilities
Students are expected to finish the assigned readings before coming to class, attend and participate
in the lectures and class presentations, and take exams as scheduled. Lectures focus on and
complement the assigned readings, providing necessary background for understanding and critiquing
the readings as well as honing the students’ skills in interpreting analytic readings. The exams cover
both the reading materials and the lectures. Students need to grasp the required readings as well as
the lectures to do well on the exams. Students who preview the readings and always attend the
                                                        1


lectures typically outperform those who fail to do so. Students who fail to show up for class
regularly are most unlikely to pass this course.
Grading Policies
 Grade component                          Due date                       Percent
 Class attendance/participation           Every class, starts class 2    10
 Debate                                   See dates below                20
 Exam #1                                  July 22                        20
 Exam #2                                  July 31                        20
 Exam #3                                  August 9                       30
 Total                                                                   100
    1. Class attendance/participation
             All students are expected to attend all classes and I’ll occasionally take attendance. You
             have three “free” absences. After that your grade goes down one point for each absence.
             The learning process is very much a “two-way street” requiring the active participation
             of both instructor and student, and keeping up with the required readings is a necessity
             for both enjoyment of class meetings and successful completion of this course. To this
             end, you will be evaluated on the level of preparation that you demonstrate in class
             discussions. I will regularly call on you in class discussion. You should be able to provide
             the following information:
             For textbook chapters:
             o What are the main perspectives offered, and what are the main arguments that
                 constitute these perspectives?
             o What are the primary assumptions underlying these perspectives?
             o How do the perspectives differ in terms their assumptions, units of analysis, and/or
                 policy prescriptions?
             For articles:
             o What is the author's argument/thesis?
             o What evidence does the author use to support his or her argument?
             o What are the strengths and weaknesses of the author's argument?
             o How does the argument compare with related concepts and readings?
    2. Debate
        There will be five debate sessions where the students will form two teams (pro vs con) to
        discuss current IPE issues of controversy, the purpose of which is to allow you to apply class
        concepts to contemporary issues. I will handout instructions for the policy debate well in
        advance of their due dates.
    3. Exams
        There will be three in-class examinations. All lectures, debates, and readings are subject to
        examination. Exam #3 is cumulative. Please bring a blue book to all of these exams. Make
        ups will be reserved for the most exceptional of circumstances, such as a serious medical
        illness (accompanied by a physician’s letter) or death of a close family member. You must
        have documentation in order for a make up to be considered.
                                                      2


University Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness and respect towards peers and community.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
Disability Accommodations
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities (512 -471-6259,
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/).
Notice Regarding Accommodations for Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services
office. Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures c an
be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                     3


Tentative Schedule
 Date Subject                                                          Readings
 7-15   Course Introduction                                            *Syllabus
        Political Economy of Trade
 7-16   Comparative advantage                                          *Coughlin (2002);Oatley, Ch3
 7-17   Society-centered approach to trade politics I                  *Rogowski (1989);Oatley, Ch4
 7-18   Society-centered approach to trade politics II                 *Hiscox (2001)
 7-19   Who supports or opposes free trade?                            *Mayda & Rodrik (2005)
 7-22   State-centered approach to trade politics                      *Milner & Kubota (2005)
 7-23   In-class video: Commanding heights                             No reading
 7-24   Debate #1: The US should impose tariffs on steel imports to
        aid domestic commerce.
 7-25   Debate #2: The US trade pressure will actually change China’s
        industrial policy.
 7-19   Review for Exam #1
 7-22   Exam #1
        Politics of MNCs
 7-23   MNC Overview: Why invest abroad                                *Dunning (1980); Oatley, Ch8
 7-24   MNCs and policy environment                                    *Henisz (2000)
 7-25   Political determinants of foreign investment                   *Li & Resnick (2003)
 7-26   Debate #3: Foreign direct investment promotes environmental
        protection in host countries.
 7-29   Debate #4: The United States should regulate sovereign wealth
        funds to restrict their activities
 7-30   Review for Exam #2
 7-31   Exam #2
        Politics of International Finance
  8-1   International monetary system                                  *Oatley, Ch10, 11
  8-2   Society-based models of monetary and exchange rate policies I  *Oatley, Ch12
  8-5   Society-based models of monetary and exchange rate policies II *Frieden (1991)
  8-6   State-based models of monetary and exchange rate policies      *Oatley, Ch13
  8-7   Debate #5: The United States should punish China for its
        currency policies
  8-8   Review for Exam #3
  8-9   Exam #3
                                                  4


List of Readings
Political Economy of Trade
Coughlin, Cletus C. "The controversy over free trade: the gap between economists and the general
public." Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review84, no. January/February 2002 (2002).
Hiscox, Michael J. "Class versus industry cleavages: inter-industry factor mobility and the politics of
trade." International Organization 55, no. 01 (2001): 1-46.
Mayda, Anna Maria, and Dani Rodrik. "Why are some people (and countries) more protectionist
than others?" European Economic Review 49, no. 6 (2005): 1393-1430.
Milner, Helen V., and Keiko Kubota. "Why the move to free trade? Democracy and trade policy in
the developing countries." International organization 59, no. 01 (2005): 107-143.
Rogowski, Ronald. "Commerce and coalitions: How trade affects domestic political
alignments." Princeton, NJ (1989).
Politics of MNCs
Dunning, John H. "Toward an eclectic theory of international production." The International
Executive 22, no. 3 (1980): 1-3.
Henisz, Witold J. "The institutional environment for multinational investment." Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 16, no. 2 (2000): 334-364.
Li, Quan, and Adam Resnick. "Reversal of fortunes: Democratic institutions and foreign direct
investment inflows to developing countries." International organization 57, no. 01 (2003): 175-211.
Politics of International Finance
Frieden, Jeffry A. "Invested interests: the politics of national economic policies in a world of global
finance." International Organization 45, no. 04 (1991): 425-451.
                                                      5
