          The Selfie Stick: Self-Portraiture and Photography of the United States after the 1980s
                                                  Spring 2019
                                           AMS 311S Unique ​31025
                                               MWF 2:00-3:00pm
                                           Instructor: Natalie Zelt
                                                 DESCRIPTION
Self-portraits are a pervasive aspect of everyday life in the United States today. Millions of people have
chosen to turn the camera around and picture themselves. What are the stakes and histories of rotating
the camera lens? How have artists used the camera and photographs to highlight and challenge the
politics of identity in contemporary culture?
In this undergraduate seminar we will consider self-portraiture and the photograph from a different
select position each week. Paying close attention to the politics of the camera in relationship to
representation, students will examine the myriad ways artists have used the camera and pictures in an
effort to depict and sometimes to define themselves. This class is not a chronological survey or
comprehensive history, rather a litany of jumping off points and positions from which students might
begin to grapple with the intersections of self-making, identity formation and photography of the United
States.
                Each of the artworks we will study address these questions in different ways
                                            -What is a self-portrait?
                                            -What is a photograph?
                                             -What is an American?
Each week we will spend time looking closely at an artwork, reading a scholarly text, and putting them in
conversation.
This course carries ​Writing Flag​, which means it is designed to get students to grapple with ideas and
issues raised in the course through writing. You can expect to write throughout the semester and
complete a substantial writing project. You will receive feedback and have opportunities for revision. A
large portion of your final grade will be derived from writing-based projects, so please become
acquainted with the resources at the ​University Writing Center.​ The folks there are pretty amazing.
                                                 Course Goals
                                                                                                           1


     -   Students will practice close looking with visual texts in the form of artwork.
     -   They will learn to write carefully and persuasively about cultural forms including artworks and
         exhibitions.
     -   Students will learn to be self-conscious of what they see, how they see, who gets to see, and
         how those images impact understandings of the world and their discipline.
     -   Students will be prepared to research the work of various artists, argue for their relevance and
         contextual position and in relation to student’s chosen field of research.
                                                Course Policies
Weekly Assignments:​ You will have weekly assignments. These assignments include looking at
artworks, reading scholarly texts, and thinking about them. The majority of readings can be found on
Canvas. ​All students​ are expected to come to class having already looked at the artworks and having
already read the texts.​ Weekly assignments will also include short presentations. You will be writing
about artworks weekly in your journals. I will review those journals throughout the semester. You will
present on artworks and scholarly texts and provide discussion questions throughout the semester. The
purpose of these presentations will be to provide brief background and context that is useful and
facilitates conversation; it is not a simple verbal report. The way that weekly presentations and
discussion questions help foster conversation will be taken into account when calculating your
participation grade. Finally, this class is about visual things. Presentations may, and probably should,
include visuals, which must be uploaded to Canvas Discussions by noon the day they are due.
Attendance and Participation: ​Attendance and active participation is crucial to both your grade and the
development of our shared classroom community. Individual class attendance and group participation
will be taken into account in calculating your participation grade. However, leaving your group in a lurch
or missing more than 3 classes may result in a zero-participation grade (30% of your overall grade).
Sustained lack of group participation or missing more than 6 classes may result in failing the course.
Excused absences may include religious holidays, school-related travel, and family emergencies, but in
order for these absences to be excused, ​you must communicate with me​ ​and your group​ as far in
advance as possible and provide appropriate documentation.
Community and Conversation:​ A seminar is a semester-long conversation that builds community over
time. The success of this conversation requires that folks from different disciplines, experiences, and
perspectives come together to engage with the ideas of the course with care and respect. This means
adding your ideas to the mix, making space for others and trusting that ideas will be thoughtfully
interpreted. A conversation has many sides. Ours requires that you be present, engaged, and actively
listening to your colleagues. Our conversation requires that you approach your classmates, your
instructor, and the community we are building with respect, openness, and compassion.
Late Work: ​The final project will not be accepted late. Late work for other major assignments will lose
one letter grade per day past the due date. In general, I do not offer extensions except for unusual
circumstances. However, unusual circumstances do sometimes occur.​ I encourage you to be as
communicative as possible with me​ in the event that they present themselves to you.
                                                                                                          2


Electronics:​ Presence is paramount in this seminar. Being present is more than being physically in a
room. It requires active looking, thinking, and dialogue with your colleagues and instructor. Should you
choose to take notes on a computer or tablet, do so responsibly. Notes are not as important as
conversation. I will ask to you stop using your device, should it become clear that you are no longer
present with us.
Communication: ​Clearly, conversation, a form of communication, is critically important to your success
in this course. ​I encourage you to stay in communication with me and your group throughout the
semester. ​Feel free to communicate with me if you are encountering difficulties with the course or are
confused about assignments, materials, deadlines, or policies. I hold regular office hours and am able to
schedule additional appointments. My preferred communication modes are email and Canvas. Please
check your email and Canvas for announcements. Please also be advised that I usually respond to emails
once a day, often in the afternoon.
What is a Syllabus?:​ A syllabus is a living document. It contains crucial information, but also grows and
changes with the conversation, the needs of the course, and the issues of the times.
University of Texas Honor Code: ​The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement​: If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that
documents your disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard
of hearing). Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss the
accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of
any accommodations you will need. For more information, visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd​.
                                           Assignments and Grading
Participation                                                        30%
Participation is integral to this small seminar. In addition to regular attendance you are expected to
come prepared to actively discuss and engage with materials.​ You will keep a journal of your weekly
in-class writings, which will be collected and reviewed periodically throughout the semester and turned
in at the end. In addition you will present multiple times throughout the semester on assigned artists
and scholarly texts and offer discussion questions.
Art in the World Review (due on or before March 11)                  10%
You will be asked to participate in one art program (exhibition, lecture, panel, symposium) on campus
this semester and write a short review (1500 words). See “A Guide to Art in the World Review and
Response Essays” in Canvas for additional details.
Critical Response Essays                                             20%
                                                                                                           3


Over the course of the semester you will be required to write two short critical response essays (1500
words each). The first will be due in hard copy at 2pm on Friday of your assigned week. The second will
be due in hard copy at 2pm on the Friday of your choice during Weeks 10 through 14. These essays
interrogate the week’s artwork and scholarly text. The essay should address how the artwork and
readings facilitate a better understanding of each other. It should outline what important questions they
raise concerning identity in the US and why they are important. Responses are not lists. They are essays
with a thesis/central guiding argument. See “A Guide to Art in the World Review and Response Essays”
in Canvas for additional details.
Final Project                                                       40%
Students will have the option to choose between two final projects. Each option is a research-based
persuasive project that includes 6 to 10 page written portion, a proposal (Due February 22, 5%,
completion grade), a first draft (Due April 5, 30%, letter grade), a final presentation (Week 15, 15%,
letter grade) and final revised essay (Due May 10, 50%, letter grade).
                                              Course Calendar
Course Structure
Most weeks will follow this basic structure:
Mondays​: Prior to arriving to class, you are expected to have spent time familiarizing yourself with the
week’s series or artwork via resources outlined on the syllabus. One of those resources includes ​DASe​, a
searchable image library available through the Fine Arts Library. We will spend the beginning of class
looking carefully and briefly responding to a single artwork from that series in writing in your journals.
Our colleagues will present additional information on the artist, series and context of the artwork. Then
we will engage with issues raised by their presentation and through our independent close looking.
Wednesdays​: We will work with the assigned scholarly text. All students are expected to read the
assigned texts carefully before arriving to class on Wednesday. Our colleagues will present additional
information on the text. We will engage with issues raised by their presentation and our close reading of
the text.
Fridays​: We will put the week’s artwork and scholarly text in conversation. We will grapple with ways
issues arise or change when the two are put into conversation. We will consider what they accomplish
and what they do not. We will ask, when put side-by-side, how they answer and engage with the
questions: What is a self-portrait? What is a photography? What is an American?
                                        Weekly Group Assignments
Students will be divided into four groups at the beginning of the semester and group responsibilities will
rotate weekly through Week 8. For example, for Week 5 the members of Group A will be responsible for
giving an artist presentation on Monday; the members of Group B will present on the scholarly text on
Wednesday; the members of Group C will deliver discussion questions on Friday; and the members of
Group D will turn in a response paper in class on Friday. Then, everyone’s responsibilities rotate for the
next week. So on Week 6: the members of Group D will be responsible for giving an artist presentation
on Monday; the members of Group A will present on the scholarly text on Wednesday; the members of
                                                                                                           4


Group B will bring discussion questions on Friday; the members of Group C will turn in a response paper
in class on Friday. After Week 8, one group per week will have a bye.
                                               Introductions
Week 1:​ Greetings + Seeing
Wednesday, January 23: ​Greetings;​ ​UT ID Writing Exercise; Review Syllabus.
Friday, January 25: ​How to See Yourself...with a Camera...by 2016 at least.
     - Nicholas Mirzoeff, “How to See Yourself,” in ​How to See the World​ (New York: Basic Books,
         2016): 29-69.
     - In class: Hand out and review “The Style Guide”
Week 2: ​Looking, Writing, Researching
Monday, January 28: ​ ​News Flash: Art is not Scary
             - Before class watch: ​https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=drzG8H1cIng
             - In class: Quiz on Looking at Art Video
             - In class: Practice Close Reading & Writing
             - In class: A photograph is a thing: Photo Materials + Groups
Wednesday, January 30: Writing in Process with the University Writing Center
     - 10:30am “On Identity: A Public Talk and Q&A with Genevieve Gaignard, Ashlyn Davis, and Dr.
         Cherise Smith.” in Gordon White Building
     - Thursday, January 31, 5:30-7:30pm Opening Reception (food) and Artist Talk for ​In Passing​ at
         The Christian-Green Gallery in Jester
Friday, February 1: ​Fine Arts Research Orientation with Rebecca Pad
                                       Issues of Identity and Power
Week 3​: ​Sherman’s March: The Looming Legacy of Cindy Sherman
Monday, February 4:​ ​Cindy Sherman, ​Untitled​ ​Film Stills​, 1977-1980
https://www.moma.org/interactives/exhibitions/2012/cindysherman/gallery/2/mobile.php
Wednesday, February 6:
     - Laura Mulvey, “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,” Screen 16:3 (Autumn 1975), 6-18.
     - Richard Dyer, “The Role of Stereotypes,” ​The Matter of Images: Essays on Representations
         (London; New York : Routledge, 1993): 11-18.
Friday, February 8: ​Discussion
     - In class: Review “A Guide to Weekly Assignments”
Week 4: ​Getting Grounded in Some Readings
Monday, February 11:
     - Review: Timeline from ​Evoking the Mullato
         http://www.evokingthemulatto.com/historicalmapping/map.html
     - Deborah Willis, Introduction, ​Picturing Us: African American Identity in Photography (​ New York:
         The New Press, 1994): 3-26.
     - Michael Omi and Howard Winant, “Introduction,” in ​Racial Formation in the United States​ (3rd
         Edition, London: Routledge): 1-17. ​Ebook
                                                                                                        5


    -   Nicholas Mirzoeff, “The Shadow and the Substance: Race, Photography and the Index,” ​Only Skin
        Deep​ (New York: International Center for Photography, 2003). 111-127.
Wednesday, February 13:​ Submit Reading Responses to ​nzelt@utexas.edu​ by 5pm
Friday, February 15​: Research Day
Week 5: ​Gazing at the Intersection
Monday, February 18:​ ​Carrie Mae Weems, ​Kitchen Table Series​, 1990
http://carriemaeweems.net/galleries/kitchen-table.html
Wednesday, February 20:
    - A.D. Coleman, “The Directorial Mode: Notes Towards a New Definition,” 1976 in ​Photography in
        Print: Writings on Photography from 1816 to Present​ Ed. Vicki Goldberg(Albuquerque, University
        of New Mexico Press, 1981): 480-491.
    - Adrian Piper, ”The Triple Negation of Colored Women Artists,” ​Out of Order, Out of Sight
        (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1996), 161-173.
    - bell hooks, “The Oppositional Gaze,” ​Black Looks​ (Boston: South End Press, 1992): 115-133.
Friday, February 22: ​In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
    - FINAL PROJECT PROPOSAL DUE
Week 6: ​Passing at the Intersection
Monday, February 25​: Genevieve Gaignard
Wednesday, February 27​:
    - Patricia Williams, “The Emperor’s New Clothes,” in ​Seeing a Color-Blind Future: The Paradox of
        Race​ (New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1998): 3-16.
    - Selections from Adrian Piper, “Passing for White, Passing for Black,” (1991)
    - chrome-extension://oemmndcbldboiebfnladdacbdfmadadm/​http://www.adrianpiper.com/docs
        /Passing.pdf​ Read pages 1 thru 9.
    - Patricia Hill Collins, “Mammies, Matriarchs, and Other Controlling Images,” in ​Black Feminist
        Thought​ (New York: Routledge, 2000): 69-96. Ebook:
        https://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/record=b6557282~S29
    - Selection from Patricia Hill Collins, “The Power of Self-Definition,” in ​Black Feminist Thought
        (New York: Routledge, 199): Read Pages 111-121. Ebook:
        https://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/record=b6557282~S29
Friday, March 1​: Meet at ​Christian Green Gallery​ in Jester
Week 7:​ ​Invisible​ ​White
Monday, March 4:​ ​Nikki S. Lee, the series ​Projects​ see via DASe or Google Images
Wednesday, March 6:
    - Mitsuye Yamada, “Invisibility Is an Unnatural Disaster: Reflections of an Asian American
        Woman,” ​This Bridge Called My Back​, eds. Gloria Anzaldua and Cherrie Moraga (Kitchen Table
        Press, 1981): 30-36.
    - -Dyer, Richard. “White.” ​Screen​. 29:4. (Autumn, 1988); pp. 44-64.
    - George Lipsitz, “The Possessive Investment in Whiteness: Racialized Social Democracy and the
        “White” Problem in American Studies,”​ American Quarterly​, 47: 3 (Sept. 1995): 369-387.
                                                                                                       6


Friday, March 8: ​In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
Week 8:​ ​ ​Self-Ish?
Monday, March 11: ​Before 1pm students must look at​ ​Kim Kardashian West, ​Selfish,​ 2015 on reserve at
Fine Arts Library.
    - DEADLINE for “Art in the World Review”
Wednesday, March 13:
    - Amelia Jones, “The Rhetoric of the Pose: Hannah Wilke and the Radical Narcissism of Feminist
        Body Art,” ​Body Art: Performing the Subject​ (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1998).
Friday, March 15: ​ In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
Week 9:​ SPRING BREAK
Monday, March 18
Wednesday, March 20
Friday, March 22
                                Challenging American Archetypes in Photography
Week 10:​ The American Family
Monday, March 25:
LaToya Ruby Frazier, the series ​The Notion of Family​ (2001-2014)
http://www.latoyarubyfrazier.com/work/notion-of-family/
Wednesday, March 27:
    - Combahee River Collective, “A Black Feminist Statement,” ​This Bridge Called My Back​. Cherrie
        Moraga and Gloria Anzaldua, eds. (New York: SUNY Press, 2015, fourth edition): 210-218.
        originally dated to April 1977.
    - Abigail Solomon-Godeau, “Who is Speaking Thus?” In ​Photography at the dock: Essays on
        Photographic History, Institutions, and Practices,​ 169-183. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
        Press, 1991.
Friday, March 29: ​In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
Week 11:​ ​The American Indian
Monday, April 1: ​James Luna, ​Take a Picture with a Real Indian​ (1991-2011) google image.
Wednesday, April 3:
    - Paul Chaat Smith, “Luna Remembers,” in ​Everything You Know about Indians Is Wrong
        (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2009): 88-102. ​Ebook
Friday, April 5:​ In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
    - DRAFT OF FINAL PROJECT DUE
Week 12:​ ​ ​The American Landscape
Monday, April 8:​Laura Aguilar, ​Nature Self-Portrait s​ eries (1996) + ​Grounded​ series (2006-7) images on
canvas and/or DASe.
Wednesday, April 10:
                                                                                                             7


    -   Gloria Anzaldúa, “Preface to the first edition”+ “The Homeland, Aztlán,”+ “La conciencia de la
        mestiza/Toward a New Consciousness,” ​Borderlands/La Frontera​ fourth edition (San Francisco:
        Aunt Lute Books, 1987/2007), 19-20; 23-35; 99-113.
    - Selections from Martin Berger, “Landscape Photography and the White Gaze,” in ​Sight Unseen:
        Whiteness and American Visual Culture​ (Berkley: University of California Press, 2005) 43-58;
        74-79 ​Ebook
Friday, April 12: ​ In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
                                            Movement and Hybridity
Week 13:​ ​Making History
Monday, April 15: ​María Magdalena Campos-Pons the series ​When I Am Not Here/Estoy Allá 1      ​ 994-1997
images on canvas and/or DASe.
Wednesday, April 17:
    - Selections from Michel-Rolph Trouillot,​ ​Silencing the Past: Power and the Production of History.​
    - Pages 65-74 from Okwui Enwezor, “The Diasporic Imagination: The Memory Works of María
        Magdalena Campos-Pons,” in María Magdalena Campos-Pons: Everything Is Separated by Water
        (Indianapolis Museum of Art: 2007).
Friday, April 19: ​ In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
Week 14: ​Picturing the Self, Picturing Belonging.
Monday, April 22: ​Njideka Akunyili Crosby
http://www.njidekaakunyili.com/
Wednesday, April 24:
    - Stuart Hall, “Cultural Identity and Diaspora,”​ Identity: Community, Culture, Difference,​ Ed.
        Jonathan Rutherford (London: Lawrence & Wishart, 1990): 222-237.
    - Watch​: ​Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, “The Danger of a Single Story,”
        https://www.ted.com/talks/chimamanda_adichie_the_danger_of_a_single_story?language=en
    - Daisy Wyatt, “Things Fall in to Two Parts: Artist Njideka Akunyili tells a New Nigerian Story,” ​The
        Independent
        https://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/art/features/things-fall-into-two-parts-arti
        st-njideka-akunyili-tells-a-new-nigerian-story-8887283.html
Friday, April 26: ​ In Class ​Discussion and Responses Due
Week 15:​ PRESENTATIONS
Monday, April 29: PRESENTATIONS
Wednesday, May 1: PRESENTATIONS + Last Class What Just Happened? And other lingering questions.
Friday, May 3: Work Day or Last Class What Just Happened? And other lingering questions.
Week 16:
Monday, May 6: ​Work Day/Meeting Day (Professor available in her office from 2-4:30)
Wednesday, May 8:​ Work Day/Meeting Day (Professor available in her office from 2-4:30)
Friday, May 10: ​Final Project DUE ​Hard copy in American Studies Office before doors lock at 5pm.
                                                                                                          8
