                      ALD 328: APPLIED HUMAN LEARNING
                                      Summer 2019
Instructor: Dr. Mary Claire Gerwels
Office: SZB 538K Office hours: by appointment
Phone: 512-554-8556 (cell)
E-mail: mcgerwels@austin.utexas.edu
PURPOSE: This course is an introduction to learning theory, motivation, and
assessment as they are applied in the elementary school classroom. You will
have the opportunity to evaluate theory and research to develop the best
teaching methods for your classroom. Therefore, this class should lead you to
explore, question, and experiment with what you are learning about education.
TEXT: Packet of Readings from the Co-op.
Date          Topic                               Assignment Due
May 28        Teaching and Learning
              Service Learning
May 29        Constructivism/Critical Thinking
June 2                                            SLP: proposal draft &
                                                  peer edit
June 3        Creativity                          Class meets at 1:00 pm
June 4        Social and Emotional Learning
June 7        Self-Regulated Learning
June 9                                            Observation paper 1
June 11       Motivation
June 14       Mindfulness and Stress              SLP proposal edited
              Management                          copy
June 16                                           Critical Incident
                                                  TBSI certificate
June 17 Resilience                                Class meets at 1:00 pm
June 18 Special Ed. and RTI
June 21 Stereotypes
June 23                                           Observation paper 2
June 25 Standardized Testing
June 28 Classroom Assessment
June 30                                           SLP: data & conclusions
July 1        Parent Involvement                  SLP: presentations
Please note that complete instructions for each assignment can be found
on Canvas in Assignments and Modules.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the communication component
of the university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication
skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and personal responsibility.


                                   Absence Policy
        Students are expected to attend and participate in class. There are no
free absences. Please do not schedule routine medical appointments during
class time. If you are absent you must turn in a 5-page paper that outlines the
readings from that topic and a description of the activities the class did that day.
You will need to ask a peer in advance to take notes for you during class.
        Any absences not made up with the paper will result in a five-point
grade deduction off your final grade, per absence. It is incumbent upon you
to remember this policy and to submit the paper to
mcgerwels@austin.utexas.edu within one week of your absence, except during
the last week when it is due on the last class day. Remember, the paper
substitutes for 3 hours of class time plus annotations, so it should reflect that
amount of work.
                                    Class Etiquette
        Class participation is important. Participation means that you come to
class on time, stay until the end, and contribute to activities and discussions in a
professional manner. It also means that you are not checking your phone or
browsing on the web during class at any time, except during a break. Please
keep your phones turned off and out of sight. Laptops should not be open
during class unless they are being used for an activity.
                          Observation Papers (20% each)
        There are two observation papers that are to be completed and shared
with me on Canvas on the designated date and time (see assignments for
details). You are to choose a topic we have already covered in class. I highly
recommend that you consider the topic you want to do before the week begins so
that you are focused on collecting information for it. The instructions for each
topic are in Canvas in Modules.
                                Critical Incident (15%)
You will write about one critical incident, which will allow you to report and reflect
on something that has happened in your internship classroom. You will follow the
protocol that is in Canvas in Assignments. It should be no more than two pages
in length and should have the 4 steps of reflection in it.
                          Service-Learning Project (35%)
The service-learning project is broken into three parts; proposal, data and
conclusions, and presentation. The first two sections are each worth 15% of your
grade and the presentation is worth 5%. Instructions for each part are in
Assignments in Canvas and examples are in Modules.


                                   Annotations (10%)
        It is important that you read the articles for each class so that you can
contribute to our discussions. When reading the articles, I want you to write
comments and questions in the margins (annotations) that you could share with
the class. I will check your reading packet each day at the beginning of class on
a pass/fail basis. If you forget your packet when I am checking you will get a zero
for that drill, so please remember to bring your packet to class. Highlighting
does not count as annotations. The grades will be averaged according to the
number of drills we have, but they typically count for about 10-12 points out
of 100 each time.
                              Writing Flag Requirements
You will get credit for a writing flag and so must do a significant amount of your
work in formal, written form. Another condition is that at least one of your papers
is to be edited by your instructor and your peers. The Service-Learning Project
(SLP) proposal will be used to fulfill this requirement. You will need to have a
peer edit your work and then you will upload it to Canvas along with another copy
for me to edit. You will correct the writing, formatting, and grammar errors that
were noted in the two edits before submitting the final copy.
                                    Late Work Policy
        I reserve the right to deduct points for late work. Work turned in after the
due date without permission will result in a ten-point deduction per day. If you
need to turn in late work, you must email to me a late work
request form (found in Modules) at least than 24 hours in
advance of the due date. You must get a reply from me to verify
that you may turn in an assignment late.
               Texas Behavioral Support Initiative (online certificate)
You will complete an online module that will fulfill a Texas legislative requirement
that you receive training in behavior management. You will have to complete the
module on your own, which takes about one hour. Full instructions about how to
access the module are in the assignment on Canvas. You will not get credit for
ALD 328 until you have uploaded a PDF copy of your certificate of
completion to Canvas. Your certificate is due on June 16 by 5:00 pm.
                                         Grades
The following scale will be used to determine grades:
        A                   94-100                     C+                 77-79
       A-                    90-93                     C                  74-76
       B+                    87-89                     C-                 70-73
        B                    84-86                     D                  60-69
       B-                    80-83                     F               Below 60%


                                 General Information
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities at 512-471-6259, 512-471-4641 TTY,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
CARE is a program through the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center.
CARE Counselors are available to help with a variety of issues that may serve as
a barrier to your academic success. Your CARE Counselor in the College of
Education is Danie White, LPC, LMFT, and her office is SZB 212E. To schedule
an appointment, call 512-232-6862 and ask to schedule a CARE appointment. If
you leave a voice mail, please include your name, EID, and contact number.
Walk-in hours Tuesdays and Fridays from 1 – 2 PM. You will check-in at the
College of Education’s Student Division in SZB 216, and they will let Danie know
you’re waiting. All services are confidential. None of your information will be
shared without your written consent.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: Use this resource to help fellow UT
members about whom you have concerns BCAL: 512-232-5050
                                  Safety Information
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required
to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with
all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction
of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions
by the following: The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office. More emergency information can be found
at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
