University of Texas at Austin                                                                                   KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                               Summer 2020
                             KIN 312M: Management of Physical Activity and Sport Programs
Instructor: Dr. Matt Bowers
Email: mattbowers@austin.utexas.edu
Phone: 512.232.2120
Office: BEL 605E
Office Hours: Virtual by appointment at https://calendly.com/mattbowers/meet
CLASS MEETING
Tu/W/Th from 10:00-12:30 **Check Canvas for up-to-date schedule and plans**
REQUIRED TEXTS
Sport Management: An Exploration of the Field and its Value
          by Matthew T. Bowers and Marlene A. Dixon
          Hard copy available at Co-Op
          Ebook available at http://www.sagamorepub.com/products/sport-management-ebook
Think like a Freak: The Authors of Freakonomics Offer to Retrain Your Brain
          by Steven D. Levitt and Stephen J. Dubner
          Hard copy available at Co-Op or anywhere books are sold
          Ebook available anywhere ebooks are sold (Amazon, iBooks, etc.)
COURSE RATIONALE
This course offers students an approachable-yet-substantive introduction to why sport - and, therefore, the
management of sport - holds an essential place in society. Unlike many introductory sport management courses
that are structured to provide brief overviews of the functional areas of sport management, this course
emphasizes introducing students to the various legitimations for sport’s role in society and then uses that
understanding as a mechanism to discuss related management implications. Additionally, this course endeavors
to help train higher-order managerial thinking that will enable students to begin developing the transferable
cognitive skills to be successful wherever their career path may lead them.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
The primary aim of this course is to generate student knowledge that will enable them to understand and
articulate the critical role that sports play in not only our economic sector, but in our shared social, cultural, and
political existence, and through that lens to introduce how we approach the management of sport. The course is
intended to cover the basic legitimations for sport, including health, socialization, economic development,
community development, national pride, and social politics.
The secondary aim of this course is to help students understand how to take a more critical, well-reasoned, and
managerial perspective in not only how they think about managing sport organizations, but how they live their
daily lives as well. As students prepare themselves for a future in a management position, this course will
introduce them to a number of simple-yet-elegant approaches to improve their thinking. Throughout the course,
students will engage in a number of real-world case studies and scenarios designed to encourage them to apply
course content. In addition to learning how to think more managerially, in each assignment there will be an explicit
emphasis on the development of transferable skills related to decision-making, creativity, communication, and
presentation. The hope is that students will leave this course feeling more comfortable in their abilities to reason,
problem-solve, and convey their thinking – whether they enter the field of sport management or any other field of
interest.
After successfully completing the course, students will be able to:
     • Define sport management and articulate its value to society;
     • Understand the history of sport management and how that has shaped its trajectory;
     • Appreciate the legitimations for sport and how these legitimations impact the way we manage sport
          organizations;
                                                                                                                        1


University of Texas at Austin                                                                                  KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                              Summer 2020
     •    Apply various managerial frameworks to assist in understanding many of the key functional areas within
          sport management;
     •    Recognize and mitigate the effects of various types of cognitive biases that often cloud managerial
          thinking;
     •    Demonstrate an appreciation of ethical considerations and the value of diversity through the use of
          unbiased language and an inclusive attitude;
     •    Understand what is required to become a contributing member of the profession
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Be early to class. Be engaged. Be excellent to each other. Students often have the impression that they are
hidden or anonymous in these virtual environments, but this is not the case. Please also come to class meetings
having read any assigned readings for that module. You are required to take an active role in shaping the
experience for you and your classmates.
CLASS FORMAT
     • Zoom meetings                                            •  Case studies
     • Pre-recorded/self-paced lectures                         •  Exams
COURSE EVALUATION
                 Qty                      ASSIGNMENT                             % OF GRADE
                   3                     Midterm Exams                          45% (15% each)
                   3       Sport Management in Action Case Studies              30% (10% each)
                   4          “Future You” Professional Development              20% (5% each)
                   5             Sports Talk Conversation Starters               5% (1% each)
DESIGN OF ASSIGNMENTS
Assignments are designed to provide you with dynamic and engaging opportunities to apply concepts and
methods from the text, lectures, and class activities. In virtually every assignment or activity, there is a managerial
decision to be made, as well as a process of reasoning to be followed.
GRADING OF ASSIGNMENTS
In general, assignments will be assessed using the following criteria:
          • Quality of writing and presentation
          • Application of methods and concepts from the text, lectures, and class activities
          • Synthesis and integration of ideas and insights
          • Clarity and logic
In any instance where a student would like to discuss his/her grade - either on a specific assignment or in terms of
the final overall grade in this course - the student must have a face-to-face meeting with the instructor and outline
the specific issues in question. Emails in which students ask for points on assignments or ask that final grades be
bumped up at the end of the semester will be disregarded; the professor will not discuss changes to grades in
anything but a face-to-face meeting.
In the event that a student wishes to challenge his/her grade on any specific assignment they must adhere to the
following procedure. Requests for a meeting to discuss the assignment must be made within one week from
receipt of the assignment grade. The request should include a basic explanation or justification for a re-grade on
this particular assignment. Following a face-to-face meeting, the instructor will review the student’s assignment
and re-grade the assignment based on the student’s rationale – assuming this rationale is deemed sufficient to re-
assess the grade. The grade on the assignment may then increase or decrease based on the instructor’s re-
assessment of the student’s work. The re-grade will be the final grade for the assignment.
SPECIFIC ASSIGNMENTS
Midterm Exams (45% of Final Grade): There will be three midterm exams (each worth 15% of the final grade)
throughout the course of the semester. The exams will take the form of multiple-choice and true/false questions.
These exams are non-cumulative and there is no final exam. See the course schedule at the end of this syllabus
for exam dates. More details will be provided in class and on Canvas.
                                                                                                                       2


University of Texas at Austin                                                                                 KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                             Summer 2020
Sport Management in Action Case Studies (30% of Final Grade): Sport Management in Action Cases require you
to navigate the types of messy, real-world scenarios that are the foundation of our training in the sport
management program. In these three cases, I throw you into a challenging situation and ask you to figure out a
solution by applying concepts and ideas from both of our texts in this course (Sport Management: An Exploration
of the Field and Its Value + Think Like a Freak). I will place restrictions on which chapters you can draw from and I
will give you additional resources to help you gather information. More details will be provided in class and on
Canvas.
“Future You” Career Development (20% of Final Grade): It is my hope that students will leave this course with an
enhanced level of thinking and a clearer understanding of their career path. Pursuant to this desired outcome,
students will be required work through a progression of four assignments related to their individual career
development. These assignments will be introduced early in the semester, but the final due date will not be until
the end of the semester. Students may complete the assignments anytime in between, but if they would like
specific feedback from Dr. Bowers, they must have turned in their assignment by the early deadline identified in
the course schedule and contacted Dr. Bowers to set up a meeting during his office hours. More details will be
provided in class and on Canvas.
Sports Talk Conversation Starters (5% of Final Grade): On Thursdays, we will hold a brief zoom call during which
we "talk sports" and synthesize what we're learning about with what's going on in the sports world. Beyond
coming and taking part in the conversation, your job is pretty simple: you need to submit to me something that
catches your interest related to what's going on in the world of sports, fitness, exercise, etc. More details will be
provided in class and on Canvas.
GRADING
Grades for the course will be based on the aggregation of scores for all coursework. Final grades will be assigned
based on the following scale:
            A                          B                   C                       D                       F
A = 93.5% - 100%              B+ = 87.5% -       C+ = 77.5% -             D+ = 67.5% -           F = <59.49%
A- = 89.5% -                  89.49%             79.49%                   69.49%
93.49%                        B = 83.5% - 87.49% C = 73.5% - 77.49%       D = 63.5% - 67.49%
                              B- = 79.5% -       C- = 69.5% -             D- = 59.5% -
                              83.49%             73.49%                   63.49%
ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION
Attendance is a critical component of your success in this course. It is important for your exposure to, and
retention of, materials not covered in the readings. In addition, it provides you with the opportunity to contribute to
our class discussions and to help formulate ideas for assignments. Material covered in class will be incorporated
into assignments and included on the exams. It is expected that you will attend and participate in all classes. The
instructor will not repeat in-class material outside of class hours. No makeup opportunities will be provided for
unexcused absences.
POLICY FOR LATE OR MISSED WORK/EXAMS
Students are expected to have all assignments completed on the announced dates and times. All assigned work
must be submitted by the time specified by the professor. For every day an assignment is late it drops a letter
grade. Students excused for athletic events, travel, religious purposes, etc. should make every effort to turn in
their assigned work before leaving. If you are struggling with uploading your assignment, you are urged to contact
ITS at 475-9400 for assistance. We will not assist you with technical issues, nor will we accept an assignment
because you could not upload it. Give yourself adequate time to submit your work in case you have technical
difficulties.
Students will be given a one-week window from the posting of assignment grades during which they may bring up
any concerns about lost or missing work. If a student suspects that they did not receive credit for something that
they completed and turned in (mistakes on our end are always possible), they must bring the potential mistake to
                                                                                                                       3


University of Texas at Austin                                                                                     KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                                Summer 2020
our attention within this window. Attempts to receive credit for lost or missing assignments beyond this window will
not be permitted.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
Students are reminded that matters of academic dishonesty are treated seriously by the university and may result
in failure in the class and possible expulsion from the university. In particular, students should use care on exams
and in the writing of their papers. For instance, do not copy sentences and passages verbatim from others without
placing them in quotes and providing proper footnoting. Ideas and theories must also be properly cited if you
paraphrase from another person’s text. It goes without saying that it is a breach of the academic code to purchase
papers on the Internet or to turn in work written by someone else. Bottom line: do your own work and properly cite
any ideas or words that are not your own.
COURSE COMMUNICATION
We will be communicating with you via email and Canvas postings. Please be sure that the email address you
have on file with the university is the email that you check regularly. You must use the address on file as your
primary university contact. Please check your email and Canvas consistently to ensure you have not missed a
communication from me.
You are also responsible for all in-class communication. It is your responsibility to listen carefully to all instruction
prior to leaving class. You are welcome to speak to me after class or at office hours if you need clarification on
any class communication.
COURSE ADMINISTRATION AND EXPECTATIONS
1. To be eligible to pass this course, students are required to complete all assignments and exams at the time
     they are due or scheduled. Students are also expected to contribute fully to their group’s assignment. Failure
     to complete any assignment or exam is grounds for failure in the course.
2. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
     the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
     individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
     enforced. For further information, visit the Student Judicial Services web site at
     http://www.utexts.edu/depts/dos/sjs/
3. At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need academic accommodations should notify
     the instructor by presenting a letter prepared the Division of Diversity and Community
     Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
4. By UT Austin policy, students must notify me of any pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
     of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
     project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
     within a reasonable time after the absence.
5. Honor Code -- The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
     leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
     these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
     (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/events/sjs_honorcode.php)
6. Full and detailed acknowledgment (i.e., citation and bibliographic reference) must be provided if contributions
     are drawn from literature in preparation of assignments. Your written work must properly cite and reference
     original work where appropriate or required. Citation and referencing must conform to the style specified in the
     Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.) – both in the body of your paper and
     its attached reference section.
7. All assignments must be word-processed in .doc or .docx format, and must be double-spaced throughout with
     1-inch margins all around using font size 12.
                                                                                                                          4


University of Texas at Austin                                                                                  KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                              Summer 2020
8. The student should retain a copy of work that is submitted, and should retain graded assignments when they
    are returned. Students must be able to produce a copy of all work if so requested.
9. Submission deadlines will be strictly enforced. Extensions will only be granted on medical or compassionate
    grounds and will not be otherwise granted except in the most extreme circumstances. A request for extension
    must be made in writing (this can be done via email) to the instructor and must be approved by the instructor
    prior to the due date of the assignment or exam. An extension, if granted, will be provided to the student in
    writing only.
10. You will not receive credit for your assignment if you forget your name. It is your responsibility to check your
    assignments for name and accuracy.
11. Assignments must be submitted to Canvas at the beginning of class on the day in which they are due. They
    are considered late if turned in after the first 15 minutes of class. Points constituting 10% of the total will be
    deducted for each day an assignment is late without prior arrangement.
12. In addition to the opportunities described above, the instructor may award other “extra credit” points for
    satisfactory work done during a class exercise or for successful completion of out-of-class volunteer
    opportunities.
                                                                                                                       5


University of Texas at Austin                                                                             KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                         Summer 2020
                                TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE (Subject to Change)
I am committed to doing my best to make sure that you feel supported during this difficult period, and one of the
most important ways in which I can help is to make the structure and planning for class as clear and
straightforward as possible. The basics of what you need to know for each day/week/assignment should be
captured in the day-by-day breakdown below, but make sure you scroll to the bottom as well to see a quick
overview of how the big pieces will work:
----
June 4th
Opening Day Course Introduction on Zoom (10:00-11:30 AM)
Links to Books:
Sport Management: An Introduction to the Field and Its Value
Think Like a Freak
----
Week 1
June 9th
Zoom: Weekly Rundown and Plan of Attack on Zoom (10:00-11:30 AM)
Reading: Chapter 1 in Sport Management and Chapter 1 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 1 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: None
June 10th
Zoom: None
Reading: Chapter 2 in Sport Management and Chapter 2 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 2 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: Future You Phase 1: Resume / Future You Phase 2: Career Path Exploration / Future
You Phase 3: LinkedIn Profile Creation + Connection / Future You Phase 4: LinkedIn Learning Resume Boost
Assignment Due: None
June 11th
Zoom: Weekly Sports Talk (10:00-11:30 AM)
                                                                                                                  6


University of Texas at Austin                                                 KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                             Summer 2020
Reading: Chapter 3 in Sport Management and Chapter 3 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 3 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: Conversation Starter Week 1
----
Week 2
June 16th
Zoom: Weekly Rundown and Plan of Attack on Zoom (10:00-10:30 AM)
Exam: Exam 1 (Timing TBD)
June 17th
Zoom: None
Reading: Chapter 4 in Sport Management and Chapter 4 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 4 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: Sport Management in Action Case 1
Assignment Due: None
June 18th
Zoom: Weekly Sports Talk (10:00-11:30 AM)
Reading: Chapter 5 in Sport Management and Chapter 5 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 5 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: Conversation Starter Week 2
----
Week 3
June 23rd
Zoom: Weekly Rundown and Plan of Attack on Zoom (10:00-11:30 AM)
Reading: Chapter 6 in Sport Management and Chapter 6 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 6 (Panopto link coming soon)
                                                                                      7


University of Texas at Austin                                                 KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                             Summer 2020
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: None
June 24th
Zoom: None
Reading: None
Self-Paced Lecture: None
Assignment Introduced: Sport Management in Action Case 2
Assignment Due: None
June 25th
Zoom: Weekly Sports Talk (10:00-11:30 AM)
Reading: None
Self-Paced Lecture: None
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: Conversation Starter Week 3
----
Week 4
June 30th
Zoom: Weekly Rundown and Plan of Attack on Zoom (10:00-10:30 AM)
Exam: Exam 2 (Timing TBD)
July 1st
Zoom: None
Reading: Chapter 7 in Sport Management and Chapter 7 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 7 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: None
July 2nd
Zoom: Weekly Sports Talk (10:00-11:30 AM)
                                                                                      8


University of Texas at Austin                                                                       KIN 312M
Department of Kinesiology and Health Education                                                   Summer 2020
Reading: Chapter 8 in Sport Management and Chapter 8 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 8 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: Sport Management in Action Case 3
Assignment Due: Conversation Starter Week 4
----
Week 5
July 7th
Zoom: Weekly Rundown and Plan of Attack on Zoom (10:00-11:30 AM)
Reading: Chapter 9 in Sport Management and Chapter 9 in Think Like a Freak
Self-Paced Lecture: Chapter 9 (Panopto link coming soon)
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: None
July 8th
Zoom: None
Reading: None
Self-Paced Lecture: None
Assignment Introduced: None
Assignment Due: None
July 9th
Zoom: Weekly Sports Talk (10:00-11:30 AM)
Exam: Exam 3
Assignment Due: Conversation Starter Week 5
-----
July 11th
Assignments Due: Future You Phase 1: Resume / Future You Phase 2: Career Path Exploration / Future You
Phase 3: LinkedIn Profile Creation + Connection / Future You Phase 4: LinkedIn Learning Resume Boost / Sport
Management in Action Case 1 / Sport Management in Action Case 2 / Sport Management in Action Case 3
                                                                                                             9
