                                German 612 Accelerated Second Year German: Reading Modern Germany
                                                                  Unique: 81585
                                                        Department of Germanic Studies
                                                          University of Texas at Austin
                                                                  SUMMER 2019
Instructor: Emily Claire Krauter                              E-mail: eckraute@utexas.edu
Class Day/Time: MTWTHF/10.00-12.00                            Classroom:
Office Hours: By appointment only                             Office Location:
About the Course:
German 612 is an intensive intermediate German course that builds on language abilities acquired in German 506–507 (or equivalent).
With a content-based approach to language instruction, the course helps students not only to review and expand their German language
abilities, but also to develop these within a meaningful context that supports the development of specific content knowledge: geography,
history, literature, demographics, education, media, pop culture, film, music, art, and architecture. Authentic texts representing a number
of genres will be used to enrich students’ developing content knowledge of the German-speaking world.
The communicative approach to language learning that we take in this course focuses on learning to use German language forms, i.e.,
grammar and vocabulary, in meaningful contexts across both spoken and written genres. The course aims to develop students’ ability to
interpret (not merely read or listen), communicate (not merely give and receive information), and perform (not merely write or speak) in
German. In other words, the course will help students to become literate users of the German language. To this end, students of German
612 are expected to take on greater involvement in their own learning than they have in their beginning-level German language classes.
Class activities (from class discussions to group projects) will require collaborative and cooperative learning on the part of all class
members. Please note that this course requires that students commit approximately 60–120 minutes per weekday (not per class day) to
homework and studying outside of class. Students not able to make this commitment over the entire span of the upcoming semester
should not take this course.
Required Course Materials:
1. Textbook: Christine Anton, Tobias Barske, Jane Grabowski, & Megan McKinstry. Sag mal. An Introduction to German Language and
      Culture. Vista Higher Learning. 2nd EDITION!
2. Sag mal Basic Supersite
3. Sag mal WebSAM (Student Activities Manual)
The textbook and access codes to the online materials can be purchased as a bundle [ISBN: VARIES! JUST MAKE SURE IT IS 2ND
EDITION!] at the COOP bookstore. Please double check that you purchase the right edition. If you order these materials from other
sources and/or if you purchase the wrong edition, you are responsible for possible delays in shipping of materials and additional costs.
Additional Resources:
1. A German-English or German-German dictionary in book/printed format, such as Langenscheidt, Cassell’s, Duden or similar. (check
      Amazon marketplace for a very affordable used dictionary)
2. Zsuzsanna Abrams (2008). Grimm Grammar. Texas Language Technology Center. http://www.coerll.utexas.edu/gg/index.html
      (Though we will not be using this e-learning tool in class, you may want to use it to review certain aspects of German grammar.)
3. Texts and materials distributed via Canvas throughout the semester
Assessment:
Your progress in the class will be assessed during the semester across the following categories:
              Participation and Preparation:            10%                         4 Chapter Tests:                40%
              Homework:                                 20%                         Quizzes:                        10%
              3 Writing Tasks:                          10%                         Oral Exam:                      10%
                                                                       1


Class Participation and Preparation (10%)
Daily attendance and active participation in class are necessary and expected components to your language learning experience
and will be assessed weekly. You are allowed up to 3 absences for illnesses, doctor’s visits, family matters, job interviews, etc.
Beginning with the 4th absence, your course average will drop dramatically (a 1% deduction off of your final grade per missed
day). Coming late to class can be disruptive. Every two times you arrive late to class will count as one full day absence. Family
emergencies that can be substantiated to the satisfaction of the language program director or serious illnesses verified by a
doctor’s note may be treated as exceptions.
The following criteria are used to determine your participation grade (using a 10-point system):
10 always well-prepared (i.e., does assigned readings and written work before class; fully participates in online discussions);
           is attentive and volunteers often; tries to use German with classmates and instructor; makes the most of each activity;
           shows real resourcefulness and imagination in using the language; responds to and engages classmates in a respectful
           manner; remains critical and open-minded toward target and native culture.
8 usually well-prepared; is attentive and volunteers occasionally; tries to use German with classmates and instructor; makes
           the most of each activity; completes exercises with some imagination and resourcefulness; makes some effort to engage
           fellow students; shows some development of cultural sensitivity.
5 adequately prepared and attentive (often waits to be called upon); occasionally needs to be reminded to use German with
           instructor and classmates; responds and completes exercises with minimal imagination; does not engage classmates
           beyond the minimum requirements for an assignment.
3 is unprepared; makes little effort to participate or complete exercises; rarely tries to use German with instructor or
           classmates.
0 makes no contribution to class whatsoever; is not on task.
Homework (20%)
Daily homework provides regular occasions to practice your German and is therefore key to your language development. Most
of the homework is done online through Sag mal’s accompanying Supersite (VHL portal: www.vhlcentral.com) The exercises
target reading, listening, writing, and speaking abilities. On the Supersite, you get immediate feedback on exercises. Since you
can do these online exercises repeatedly throughout the semester, they also serve as excellent study tools for quizzes and tests.
Homework must be done by midnight on the due date indicated by your instructor, however I strongly recommend to do some
portions of the homework on a daily basis instead of ‘pulling an all-nighter’ just before the deadline. Language learning is far
more effective if it becomes a daily habit. Homework turned in late will be penalized 5% for every day late. Your instructor will
provide you with registration instructions to get you started. Should you experience any technical difficulties, it is your
responsibility to contact VHL’s technical support immediately at http://support.vhlcentral.com, or tel. 800-248-2813. Their staff
is able to trouble-shoot computer difficulties much better when they are contacted soon after issues occur.
In addition to the online homework, more “traditional” homework will be assigned regularly for you to practice your German.
Please note that homework assignments without a written component, such as reading a passage, studying grammar rules, or
memorizing vocabulary, are considered homework and will count toward your grade. Late and/or sloppily-completed homework
will not be accepted.
Writing Tasks (10%)
Three writing tasks over the course of the semester give you the opportunity to strengthen your writing abilities in German in
meaningful and creative ways. Here, the focus is not only on being able to use certain linguistic forms correctly, but also on
developing writing that shows an ability to create a cohesive text and an awareness of audience within an identifiable genre. Your
texts will be assessed according to your ability to address general task requirements, engage with content material, and use
appropriately complex and accurate language. With our writing-process approach (which we will use for the second and third
tasks in this course), you have the option to turn in two versions of the assignment. First drafts are optional and will be graded
by your instructor and returned with feedback to help you revise your work. With the second draft, you can improve the final
essay grade up to two half-grade points. If you do not want feedback, you only need to submit a final draft. A very good revision
can improve a grade from a ‘B’ to an ‘A-’; a satisfactory revision can improve a grade from a ‘B’ to a ‘B+’; a weak revision,
                                                                  2


however, will not improve a grade. Writing tasks are due on the date indicated on the syllabus. For each calendar day that a
paper is submitted late, the grade for the paper will be deducted 10% points.
4 Written Chapter Tests (40%)
Four in-class written exams test your knowledge of and ability to discuss major themes appearing in the chapters. Both content
and language forms (i.e., grammar and vocabulary) will be assessed. If you arrive late for a test, you must still finish the test by
the end of the class period. If you miss a test without having obtained permission from the instructor in advance, you will not
receive any credit for the test. Documented medical or family emergencies, religious holidays, and military service that can be
substantiated to the satisfaction of the coordinator will be treated as exceptions.
Quizzes (10%)
To ensure regular studying of vocabulary from the textbook and other instructional materials, there will be quizzes related to
course readings and targeting key vocabulary on a regular basis. Quizzes will not necessarily be announced. Please note that
no make-ups will be given for missed quizzes, regardless of whether or not they were assigned ahead of time.
Oral Exam (10%)
The oral exam is designed to assess dialogic speaking abilities developed over the course of the semester. With partners,
students will prepare and act out short role-plays for topics related to the chapters studied. Your instructor will provide
information for you at a later date on the format and content of the exam. The exam will be administered during the last week of
classes.
Grading Scale:
The following grading scale will be used to determine your final course grade:
              A       93-100 %              B      83-86.9 %               C      73-76.9 %            D      63-66.9 %
              A-      90-92.9 %             B-     80-82.9 %               C-     70-72.9 %            D-     60-62.9 %
              B+      87-89.9 %             C+     77-79.9 %               D+     67-69.9 %            F     below 59.9 %
Please note: There are no incompletes given in German 612.
Studying vocabulary:
It is essential for your success in GER 612 that you study vocabulary daily and thoroughly. I recommend the study technique that
research shows to be the most effective: flashcards. Always study vocabulary both ways: Begin with German > English, then
switch to English > German. Make sure to study genders and plurals along with the nouns, and conjugations with irregular verbs.
Come up with as many mnemonic devices as possible. Pay attention to spellings and practice pronunciations as you go along,
whether silently or aloud. Study the vocabulary items in a different order each time, and gradually sort out the ones you have
mastered. We will address some of these strategies in the first few days of class, but make sure to seek advice at any time, if you
feel your studying of vocabulary is inefficient.
Extra Credit:
A great way to practice your German (and get extra credit) is to take part in the many department-sponsored events, including
the German film series, the radio show Es klingt wie Deutsch, UT’s German Club, and weekly Stammtisch. Dates, places and times
for all extra-curricular events will be announced in class. Participation in each event counts as a 0.5% point toward your overall
grade. You can receive up to 3% points total through extra credit.
Opportunities to Speak German:
UT and the wider Austin community offers a number of opportunities to practice your German informally and get to know others
interested in the language and culture:
                                                                   3


1.    Austin German Language Meetup Group: 7 p.m. monthly conversation group (for more info, see: www.meetup.com/austin-
      german)
2.    German Film Series: Contemporary films shown in Burdine Hall, schedule will be announced in class.
3.    UT’s German Club: This is a fun and active group for learners of German at all levels of proficiency. Check out their Facebook
      site at https://www.facebook.com/groups/883700825052043.
4.    Es klingt wie Deutsch: UT’s famous student-run German language radio show. Check them out on Facebook at:
      https://www.facebook.com/Es-Klingt-Wie-Deutsch-214889598551642. This program welcomes the participation of
      speakers of German from all levels of proficiency. Don’t be shy!
5.    Stammtisch: Speak German with other undergraduates and graduate students from UT in a low-pressure and fun
      environment! Times and dates will be announced in class.
Placement Exams:
If you are new to UT and have taken German before, or if you have acquired German in any other context (e.g., family, extensive
stay in a German-speaking country, etc.), you may want to take the placement exam/credit by examination test offered by UT’s
Center for Teaching and Learning to ensure that you are attending the appropriate course and that you can claim credit for
courses. See the schedule and register immediately at: http://ctl.utexas.edu/studenttesting/. If you have any questions regarding
placement, please contact your instructor.
Errors and mistakes
Errors and mistakes are inevitable. Your instructor fosters an atmosphere where mistakes will be treated respectfully.
Language learning requires risk-taking, and it is important for you to feel safe and relaxed, so that you can speak up in front of
the class without any anxiety, even if you are not certain whether your contribution is 100% correct. Please do not hesitate to
contact your instructor if there is anything in the classroom that prevents you from speaking in class.
Questions? Comments? Concerns?
We value your feedback. If you enjoy your class, let your instructor know and tell your friends. If there are any aspects of the
class that you do not feel comfortable with, please do not hesitate to inform your instructor. If you are not comfortable with
approaching him/her, feel free to contact Dr. Nick Henry (nhenry@austin.utexas.edu). As the language program director in the
Department of Germanic Studies, he will be eager to find solutions.
Your Next Course:
Students who have successfully completed GER 612 should continue their German study with GER 328 (Advanced German
Grammar) or GER 331L (Advanced Conversation and Composition). You are also encouraged to seek the guidance of the
Undergraduate Advisor in your enrollment decisions (see below)
Advising, Upper-Division German, Majoring and Minoring:
For information about majoring or minoring in German, please go to
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/germanic/undergraduate/Advising.php.
Study Abroad in Würzburg, Germany:
The Department of Germanic Studies offers a number of study abroad opportunities including a summer program (the German
and European Studies Summer Program in Würzburg) that specifically targets language students like you. Specifically, we offer
GER 330C every year, an upper-division Composition and Conversation course for students who have successfully completed
GER 612. In addition, you also can enroll in courses in literature, art history, economics, and politics in Germany, taught in
English. Up to 9 UT credits can be earned. For more information, please see our web site
(www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/germanic/StudyAbroad/Wuerzburg.php), or contact Dr. Peter Hess (tel. 512-232-6352,
phess@austin.utexas.edu).
Academic Integrity:
Please keep in mind that language learning is a long-term process and necessarily involves making mistakes. Your instructor is
there to help you along the way, but ultimately the effort must come from you to make the experience worthwhile.
                                                                 4


                                                     University of Texas Honor Code
             The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
              opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
                              integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
1. Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted by a student
      in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work, unless the instructor explicitly allows collaboration.
2. You are encouraged to study together and to discuss information and concepts covered in lecture and the sections with
      other students. You can give “consulting” help to or receive “consulting” help from such students.
3. Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave material to be
      copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to
      include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
4. During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the examinations, nor may
      you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during the examinations will
      result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
5. Using online translation packages (e.g., Google Translate) is not permissible. Unlike dictionaries and grammar references,
      such programs simply provide ONE translation, rather than allowing you to choose among various words/tenses, etc. to
      come up with the best word or phrase on your own. Moreover, translation programs very often produce inaccurate, incorrect
      translations, and are easy to identify. Students will learn far more by doing their own work and will avoid risking serious
      academic consequences.
Students who do not comply with University rules on scholastic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and
the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, visit the Student
Judicial Services website at deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Students with Disabilities:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Accommodations for Religious Holidays:
By UT Austin policy, students must notify their instructor of pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students:
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-
mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at:
https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy.
The class will use the course management site Canvas, accessible to each enrolled student through his/her UT Direct account.
E-mail reminders and updates will be sent through this site.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
If you are worried about someone who is acting strangely, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                     5


Counseling and Mental Health Center:
College life can be overwhelming. If you ever feel distressed, the Counseling & Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling,
psychiatric consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students’ academic and life goals and enhance their personal
growth and well-being: http://cmhc.utexas.edu.
Title IX and Sexual Harassment:
The University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from discriminatory conduct
based on gender. As required by Title IX, the University encourages any student or non-student who thinks that he or she has
been subjected to sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence) or sexual misconduct by another student,
member of the faculty or staff, or campus visitor or contractor, to immediately report the incident to any of the persons or offices
listed below.
  Institutional Title IX Coordinator                             Deputy Title IX Coordinator for Students
  University Compliance Services                                 Student Emergency Services
  2.206 UT Administration Building (UTA)                         Office of the Dean of Students
  512-232-3992                                                   4.104 Student Services Building (SSB)
                                                                 512-471-5017
Students may also report incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence) or sexual misconduct to
any university Responsible Employee, who is then required to promptly notify any of the above Title IX coordinators of the
reported incident. Complaints or allegations of student-on-student sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual
violence) or sexual misconduct will be handled by the Office of the Dean of Students. Cases of sexual violence may also be
reported to the University of Texas Police Department, the City of Austin Police Department and other local law enforcement
authorities. The Title IX Coordinators can assist individuals with contacting these law enforcement agencies.
Emergency Evacuation Policy:
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when an alarm is activated or
an announcement is made. Please note the following policies regarding evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be
      the one you used when you entered the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow your instructor’s instructions.
Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or
the Fire Prevention Services office.
SB11:
According to SB11 (“Campus Carry”), individuals who hold a required license are eligible to carry a concealed handgun in this
classroom. UT Austin is obliged to follow SB11 to the letter and is not at liberty to enact policies or provisions that violate it. Any
changes to the law must come through the state legislative process. Instructors may not impose a ban on concealed handguns
in their classrooms. If you consider exercising this right, please consult the relevant policies in the Handbook of Operating
Procedures (https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/campus-concealed-carry). The open carry of handguns is not permitted
anywhere on campus, including in this classroom. Anyone who sees an openly carried handgun in this classroom or elsewhere
on campus should immediately call 911.
                                                                  6


                                    Kalender für Deutsch 612 – Sommer 2019
All dates and assignments are tentative and can be modified by the instructor.
                                             Im Unterricht                                    Zu Hause
                     Datum
                                             (prepare in textbook for this date)         (assignments due)
            Do          6.6                  Willkommen, Kennenlernen
                                             506 & 507 Wiederholung
 1. Woche   Fr          7.6                  Lektion 9A: Die Alltagsroutine
                                             Kommunikation & Kultur: Die Kur,
                                             Reflexive verbs with accusative and
                                             dative pronouns
            Mo          10.6                 Strukturen & Fotoroman: Guten
                                             Morgen, Herr Professor! &
                                             Reciprocal verbs and reflexives used
                                             with prepositions
            Di          11.6                 Lektion 9B: Beim Arzt
                                             Kommunikation,
                                             Fotoroman & Kultur: Im
                                                                                           Schreiben #1
                                             Krankenhaus & Apotheken
                                             Wiederholung
                                                             QUIZ 1
            Mi          12.6                 Strukturen: Der Konjunktiv II &
                                             würden with the infinitive
                                             Weiter geht’s: Lesen/Schreiben
            Do          13.6                 Einführung der 1. Schreibaufgabe
                                             ROLLENSPIEL #1
 2. Woche
            Fr          14.6                 Wiederholung
                                                             TEST 1
            Mo          17.6                 Lektion 10A: Besorgungen
                                             Kommunikation
                                                                                     Schreiben #2 v1 (optional)
                                             Fotoroman & Kultur: Gute
                                             Neuigkeiten & Fußgängerzonen
            Di          18.6                 Strukturen: Subordinating
                                             conjunctions, adjectives as nouns,
                                             futur I
            Mi          19.6                 Lektion 10B: In der Stadt
                                             Kommunikation
                                             Foroman & Kultur: Sabites Nacht &
 3. Woche                                    Kabarett
            Do          20.6                 Strukturen: prepositions, nationality
                                             Wiederholung
                                                            QUIZ 2
            Fr          21.6                 Weiter geht’s: Lesen/Schreiben
                                             Einführung der 2. Schreibaufgabe
                                             ROLLENSPIEL #2
                                                           7


           Mo          Wiederholung                          Schreiben #2 v2 (mandatory)
                24.6
                                      TEST 2
           Di   25.6   Lektion 11A: Im Büro
                       Kommunikation
                                                              Schreiben #3 v1 (optional)
                       Fotoroman & Kultur: Sag niemals nie
4. Woche
                       & Familienunternehmen
           Mi   26.6   Strukturen: relative pronouns, past
                       tense
           Do   27.6   Wiederholung: relative pronouns
           Fr   28.6   Lektion 11B: Berufe
                       Kommunikation
                                       QUIZ 3
           Mo   1.7    Fotoroman & Kultur: Schlechte
                       Nachrichten & Sozialversicherungen
           Di   2.7    Strukturen: Futur II
5. Woche
           Mi   3.7    Strukturen: adjective endings
           Do   4.7    Tag der Unabhängigkeit (kein
                       Unterricht)
           Fr   5.7    Weiter geht’s: Lesen/Schreiben
           Mo   8.7    Einführung der 3. Schreibaufgabe
                                 ROLLENSPIEL #3
           Di   9.7    Wiederholung
                                      TEST 3
           Mi   10.7   Lektion 12A: In der Natur
6. Woche               Kommunikation
           Do   11.7   Fotoroman & Kultur: In der
                       Kunstgalerie & Landschaften
                       Deutschlands
           Fr   12.7   Strukturen: Der Konjunktiv in der
                       Vergangenheit
           Mo   15.7   Strukturen: Das Partizip Präsens
                       Wiederholung
                                      QUIZ 4
           Di   16.7   ROLLENSPIEL #4
7. Woche               Lektion 12B: Die Umwelt
                                  Kommunikation
           Mi   17.7   Fotoroman & Kultur: Auf
                       Wiedersehen, Berlin! & Grüne Berufe
                       in Sachsen
                                      8


           Do   18.7   Strukturen: Passive voice
           Fr   19.7   Wdh. Strukturen: Passive voice
           Mo   22.7            Mündliche Prüfung
           Di   23.7            Mündliche Prüfung
           Mi   24.7   Anschließendes Gespräch zum Kurs
8. Woche
           Do   25.7                      Film
           Fr   26.7   Film Discussion
           Mo   29.7   Wiederholung
9. Woche   Di   30.7                  TEST 4
                                      9
