                             Asian Americans in the South
                             AAS 330 (32090) / AMS 321 (31115)
Instructor: Dr. Aarti Bhalodia
Course Description
This course focuses on the history and culture of Asian Americans in the South. We will
examine what brought Asians to the American South. How have Asian Americans in the South
created and sustained community? We will study the development of Asian American
communities in metropolitan areas, such as Austin, Dallas/Fort Worth, Houston, Atlanta, and
New Orleans. The course will highlight the diversity within Asian America by exploring
Chinese, Indian, Vietnamese, Filipino, Korean, Pakistani and Japanese communities.
While focusing on contemporary Asian American life in the South, the course will explore
legacies of Jim Crow segregation and the impact of the Civil Rights Movement on Asian
American community development and residential living patterns in the South. Through the
semester we will consider the following questions: How have Asian Americans negotiated
culture, language, and/or religion in the South? What challenges and opportunities have they
faced as they navigate socio-economic, racial, and social boundaries?
This course carries the Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag. The purpose of the Cultural
Diversity in the United States Flag is for students to explore in depth the shared practices and
beliefs of one or more underrepresented cultural groups subject to persistent marginalization. In
addition to learning about these diverse groups in relation to their specific contexts, students
should engage in an active process of critical reflection. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one underrepresented cultural group in the U.S.
https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about
Reading Assignments
Book chapters and articles on Canvas. The course is listed as AAS 330 for all students.
Joshi, Khyati Y. and Jigna Desai ed. Asian Americans in Dixie: Race and Migration in the South.
Champaign, Illinois: University of Illinois Press. 2013. University Coop and PCL Reserves.
Mohl, Raymond A., John E. Van Sant and Chizuru Saeki ed. Far East, Down South: Asians in
the American South. Tuscaloosa: The University of Alabama Press, 2016. E-Book – UT library.
Assignments and Grading
                                                  1


Attendance and class participation: 10%
Written assignments: 10%
Quizzes (five): 50%
Research paper description and bibliography: 5%
Research paper presentation: 5%
Research paper: 20%
           Grade          Cutoff
           A              93%
           A-             90%
           B+             87%
           B              83%
           B-             80%
           C+             77%
           C              73%
           C-             70%
           D+             67%
           D              63%
           D-             60%
           F              <60%
Attendance: You are required to attend all class meetings. I expect to be informed before the start
of class if you are unable to attend. More than two unexcused absences will affect your grade.
Class participation: You are responsible for completing all assigned readings before each class
meeting. Participation in class activities is crucial and a component of your final grade. We will
have regular class discussions based on required readings in which you are expected to
participate. If I am not satisfied with class participation I will give a pop quiz.
Class etiquette: Students are not permitted to use laptops, tablets or phones while class is in
session. During lectures you should be listening attentively to the instructor and taking notes. All
PowerPoint slides will be posted on Canvas. During class discussions all students are required to
treat each other with respect. Students who are repeatedly disruptive will receive a poor class
participation grade. Disruptive behavior includes showing up to class late, leaving early, talking
to a neighbor while class is in session, talking/texting on a phone, checking email/playing
computer games and sleeping.
Written assignments: In-class and take-home written assignments will be based on assigned
reading, lectures, films and other relevant course material.
Quizzes: You are responsible for completing five quizzes, each worth 10% of the overall grade.
Quizzes will consist of multiple choice and short answer questions.
Research Paper: The essay is a 8 page (double spaced) research paper due on the last day of
class. I will discuss ways in which one researches and writes a successful paper. You can also
                                                    2


find research essay guides on Canvas. A research description (350 words) along with a
preliminary bibliography is due in class on the assigned date.
You will also get an opportunity to share your work. In the final weeks of the semester all
students will give a 10 minute oral presentation. You need to present on the day you signed up
for. If you are absent on your chosen date, you will lose all points for this assignment.
Deadlines: Hardcopy of written assignments are due at the beginning of class on the due date.
For every day your assignment is late you will lose one letter grade.
If you are having trouble in class or are dissatisfied with your assignment grade/s come see me
promptly. Don’t wait until the end of the semester to seek my guidance on how to improve your
standing in the course.
Academic Integrity
As per University policy, those who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Refer to http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php for more
information on academic integrity, plagiarism, and consequences of academic dishonesty.
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
http://sites.utexas.edu/disability/
If you have a disability you need to notify me during the first two weeks of the semester and
provide appropriate documentation from SSD (Services for Students with Disabilities).
Emergency Situation
Please familiarize yourself with recommendations from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security (512-471-5767) on what to do in the event of an emergency.
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: utexas.edu/emergency.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-
concerns-advice-line
The instructor reserves the right to change the syllabus. All changes will be announced in
class and on Canvas.
                                          Class Schedule
                                                   3


Jan 22 W Introduction
Jan 24 F Background to the course
Part I   History of Asian Americans in the South
Jan 27 M “Manilaman” – Filipinos in Louisiana.
Jan 29 W Coolie trade. Canvas.
Jan 31 F Asian labor. Canvas.
Feb 3 M  Immigration laws
Feb 5 W  Asian Americans in Dixie, chapter 4.
Feb 7 F  Quiz 1
Feb 10 M Mississippi Triangle – Documentary screening in class
Feb 12 W Far East, Down South, chapter 6. E-Book.
Feb 14 F Far East, Down South, chapter 7. E-Book.
Feb 17 M No Class
Feb 19 W Vivek Bald, Bengali Harlem, chapter 1. Canvas.
Feb 21 F Bald, Bengali Harlem, chapter 2. Canvas.
Feb 24 M Quiz 2
Feb 26 W Asian Americans in Austin and Beyond. Canvas.
Feb 28 F Asian Americans in Austin and Beyond. Canvas.
Mar 2 M  Far East, Down South, chapter 3. E-Book.
Mar 4 W  Far East, Down South, chapter 2. E-Book.
Mar 6 F  Quiz 3
Mar 9 M  Post WWII
                                         4


Mar 11 W      Relocation, Arkansas: Aftermath of Incarceration – Documentary screening in
              class
Mar 13 F      No reading
March 16 – 20         Spring Break – No Class
Mar 23 M      Changes in immigration laws
Mar 25 W      Asian Americans in Dixie, chapter 5.
Mar 27 F      Demographic changes in the South. Canvas.
Mar 30 M      Quiz 4
Apr 1 W       Asian Americans in Dixie, chapter 6.
Apr 3 F       Asian Americans in Houston. Canvas.
Apr 6 M       TBA – Assignment due
Apr 8 W       Far East, Down South, chapter 9. E-Book.
Apr 10 F      A Village Called Versailles – Documentary screening in class.
Apr 13 M      Asian Americans in Dixie, chapter 10
Research paper description and bibliography due at the beginning of class on April 13.
Print Copy.
Apr 15 W      Asian Texans. Canvas.
Apr 17 F      Asian Texans. Canvas.
Apr 20 M      Quiz 5
Apr 22 W      Asian Texans. Canvas.
Apr 24 F      Asian American political participation assignment due
Apr 27 – May 6        Research paper presentations
May 8 F       Course wrap up
Research paper due at the beginning of class on May 8. Print copy.
                                                5
