                  Introduction to Advertising/PR Research (309R): Fall 2019
                          Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Instructor
Matthew S. Eastin, PhD
Professor
Office: BCM #4.324
Office Hours: T | 11am to 1pm (I am also open to meet by appointment).
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
UT Email: matt.eastin@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants
Buduo Wang
Office Hours location: BCM #4.382
Office Hours: W |12:00 to 3:30, Th | 12:00 to 3:30 and 9pm to 11pm (virtual office hours), F |
12:00 to 3:00,
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Daniela De Luca
Office hours location: BCM # 4.382
Office Hours: M | 9:00-12:00 & 2:00-5:00, T | 9:00-11:00. W | 5:00-7:00 (virtual office hours),
TH | 9:00-11:00
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Required Resources
Davis, J. J.(2012). Advertising Research: Theory and Practice, 2nd Ed. Saddle River, NJ:
        Prentice Hall.
Buy at the Coop or online, bound copy, eBook or value edition – wherever you can get it and in
whatever form you desire, just be sure to get the 2nd edition.
Technological Requirements
All students will be required to use excel and SPSS throughout the semester. You may access
SPSS in the following ways:
●   Campus Labs: MEZ 2.104 (5 copies)
●   You may purchase a 6-month or 1-year student license of IBM SPSS (Base Grad Pack) for
    $42.99 or $65.99, respectively. Visit the following: http://www.onthehub.com/spss/
● IBM SPSS free trial: https://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/technology/spss/spss-trials.html


Course Goals
From a media and advertising perspective, this course will cover essential statistical analyses
needed for basic advertising research. Quantitatively, within the context of advertising examples,
this class will cover sampling, descriptive statistics, variable development and measurement,
probability, group comparisons, and relational and predictive testing. Again, each of the topics
will be advertising-based in example and context.
Flagged Course
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed
to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments
you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should, therefore, expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-
world problems.
Lectures
All lectures will be posted to CANVAS. Students can view lectures at any time prior to taking
the exam. Lectures may be in video, audio or presentation format (although most are video).
Assignments will be covered in lecture and labs. Students can follow up with the instructor or
TA during their online (or off-line) office hours. Due to the nature of this online class, all
material needed for exam 1 will be posted by August 28th, 2019. Following exam 1, all material
needed for exam 2 will be posted. Following exam 2, all remaining materials will be posted.
Grading breakdown is as follows:
Individual Assignment (x3 – 10% per)                    =       30%
Exam 1 and 2 Flashcards (5% per)                        =       10%
Exam 1                                                  =       15%
Exam 2                                                  =       20%
Exam 3 (cumulative)                                     =       25%
Total                                                         100%


Grade Breakdown
 93-100 = A     87-89 = B+         77-79 = C+          65-69 = D+
                                                                          59 and below = F
 90-92 = A -    83-86 = B          73-76 = C           60-64 = D
                80-82 = B -        70-72 = C –
Individual Assignments
There will be three individual assignments. TWO of the assignments will require you to analyze,
display (visually) and write-up data using SPSS. Simply using SPSS output will not be
sufficient for assignment completion. Meaning, when you are asked to display content in a
chart, you will need to customize the chart. More information/examples will be presented in class
on the date indicated on the course schedule below.
Exams
There will be three exams throughout the semester. Exam #3 will be cumulative so make sure
you go back and review early class content. Make-up exams will be given only in instances of
excused absences. Furthermore, you must notify me beforehand about an excused absence for an
exam. On the scheduled exam days, the exam will be available online from 5pm to 9pm.
You can take the exam at any point during this time period. However, once you start, you will
need to finish the exam. All exams will be timed and will end at their designated time allotment.
Meaning, at 9pm the exam will close.
Make-up Policy Exams must be taken during the scheduled exam time. A make-up exam can
only be taken if the student presents proof of a valid medical excuse or extenuating circumstance.
Medical excuses and extenuating circumstances will be verified and judged as warranting a
special case by the course instructor. ALL class assignments must be turned in by the posted
day and time. No late work will be accepted.
Communicating with the Instructor
Contact me via e-mail (USE the email given above: introresearchadpr@gmail.com) or in-
person (office hours or by appointment). I check this e-mail regularly and will do my best to
respond as soon as I can; however, do not expect a response immediately, during the weekend, or
at midnight before the test—simply stated, plan ahead and give me time to respond. For quickest
response, please put "ADV 309R" in the subject heading.
        Piazza
        For most questions related to course material or class administration, please post your
        question to Piazza. This is the most efficient way for us to share knowledge among the
        entire learning community. Never doubt the value of your questions – if you are
        wondering about something, at least a few of your classmates are wondering the same
        thing!


        This semester, we will be using Piazza as a class-wide discussion forum. If you have
        questions or topics that you'd like to discuss with your classmates, this is the place to do
        it. The system is highly catered to getting you help fast and efficiently from classmates,
        TAs, and instructors. Rather than emailing questions to the teaching staff, we encourage
        you to post your questions on Piazza.
Academic Dishonesty
Any form of academic dishonesty, including plagiarism, manufacturing quotes or sources, using
another’s reporting, research or quotes without giving proper attribution, will result in an
automatic grade of “F” for your assignment, possibly the course and possibly worse. If you’re
ever unsure whether you’re crossing the line, ask – that’s what good practitioners and good
journalists do. Here’s the basic university policy on academic dishonesty:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html (Links to an external site.)
Special needs
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic adjustments for
qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512)
471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please see me at the
beginning of the semester if you have special needs or require alternative testing.
Tentative Nature of this Syllabus
This syllabus represents a contract in the works. Events that transpire during the semester may,
in rare circumstances, require me to modify the syllabus. I will announce the modification in
class and on the course Canvas. Meaning, the syllabus will update weekly with new reading and
any changes in topics. Ultimately, it is your responsibility to keep up with any such
modifications and be aware of current policies, deadlines, etc.


Course Schedule
 Timeline               Topic(s)      Reading(s) Assignment   Description
                                                 Due Dates
                        Pre-Course    Chapter 1
 Week of August 28th    Activities    and 2
                        Introduction
                        Sampling/
 Week of September 2rd  Introduction  Chapter 4
                        to SPSS
 Week of September 9th  Measurement   Chapter 10
                                      Chapter 11
 Week of September 16th Descriptive   Chapter 15
                        Statistics
                                                 Flashcards
 September 20th                                  Due – 5pm
                                                 Canvas
                                                 Submission
 September 25th         Exam 1
                                                              Gary Wilcox,
 Week of September 30th Data          Chapter 14              Chein Yang,
                        Visualization                         Ted Talk
                        P-Value and
                        Chi-Square
 Week of October 7th    T-test/       Chapter 16
                        Analysis of
                        Variance
                                                 Assignment 1
 October 16th                                    – 5pm
                                                 Canvas
                                                 Submission
 Week of October 21st   Correlation/
                        Regression
 Week of October 28th   Factorial     Chapter 16
                        Design


                                              Flashcards
November 1st                                  for Exam 2
                                              Due –
                                              Canvas at
                                              5pm.
November 6th          Exam 2
                                              Assignment 2
November 11th                                 – 5pm
                                              Canvass
                                              Submission
                      Segmentation Chapter 17
Week of November 11th              and 9
                      Biometric
                      Research
Week of November 18th Ad Metrics   TBA
Week of November 25th Thanksgiving
                      Ad Metrics –
Week of December 2nd  Interview
                      Digital
                      Metrics
                                              Assignment 3
Due December 6th                              – 5pm
                                              Canvass
                                              Submission
December 10th         Final Exam
                      Review
                      (offline)
December 12th         Exam 3
