                                                                                                   MKT 337 –
                                                                                 PRINCIPLES OF MARKETING
                                                                                                     (#71982)
                                                                                    SUMMER SEMESTER 2020
                                                                  M/W 8:00 AM – 11:30 AM (Online via Zoom)
INSTRUCTOR
Alex Gabbi
Office: CBA 6.314 (Via Zoom)
Office hours: MW 12:00-1:00 PM (Via Zoom @ https://utexas.zoom.us/j/3641517004)
UT email: alex.gabbi@mccombs.utexas.edu
TEACHING ASSISTANT
Name: Andrea Lloyd
UT E-Mail: aclloyd@utexas.edu
CONTACT
Office hours, by appointment, e-mail, phone or text message (512-633-1193)
COURSE DESCRIPTION
The primary objective of Marketing 337 will be to introduce you to the basic concepts, practices and tools
of marketing. The course has a broad scope, is contemporary in outlook, and managerial in orientation.
Regardless of the field you ultimately choose to pursue, this course should give you a strong grounding in
the marketing discipline.
For marketing majors, you will find that this course provides a strong foundation for your future studies and
work opportunities. As we will quickly learn in class however, “marketing” is not just for marketing majors.
It is not simply a function or a department. Instead, marketing is a process which allows an organization to
create and deliver value for customers – hopefully more value than competitors offer – and therefore
provides the engine for organic growth of an organization. No matter what field you study in college and
what career you eventually pursue, your success in business will be largely determined by your ability to
deliver more value to customers than your competitors.
More specifically, in this class you will have the opportunity to…:
      1) …understand that “marketing” is the discipline that studies how organizations can achieve superior
          organic growth
      2) …explain and apply the marketing process (i.e., developing promising configurations of insights,
          strategies, and execution) that gears the organization for growth
      3) …analyze and apply the marketing mix instruments (i.e., key tools and concepts pertaining to
          product management, price management, communication management, and sales management)
COURSE DESIGN AND PHILOSOPHY:
To start with, it is important for you to understand marketing-specific terminology, concepts, & activities.
• The first step in accomplishing this will be for you to read the assigned chapters by the dates outlined in
      the schedule.
• In addition, our class discussions will reinforce key concepts.


Alex Gabbi – Summer 2020                      MKT 337                                                        2
Reading text chapters and attending class is, however, only the first step. To really understand this
material, you must also learn to apply it. To accomplish this, we will also have:
• Assigned readings from “popular press” sources (e.g., The Wall Street Journal)
• Class discussions & activities
• Several assignments intended to give you an opportunity to apply what you have learned
READING MATERIALS
MKTG-12 (use a different edition only at your own risk)
     Lamb, Hair, & McDaniel – Cengage [Note - extra online access/modules are optional]
     (available at the UT Co-op or at online book retailers)
Course Articles
     (available on Canvas)
Lecture Slides & Course Assignments
     (available on Canvas)
EVALUATION & GRADING
Grades will follow plus/minus system with these cut-offs. A: 93-100, A-: 90-92.99, B+: 87-89.99, B: 83-86.99,
B-: 80-82.99, C+: 77-79.99, C: 73-76.99, C-: 70-72.99, D+: 67-69.99, D: 63-66.99, D-: 60-62.99, F: 59.99 or
lower. Decimals will be not be rounded up – an 89.7 average will earn a B+, not an A-.
Mid-Term Exam                                    25%
Final Exam                                       25%
Marketing Plan Assignment 1                      15%
Marketing Plan Assignment 2                      15%
Class Participation                              20%             every day, excluding exam days
____________________________________________________
Total                                            100%
Exams
There will be two exams and, collectively, they account for up to 50% of your grade. The exams will only be
given on the assigned exam dates during class time. Exams end promptly at the designated time on the
course schedule regardless of when you begin, so be sure to begin on time, and no students will be allowed
to begin their exam after the first student finishes. See exam details below.
         Format: The exams will include multiple-choice and short answer/essay questions. Each exam will
cover only the material from that portion of the syllabus. The material will be drawn from the textbook,
assigned readings, and the lectures/discussions, including guest speakers, but not current event articles
that we use as the foundation for discussion. All exams will be “open note” and “open book.”
         Appeals: After taking an exam, you may submit an appeal on any question for which you believe
there is some cause for review. Each appeal must be made by the end of the second class session following
the posting of exam grades and must include the specific reason for the appeal, including the explanation
for the reason why you believe the answer you provided is the best choice, along with documentation or a
citation as backup for your exam response (e.g., passage from the textbook, lecture slide, etc.).
Marketing Plan Assignments
These assignments will give you some practice creating specific and important sections of a typical
marketing plan for a current, real business venture. I will provide you with at least one choice for you to
select from, but you are encouraged to select a topic that is of personal interest. You will be able to work
independently or with one other student as a team on this project. For the first assignment, you will create
a Situation Analysis, including an overall SWOT analysis along with an industry and customer analysis. For


Alex Gabbi – Summer 2020                       MKT 337                                                          3
the second assignment, you will describe the Market-Product Focus for the product, product line, or brand.
Additional details on these assignments will follow separately.
Class Participation & Attendance
Each class session, you will receive a participation score from 0-3, based on the quality and quantity of your
participation during that class. One point will be awarded for attending the class session. The second and
third point will be awarded based on your quality of contribution that session. Answer questions, pose
questions, participate in class exercises and provide insightful observations. Keep in mind that quality is an
important component of this - simply giving one-word responses to questions I pose to the class will not
automatically result in 1 point each. Periodic cold calls also count here.
Note that if you arrive more than 10 minutes late to a class session or leave more than 10 minutes early,
you will not receive the one point for attendance. Additionally, if tardiness becomes a chronic problem
(e.g., consistently showing up 3-5 minutes late for class), then I will consider more penalties because of the
disruption.
At the end of the semester, the participation scores will be summed and then averaged across the entire
class. If your total score is equal to or greater than the class average, then you will receive 20 points (or
20% of your total class grade). If your total score is below the class average, then you will receive between
0-20 points, based on the distribution of points across the class participation scores below the average.
Classroom Environment
My goal is to provide tools and create an environment for learning. I believe my responsibility as an
instructor is to ensure that this class contributes to the overall return on your investment by providing a
worthwhile set of tools and resources and doing my best to demonstrate how interesting and important
this topic can be to you and the world-at-large.
Since you all learn in different ways, your responsibility is to take advantage of all the resources provided in
all the ways that are best for you. I expect you to be very active in your learning, rather than sitting on the
sidelines as a passive observer. I have created a fairly specific structure to this course but will maintain
flexibility so that we can adapt to the needs and desires of those participating.
Throughout this course I am trying to encourage you to read the material from the resources provided,
critically think about how they apply to a variety of marketing circumstances, make connections to concepts
larger than marketing, and consider how you will make the world a better place through your work.
You are all bright people who learn in different ways. Because you all come from a variety of experiences
and backgrounds, I am hoping that each of you will contribute greatly to the knowledge built in this class by
sharing your thoughts. Come prepared to engage in the discussions, whether you actually speak out loud
or not, by not just reading the required cases and chapters, but by also forming opinions and questions
about the material presented. I will call upon you from time to time, but these will not be attempts to
harass or embarrass you, I promise. I simply want to give everyone more experience in being prepared to
speak on the spot about various topics.
TECHNOLOGY TOOLS
Canvas
One tool you may find particularly helpful to your group work is in Canvas. If you sign on to Canvas
(canvas.utexas.edu) you will find a listing of your courses for this semester. If you click on our course, you
will see a number of tools available for your use. The primary tools that you will find helpful in terms of
groups will be the E-mail* feature (you can send e-mails to your group as a whole), and the Groups feature.


Alex Gabbi – Summer 2020                      MKT 337                                                         4
Just click on the Communication button. You will see links for E-Mail and for Groups. Your Groups pages
will allow you to have, for your group members only, threaded discussions, a chat room, and a way to post
documents that you can all see to review. All course materials that I reference during class will also be
posted in the “Files” section of Canvas.
Note that the e-mail address that Canvas has for you is the address that you provided to UT when you
registered. If you would like to double-check or change it, go to
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/index.cgi. Then click “My Addresses” on the bottom left side of the
page. That will show you what UT has as your official e-mail address. That is the address that Canvas will
use.
Note that Canvas provides a roster of all students in the class. Therefore, please read the University policy
listed below.
     Beginning Fall 2001, web-based, password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited
courses taught at The University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of
information that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a
component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters
must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For
information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html
Zoom
All class instruction will be online via Zoom. Other technology tools may be periodically used but you will
be given instructions for those tools on a case-by-case basis.
Live Instruction/Presentations via Zoom: Class will be conducted during our normal meeting time. To join a
class session, please go to the Zoom meeting link available on Canvas for the class date/time in question.
Note that attendance will be taken as normal based on logging in, leaving video active and keeping the
Zoom screen “in focus”. Please also note that since class attendance is mandatory, classes will not be
recorded. If you miss a class, you are responsible for learning the material on your own or obtaining notes
from one of your classmates.
Virtual Office Hours: To come to virtual office hours, just come to the appropriate Zoom meeting room
(https://utexas.zoom.us/j/3641517004) during regular office hour times. Of course, as always, you can also
text or e-mail me at any time with questions you might have.
                                             Important Notifications
                                            Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
                                               Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project
in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.


Alex Gabbi – Summer 2020                       MKT 337                                                           5
                                        Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching
this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class,
you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement
on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to
ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our
academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student
Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies
and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic
dishonesty.
                                                  Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
         buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
         assembling outside.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first
         week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 (or
         https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php).
     • Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
         http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.


Alex Gabbi – Summer 2020            MKT 337                                        6
                                      Course Schedule
 Date        Session     Topics                       Readings
 6/8         1:30-2:30   Overview of Marketing        Chapter 1
                                                      “Fortnite Success Factors”
             2:40-3:40   Strategic Planning /         Chapter 2
                         Marketing Plans              “The Inside Story of How the
                                                      iPhone Crippled Blackberry”
             3:50-4:50   Marketing Environment        Chapter 4
                                                      “As Middle Class Shrinks,
                                                      P&G Marketing Aims High”
 6/10        1:30-2:30   Marketing Environment        Amazon Pillpack Articles (2)
             2:40-3:40   Marketing Environment        “Are we one Step Closer to
                                                      Pilotless Commercial Jets?”
                                                      “Summary of Homo Deus”
             3:50-4:50   Marketing Research / DSS     Chapter 9
                                                      “Tracking Technology Sheds
                                                      Light on Shopper Habits”
                                                      “How AI Will Reinvent
                                                      Market Research”
 6/15        1:30-2:30   Consumer Decision Making     Chapter 6
                                                      “BMW Seeks Idea Class”
             2:40-3:40   Business Marketing           Chapter 7
                                                      “The Most Destructive,
                                                      Unpredictable Force in
                                                      Tech”
                                                      “Popular Selling
                                                      Methodologies”
             3:50-4:50   GUEST: B2B in a B2C World    “Four M’s of Influencer
                                                      Marketing”
 6/17        1:30-2:30   Metrics                      “Marketing Performance
                                                      Metrics”
             2:40-3:40   STP                          Chapter 8
                                                      “How to Create Detailed
                                                      Buyer Personas for Your
                                                      Business”
                                                      “Tesla’s New Rival”
                                                      “Lego Sets Its Sights on a
                                                      Growing Market: Stressed-
                                                      Out Adults”
             3:50-4:50   Product Development          Chapter 10
                                                      “Costco’s Kirkland and Other
                                                      Store Brands are Having a
                                                      Moment”
 6/22        1:30-2:30   Product Management           Chapter 11
                                                      “Brandless the Online Store
                                                      that Sells Everything”
             2:40-3:40   Services / Non-Profits       Chapter 12
                                                      “Why Can’t We Sell Charity
                                                      Like We Sell Perfume?”
             3:45-5:00   MID-TERM EXAM                Chapters 1, 2, 4, 6-12
                         MARKETING PLAN 1 DUE


Alex Gabbi – Summer 2020                   MKT 337                                                      7
 6/24         1:30-2:30         Marketing Channels                   Chapter 14
                                                                     “Amazon is Opening a
                                                                     Supermarket with No
                                                                     Cashiers. Is Whole Foods
                                                                     Next?”
                                                                     “The Future of Retail”
              2:40-3:40         Supply Chain Management              Chapter 13
                                                                     “Five Things to Know about
                                                                     Costco’s $4.99 Rotisserie
                                                                     Chicken”
              3:50-4:50         Supply Chain Game                    None.
 6/29         1:30-2:30         Ethics / Sustainability              Chapter 3
                                                                     “Adidas is Making a
                                                                     Recyclable Shoe”
              2:40-3:40         Promotion Strategy                   Chapter 15
                                                                     “These Brands Spend Nearly
                                                                     $100 Billion on Ads. They
                                                                     want Facebook and Google
                                                                     to Raise their Game”
              3:50-4:50         Advertising                          Chapters 16-18
                                                                     “Businesses Using Pokemon
                                                                     Go Lures to Attract More
                                                                     Customers”
 7/1          1:30-2:30         Public Relations / Personal          Chapters 16-18
                                Selling / Sales Promotions           “Blue Bell Agrees to $19
                                                                     Million Fine Over Ice Cream
                                                                     Linked to 2015 Listeria
                                                                     Outbreak”
              2:40-3:40         GUEST: Social Media                  Chapters 16-18
              3:50-4:50         Global Marketing                     Chapter 5
 7/6          1:30-2:30         Pricing                              Chapter 19
                                                                     “Now Prices Can Change
                                                                     Minute to Minute”
              2:40-3:40         Pricing                              None.
              3:50-4:50         GUEST: Pricing Exercise /            None.
                                Dynamic Pricing
 7/8          1:30-2:45         FINAL EXAM                           Chapters 3,5, 13-19
                                MARKETING PLAN 2 DUE
              3:00-3:50         The Future of Marketing              “Next Generation Retail
                                                                     Technology: How IoT, AI,
                                                                     and 5G will Impact the
                                                                     Shopping Experience.”
              4:00-4:50         Conclusion / Pulling it              None.
                                Together                             Bonus Participation!
The content for each date presented on the following schedule is subject to change. Students are
responsible for monitoring announcements made in class and on Canvas for specific changes to the course
schedule.
