Course:             LAR 387K LIVING SYSTEMS DESIGN I (ARC 327R 22-NATIVE PLANTS)
Unique number:      01655 & 00769
Instructor:         Adam Barbe & Hans Landel
Schedule:           Tuesday 2:00 p.m.-3:30 p.m. & Thursday 2:00 p.m.-5:00 p.m.
Location:           SUT 2.114
Duration:
Introduction to LAR 387K Living Systems Design I
Creating sustainable, healthy, and culturally meaningful landscapes requires understanding of plant biology and
ecology. Living Systems I forms the foundation for this understanding by investigating the relationships between
plant ecology and the use of plant materials in design. Students will gain a working vocabulary of plant materials,
including plant morphology, the relationship of plants to soil and hydrologic processes, plant communities,
successional patterns, population biology, and species competition.
By the end of the course student will be able to identify a minimum of 150 native and adaptive plant species and have
a working knowledge of their use in sustainable site design and ecological restoration.
The course will include lectures, hands-on activities, on-line work, and field studies. Visits to local landscapes,
including the LBJWC, will provide the opportunity for learning in the field as well as how plants are utilized as a
means of design. All travel must be coordinated amongst the students themselves. Each student is ultimately
responsible for their own attendance to off campus sites.
The dynamic nature of plants and their use in the design of managed landscapes will be explored through sketching,
orthographic drawings, temporal studies, detailed site observations, fieldwork, and case studies.
Goals & Learning Objectives
•    Demonstrate how the environment and plants interact to form an ecosystem.
•    Understand the role of plant biology and plant ecology in the creation of sustainable, healthy, and culturally
     meaningful landscapes.
•    Understand of how to apply the concepts of plant biology, ecosystem function and ecosystem services to
     appropriately use plants within a designed landscape.
•    Demonstrate proficiency in the observation and analysis of living systems through sketching, orthographic
     drawings, temporal studies, detailed site observations, fieldwork, and case studies.
•    Understanding how to use plant morphology and taxonomic relationships to identify plants.
Catalog Description
LAR 387K, Living Systems Design I focuses on inter-connections between geological, biological, and social systems of
the designed landscape. Cover subjects such as plant ecology, plant communities, soils, planting design and plant
identification.
4.5 hours a week for one semester. Offered on the letter-grade basis only.
Time Commitment
Tuesday 2:00 p.m.-3:30 p.m. & Thursday 2:00 p.m.-5:00 p.m.
In order to effectively perform well and effectively learn, students should expect, on a weekly basis, to spend 4.5
hours per week in class / lab and, at a minimum, twice that time outside of regularly scheduled class periods. To
respect students' time, time spent on occasional Saturday field trips may replace in-class time.


Attendance
With the exception of faculty exemption or an excused absence, class attendance is mandatory. Students with three
[3] unexcused absences may be dropped from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than
three [3] unexcused absences is a full letter drop in the final grade for the course, unless the student is dropped from
the course. Students should contact the instructor prior to class if they expect to be absent or late.
Absences based on religious observances must be arranged fourteen [14] days in advance. Any work missed
during that time must be turned in within one week [7 days] of the absence. A student who fails to complete missed
work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Attendance is expected for all lectures, field trips, studio sessions, and discussions. If a class meeting has to be
rescheduled, it will be done in a timely manner, with the intention of accommodating the majority of the course
participants' schedules.
Grade Percentages
Grades will be assigned according to your performance in these assessments:
  1.  Lecture Exams / Assignments (30%)
  2.  Plant ID Assessments (25%)
  3.  Journal Assignment (25%)
  4.  Final Project (20%)
Grade Evaluation
Assessments will be assessed on the basis of the demonstration both of understanding, which includes
completeness and excellent communication of concepts and knowledge and the use of evidence to support
arguments/answers, and of skills such as plant identification, sketching, and field skills. Assessments will also be
assessed on timeliness. Assignments are to be completed in the time allowed. With the exception of a medical or
personal emergency, late work will be reduced by one letter grade per each 24 hour period after the stated
assignment deadline.
Instructors will strive to return graded assessments in a timely manner.
Grade Scale
Final grades will be computed in accordance with School of Architecture and University Academic Policies as follows:
  Grade      Work Quality       Performance Level                                                                                      Points
  A          excellent          Work consistently surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness or initiative, appropriateness,     4.0
                                verbal and (if appropriate) visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student
                                pursues concepts and/or techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Work is complete
                                on all levels.
  A-         good               Work is consistently thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.        3.67
  B+                            Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class. Work is complete on all levels and           3.33
  B                             demonstrates potential for excellence.                                                                 3.0
  B-         required           Work consistently meets the minimum requirements and objectives, or is neither consistently "good"     2.67
  C+                            nor consistently "poor". Work is incomplete on one or more levels.                                     2.33
  C                                                                                                                                    2.0
  C-         poor               Work is consistently incomplete. Basic skills including verbal clarity or logic and, if appropriate,   1.67
  D                             graphic skills, are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill,     1.0
                                understanding and knowledge base.
  D-         unacceptable       Work is consistently unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable.        0.67
  F                             Note that one way this grade will be assigned is if you have excessive unexcused absences.             0.0


  X          excused            Issued only in the case of compelling, nonacademic circumstances beyond the student's control.  0.0
             incomplete         Simply not completing work on time is an inadequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may
                                only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a
                                new completion date. According to School of Architecture policy, class work must be completed
                                before the second week of the next design semester in which the student is enrolling.
All grades are subject to deductions for absences, late work, and late arrivals.
Any grade can be re-evaluated based on student concern. Subsequent evaluations can cause the grade to be reduced,
remain unchanged, or increased. Grades can only be discussed on an individual basis, not as a comparison with other
students' grades.
Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trustworthiness, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Plagiarism or violations of academic integrity in any form will be handled according to measures as outlined by the
General Information catalog and the University. All course-related work submitted for evaluation is to be original and
prepared without unauthorized assistance. Work that is supplemented from ideas not originating from the student
should clearly cite the parent source.
Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary action, including the receipt
of a failing grade for the course, and possible dismissal from the University. Since such infractions harm the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
NO CELL PHONE USE ALLOWED DURING EXAMS/QUIZZES. If a student is observed with a cell phone during an
exam or quiz, the student's exam or quiz will likely be confiscated and the student will receive a zero, and the
student's name will be submitted to the University.
Faculty Contact Information
office location: TBD
hours:              T & Th 1-2:00pm
email:              abarbe@utexas.edu & hlandel@wildflower.org
Office hours will be maintained at scheduled times in order to discuss issues related to the schedule, evaluation,
coursework, etc. If these office hours are inconvenient, please feel free to make an appointment. Please do not
hesitate to notify the instructor of impending schedule conflicts with other classes.
E-mail Correspondence
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading
their email for university and course-related information and announcements. Students must keep the university
informed about changes to their e-mail address (see http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php). Students
should check e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
can be time critical. That being said, the instructors will typically not be available to respond to email on the
weekend.
When composing email, include “LAR 387K” in the subject line along with the topic of your inquiry. Emails should
address the instructor and be professional in tone. The instructor will endeavor to reply in a timely manner or will
address your question in class.
Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 512.471.6259 or
512.471.4641. See also http://www.deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.


Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
Contact the BCAL to discuss your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through
a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512.232.5050
or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Classroom Culture
School of Architecture learning encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and empirical learning.
This course offers an environment where students ask questions and make proposals; these are developed and
discussed among classmates and the instructors. We strive to foster an optimal learning climate and an
environment of mutual respect. As members of the college community, you are expected to recognize individual
differences. This course includes discussions, which means you may be exposed to ideas with which you may be
uncomfortable. You are responsible for the content and tone of your statements, and should strive to be empathetic
speakers and listeners. People can disagree and argue in respectful ways. Learning is not restricted to the class
period. First, classmates are invaluable resources: evaluate their work and process, engage in discourse, and invite
their critique. Second, visit the library, as it maintains an ever expanding, curated collection of texts and journals that
catalog advances in architectural theory, form, and technology. Last, evaluate your process in order to fold feedback
into analytic and synthetic skills.
Etiquette + Safety
The classroom is where interactions between participants should be founded in mutual respect and accepted norms
of behavior that will establish a professional atmosphere and foster productive workplace habits. Please consider
the following:
  1. Arrive on time
  2. Turn off your cell phone
  3. Close down email and social media
  4. Do not eat meals during class
  5. Contribute to discussions, be attentive, and be prepared for class activities
  6. Avoid side conversations and other distractions
  7. Stay for the entire class period
  8. Maintain a clean and orderly work area
  9. Respecting each other includes listening to each other
Required Text
No textbooks will be required for this class, reading will be assigned.
A Field Studies Journal / Sketchbook is required:
     •     Classic Moleskin Notebook
     •     colors: black
     •     size: a4 (21x29.7 cm / 8.25x11.75 in)
     •     page layout: plain
     •     cover: soft cover
