Anthropology 366WB (Web-Based) (31770)                                                                    Spring 2020
                         ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY OF THE HUMAN SKELETON
                                                       Syllabus
PROFESSOR
   • Dr. John Kappelman (email: jkappelman@mail.utexas.edu)
   • Office: SAC 5.160, telephone: 512-471-0055
   • Office hours: M W: 10-11 am in SAC 5.160, or by appointment (email with your name and class number
        in the subject line to set up an alternative day and time)
   • Ms. Adrienne Witzel, course manager and content developer
WB (= web-based)
   Because this class is web-based, there are no lectures or laboratory sessions. This online format will be well-
   suited for those students who are at ease learning material without the structure of a formal lecture or
   laboratory, but will not be appropriate for other students who do their best work within a more formally
   structured lecture and laboratory setting. Please read the syllabus carefully and think about how you will
   approach and handle this sort of a class. However, it is also important to keep in mind that more and more
   learning in the future will be web-based, and learning how to learn within this setting is an important skill to
   develop. Some students in this class have likely already taken an online class.
   Given the web-based nature of the class, drops are allowed at the very latest date permitted for those students
   who find that this class format does not meet their educational goals.
PREREQUISITES
   • Anthropology 301 and upper-division standing, or permission of the instructor
   • Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
        Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259
DESCRIPTION (see the UT Canvas class website)
   A336WB introduces the student to an in-depth study of the human skeleton. This class covers skeletal
   identifications with some attention to developmental biology and functional morphology, and a special focus
   on identification skills as they relate to forensics and archaeological studies. This class is not, however,
   focused solely on simple identifications of complete skeletal elements; although it is important to master this
   skill, exams include identifications of fragmentary elements and even broken portions of elements, the
   anatomical features of elements, siding, pathology, taphonomy, and determinations of age and sex.
   This class requires very intensive study. Students learn the skeleton region by region, reading and studying
   the assigned book chapters and materials on various web sites. Actual physical specimens are not available for
   examination, but we hope to be able to provide several 3D files so that students can 3D print the elements if
   they wish. Students complete the exams and case studies online; the exams are closed book within a timed
   format, while the case studies are open book and untimed.
   Students must have a professional approach to the subject and the study of the human remains. Expertise in
   human skeletal identification is especially applicable to the fields of archeology, biological anthropology,
   health sciences, law, and law enforcement.
                                                           1


ACADEMIC HONESTY
  Students who cheat not only cheat themselves but also cheat other students in the class as well as the
  University. This class has a zero tolerance policy for cheating. Any student found cheating will receive an
  F in the class and will be directed to the appropriate University authorities for additional sanctions including
  possible dismissal from the University. Please see Student Code of Conduct and Honor Code to review the
  UT policy.
  Students must sign and submit a form that states that they agree to follow the course rules enumerated
  below. The form is available on the Canvas class website.
  Examples of cheating are defined below:
    • The use of any materials of any kind during an exam or an exam review – e.g., hard copy, electronic,
        books, notes, other websites, a second computer, cellphones or having another person communicate or
        assist the student during an exam by any means such as face-to-face conversation, Facebook, Skype,
        cellphone – are all considered cheating.
    • Students ARE NOT permitted to copy by any means the questions and answers from an exam,or share
        any information about the exams with another student. Taking screen captures of the exams is not
        permitted. These behaviors are considered cheating
    • Students ARE NOT permitted to share problem sets and answers with other students and ARE NOT
        permitted to submit assignments for one another. These behaviors are considered cheating
    • Any questions about lab assignments and exams should be directed to the professor and NOT to your
        fellow students. If you have any questions, please ask!
COURSE WEBSITE, TEXTBOOKS, AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA
  • Canvas class website: we use this website for the course.
  • Steele and Bramblett, 1988. The Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton. Texas A&M University
      Press, College Station, TX. (Note: we use the vocabulary in this text.) This text has black and white
      photos.
  • eSkeletons.org offers a web-based version of the human and primate skeleton. There are many other
      online sites, but this is the one that we built.
  • eForensics.info is a website that we are continuing to build out.
  • OPTIONAL: Bass, 1995. Human Osteology. Special Publication No. 2, Missouri Archaeological Society,
      Columbia, MO. Most students of human osteology also have a copy of this book because it offers
      different ideas for skeletal identifications, and provides drawings of the skeletal elements that some
      students prefer or feel offer an important complement to photographs.
  • OPTIONAL: Buikstra and Uberlaker, 1994. Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal
      Remains. Most students of human osteology also have a copy of this textbook because it offers a thorough
      means for inventorying and identifying skeletal remains.
DESCRIPTION OF REQUIREMENTS
  The exams and case studies are accessed on the Canvas course website.
  Online Exams
  Exams will be posted one week before their deadline date and must be completed by the deadline date in
  order to receive credit. If an exam is not completed by the deadline date, a grade of zero will be assigned.
  Completed exams can be reviewed up to one week after the exam’s completion date.
  Exams cover the content in each of the individual Steele and Bramblett chapters (see schedule below). All
  content in each chapter may appear on the exam, so be sure to study the text, figures, and plots. Even though
  there are exam deadline dates throughout the semester, if a student wishes to test at an accelerated schedule,
                                                          2


  say, completing all of the exams before spring break, please let us know and we can accommodate this sort of
  a customized testing schedule. Exams are timed and limited to 45 minutes.
  Students complete their exams in a proctored testing lab (WCP 5.112) on M-Th (no testing on F). The testing
  lab schedule is provided on the last page of this syllabus. Students must show a current UT ID when they sign
  in with the testing proctor.
  In the event that a student is taking this class off campus (e.g., study abroad, internship in another city, etc.)
  and is not in residence at UT Austin, s/he will need to locate a proctored testing center that has web access so
  that s/he can complete the exams there. A proctor from the testing center will be required to contact our
  technical team (awitzel@utexas.edu) in order to provide valid credentials.
  Case Studies
  We provide several “case studies” that offer the student an opportunity to identify fragmentary skeletal
  remains and attempt to assess correct IDs of the elements along with determinations of age, sex, stature,
  number of individuals, etc. The case studies mirror the work of a forensic anthropologist.
  Case Studies are made available at the beginning of the semester. They are untimed, open book, and can be
  submitted online from any computer. They can, however, be completed one time only. Even though the case
  studies are available early in the semester, we STRONGLY recommend that students complete all of the
  exams FIRST so that they thoroughly learn human osteology BEFORE they attempt to complete the more
  complex case studies. Following this learning strategy is guaranteed to improve the score on the case studies.
  Extra Credit
  It is critical that scientists engage with the public. Students may have the opportunity to volunteer at public
  outreach events as part of Prof. Kappelman’s lab group whenever these are scheduled.
  In addition, students are always welcome to volunteer in the lab and participate in the various ongoing digital
  imaging projects, many of which are designed for the public (e.g., eSkeletons, eFossils, eLucy, and even
  eForensics).
GRADING
  • Exams (10 in total)                                                              40%
  • Case Studies                                                                     60%
  • Total                                                                           100%
  Grades (rounded to whole number with + and -): A (90-100%), B (80-89%), C (70-79%), D (60-69%), and F
  (<60%).
                                                           3


DISABILITIES, EXTENSIONS, and DROPS and INCOMPLETES
Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259.
Extensions
Requests for an extension for missed work because of a sanctioned University activity, documented illness,
family-related emergency, or death in the family will be dealt with on a case-by-case basis, but whatever the
circumstance, documentation is required. If you are unable to document your excuse, you will not be permitted to
make up the missed work. Whatever the case – sanctioned University activity, documented illness, family-related
emergency, or death in the family – full documentation is required. If you find yourself so sick that you must
miss an exam or lab submission, you should see a doctor, and if you do, the doctor will give you a written excuse.
Permission to make up missed exams or labs requires a completed Extension Permission Request Form (available
on the Canvas class website) and supporting documentation (see below). The extension request, consisting of a
completed Extension Permission Request form along with supporting documentation, must be submitted no later
than the Friday following the missed exam deadline date. Because Case Studies can be submitted at any time after
3 September, do not expect that being ill on 9 December (the deadline date) will permit you to obtain an extension
request for all of the missing work.
Supporting documentation:
     • If an illness, a medical excuse documented by a letter from your doctor;
     • If a family emergency, written documentation;
     • If a family death, an obituary or death certificate;
     • If a University-sanctioned activity, a letter from the director of the organization delivered to us BEFORE
         the event since these events are scheduled months in advance; and
     • If a work-related conflict, a note from your supervisor.
If a scheduling conflict arises from work or some other issues that will cause you to miss a deadline, please
inform us as early as possible so we can assess the validity of the conflict and make any necessary arrangements.
If you do not tell us ahead of time about a scheduled event, you will not receive permission to make up the missed
work.
The extension request must receive approval before any missed work can be made up. If you cannot provide
independent documentation that we can verify, the extension request will not be approved. We check on all
excuses by calling the doctor, supervisor, family member, and faculty supervisor or coach.
During the days when a completed extension request is under evaluation, you should continue to meet the exam
schedule.
Drops and Incompletes
If you find that you are unable to complete the course, you may obtain a drop with a “Q” if you file the
appropriate paperwork (available from your dean’s office). This request must be filed by the University deadline.
An incomplete after the deadline date can generally only be granted for a serious medical condition as
documented by a letter from your doctor. In only exceptional cases are other excuses considered legitimate
grounds for an incomplete, and these excuses generally require approval from your dean’s office.
We strongly advise you to finish the course as early as possible and thereby avoid any last-minute problems.
                                                          4


EXAMS AND CASE STUDIES SCHEDULE: deadline due dates on Mondays
 Exams follow the chapters in Steele and Bramblett (listed as “S&B Chapter #” below).
 Jan 28            ▪ You must review information on the Canvas course website (e.g., academic honesty policy
                      agreement, tech requirements, etc.) and sign and submit the agreement form (available on
                      Canvas) that states that you agree to follow the policies of the course.
                   ▪ If you are off-campus, you must find a testing center and notify us of its location, and they
                      must contact us (see above).
                  Case Studies available on Canvas (untimed, open book exercises) but see below.
 Feb 3             EXAM: Introduction to Osteology (S&B Chapters 1 & 2, and “Legend” at eSkeletons.org)
 Feb 10            EXAM: Vertebral column (S&B Chapter 5)
 Feb 17            EXAM: Chest and Shoulder Girdle (S&B Chapter 6)
 Feb 24            EXAM: Arm (S&B Chapter 7)
 Mar 2             EXAM: Wrist, Hand, and Fingers (S&B Chapter 8)
 Mar 9             EXAM: Pelvic Girdle (S&B Chapter 9)
 Mar 16-21         Spring Break
 Mar 23            EXAM: Leg (S&B Chapter 10)
 Mar 30            EXAM: Ankle, Foot, and Toes (S&B Chapter 11)
 Apr 6             EXAM: Skull (S&B Chapter 3)
 Apr 13            EXAM: Dentition (S&B Chapter 4)
 Apr 14-May 8      Case studies: We recommend that students focus on Case Studies from 15 Apr to 8 May,
                   AFTER completion of the exams since these have deadline due dates. Please note that the
                   Case Studies are available starting on 28 Jan.
 May 8             Case Studies due date
 IMPORTANT DATES AND DEADLINES TO REMEMBER:
 Jan 24            Last day of official add/drop period
 Feb 5             Twelfth Class Day
 Mar 16-21         Spring Break
 April 6           Last day a student may, with their dean’s approval, withdraw or drop a class, or change to
                   pass/fail basis.
 May 8             Last class day of the semester
                                                        5


SAC 5.112 PROCTORED TESTING LABORATORY SCHEDULE                                                  Spring 2020
Students must present a hard copy UT ID to the testing proctor when they sign-in. Students must sign in 45
minutes before testing ends for the day or they will not be seated for an exam. The TAs for A301WB manage sign
ins.
You can take your tests anytime during the lab is open, shown in highlight on the table below. There is no testing
lab access for A366WB on Fridays.
                    Monday           Tuesday        Wednesday          Thursday        Friday
     8:00 AM                                                                                         8:00 AM
     9:00 AM                                                                                         9:00 AM
   10:00 AM                                                                                         10:00 AM
   11:00 AM                                                                                         11:00 AM
    12:00 PM                                                                                        12:00 PM
     1:00 PM                                                                                         1:00 PM
     2:00 PM                                                                                         2:00 PM
     3:00 PM                                                                                         3:00 PM
     4:00 PM                                                                                         4:00 PM
     5:00 PM                                                                                         5:00 PM
     6:00 PM                                                                                         6:00 PM
     7:00 PM                                                                                         7:00 PM
     8:00 PM                                                                                         8:00 PM
                                                          6
