ANT 304T – Introduction to Texas Archaeology
Unique # 30990
ONLINE AND ON DEMAND
Instructor
Dr. Mariah Wade
Office: SAC. 4.146
Office hours: W 3:00 pm -5:00 pm
Email: m.wade@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants
Mr. Jordan Bowers
Office: SAC. 4.166
Office hours: M 1:00 pm - 3:00 pm
Ms. Fatemeh Ghaheri
Office: SAC. 4.166
Office hours: Tu 11:00 am - 1:00 pm
Ms. Elizabeth de Marigny
Office: SAC 4.166
Office hours: M 11:00 am - 1:00 pm
TA Email: onlineant304tta@austin.utexas.edu
Course description
People have been in Texas since about 12,000 years ago and the evidence of their presence throughout
time is fascinating. Ever wondered how we know and can prove that? This course introduces students to
Texas archaeology through lectures and a variety of media resources. Texas geographic and
environmental diversity provided prehistoric and historic peoples with unique resources and possibilities,
and people used that diversity to make choices and develop specific cultural characteristics while
interacting with other peoples from the surrounding regions.
Doing archaeology requires teamwork, critical thinking and multidisciplinary approaches. In archaeology,
it is often more important to ask relevant questions than provide ready answers. The lectures, readings,
videos and homework assignments in this course aim to emphasize these requirements as well as how
archaeology relates to other sciences.
This course may be used to fulfill the natural science and technology (Part II) component of the common
core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and empirical
and quantitative skills.
Pre-requisites
None
Course Readings
This course uses textual and media material from The Texas Beyond History website.


http://www.texasbeyondhistory.net/
All required readings, whether they are from The Texas Beyond History or from other sources, are
available through links provided in the modules or posted on Canvas.
Although not required, it is highly recommended that students purchase Stone Artifacts of Texas Indians,
by Ellen Sue Turner and Thomas R. Hester.
Evaluation
Participation and attendance: 5 points
Tests: 3 tests @ 20 pts each = 60 points
Labs: 4 labs @ 5 pts each = 20 points
Workshops: 3 workshops @ 5 pts each = 15 points
Grading policy
A:  100-90
B:  89-80
C:   79-70
D:  69-60
F:  less than 60 points.
Description of Online Course Format
This course is streamed to your computer ON DEMAND. That means there is no assigned classroom or
scheduled class time. Unlike the majority of courses offered at the University of Texas, you will be
viewing this class online from any place you choose and at the time most convenient for you. Because
you are not required to attend class at a specific time and place, you must be disciplined and schedule a
time and chose a quiet place to listen to the lectures.
If you want to do well in this class, you must treat it as a normal face-to-face class: you must not answer
the phone, a knock on the door of your apartment, etc. Otherwise, you may miss an instapoll and
important lecture material. Instapolls track your class attendance and participation and are graded (see
below).
Technical Requirements
All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and
smartphones are not supported. Your computer should have enough battery life to last an entire class
period and meet the following requirements:
•    2 GB RAM/memory (most computers purchased in the last five years will have this)
•    Modern and updated operating system (Windows or macOS)
•    Updated web browser: Chrome (recommended), Safari, Firefox
•    5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
Specific information about the online course format
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1264310/


You can enter directly at this URL or through Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into
Canvas and the class website, you will need your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class
website, you can navigate your way to other areas.
Some of the most important features include:
•   Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the technical requirements,
    information regarding technical questions and other important information. On the left-hand side of
    each page of the Canvas course site are navigation tabs to all parts of the website, including the
    Syllabus.
•   Modules – The Modules page includes links to the Video Lectures, Assignments, Readings, Lecture
    video archives and other course documents.
•   Pre-Class Activities – These activities are required before the first day of class to ensure that you are
    prepared to take the online course. Activities include making sure your computer is up-to-date, testing
    your network connection, and watching screencasts that help you understand how to navigate and
    communicate in the course (see Technical Requirements above). You must complete these activities
•   Frequent Asked Questions (FAQ) – Please refer to this feature because it is set to answer most of
    your questions. If you do not find the answer to your question in FAQ, then please contact your
    Teaching Assistants or Dr. Wade.
Most of your activity on Canvas will take place in the Modules tabs.
Tests
There are three tests that will be taken in person on the following dates, times and classroom:
Test One - October 7 – 5:00-6:00 PM in RLP 0.130
Test Two – November 18 – 5:00-6:00 PM in RLP 0.130
Test Three – December 9 – 5:00-6:00 PM in RLP 0.130
This is the link to the building and its location:
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/campus/buildings/nlogon/maps/UTM/RLP/
Out of the Classroom Projects
All students must attend to obtain a grade. Students will have to register online for the different workshop
dates. Registration is on a first-come, first-serve basis. The days, times and places are shown below:
Material Culture Workshop One
Monday, September 16 -5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174
Tuesday, September 17 - 5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174
Wednesday, September 18 - 5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174
Thursday, September 19 - 5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174
Material Culture Workshop Two
Monday, October 21 - 5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174
Tuesday, October 22 - 5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174
Wednesday, October 23 - 5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174
Thursday, October 24 - 5:00-6:00 PM in SAC 4.174


Visit to the Bullock Museum
Friday November 22– 1:30 PM
Saturday, November 23- 12:30 PM
ONLINE COURSE FORMAT
Preparation for classes: To prepare for these classes, we ask that you do two things. First, you are required
to view the pre-class modules assigned for that week. Each module emphasizes which videos or readings
students will need for the following class, but you can do all weekly readings and view videos ahead. This
allows students to better manage their own schedules and you can watch the videos at your own pace,
rewinding when you feel it necessary. Second, students are expected to complete any readings associated
with each class. The lecture videos will continue to be open for viewing throughout the semester but pre-
class activities will no longer be accessible after the closing deadline.
Email and office hours
Despite the fact that this class has no scheduled room and time we want to preserve as much contact with
the students as possible, so we encourage all students to visit Dr. Wade and the Teaching Assistants
during their scheduled office hours or contact them through email (see above).
Attendance and Instapolls
There are 25 lecture videos. In each video, two questions (instapolls) related to that lecture will appear at
a random time. Note that instapolls are spread-out throughout the lecture. Instapolls appear for 1.5
minutes and are graded for accuracy. Students who skim through the lecture just to find the instapolls end
up missing some and will likely miss necessary information to answer the question correctly
There will be a total of 50 instapolls and grading will be as follows:
40 or more correct - 5 pts
30 or more correct - 4 pts
20 or more correct - 3 pts
10 or more correct - 2 pts
9 or less correct – 0 pts
Tests
The three tests that are part of the grading for this class will take place on specific days and times, and
your answers will be submitted on Scantron. Tests will NOT be comprehensive. Test One will cover the
class material from the beginning of class, Test Two will cover the class material since Test One and Test
Three will cover the material since Test Two. Please note that some of the material does overlap, but you
will be given clues as to this material before the tests.
Questions and participation
As noted before, there are two approved avenues of communication with Dr. Wade and the Teaching
Assistants. Note that the Canvas inbox is NOT a supported way to contact the teaching staff:
•    In-person office hours with Dr. Wade or the TA Team (see office hour times at the top of the
     syllabus)
•   Dr. Wade’s email and the TA email – Please use these email addresses for private inquiries related to
     the course.


All technical support questions should be directed to gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu. Do
Not email the teaching staff with technical issues. YOU MUST COMMUNICATE with the technical staff
as soon as you experience a problem.
We expect that you will treat all communications - online and in office visits - in a civil and respectful
manner. Please refrain from using profanity or any euphemisms for profanity. Please do not use sarcasm
in a way that can be misinterpreted negatively. Violators of these rules will simply be shut out from all
class communications—email, and office hours.
OFFICIAL RULES AND ANNOUNCEMENTS:
Class instructions (please read carefully):
1.   Class participation is required. All assigned readings are required.
2.   Assignments will be due on the appointed dates. This is a fairness issue.
3.   Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will be dealt with according to University Rules.
     o   Please see: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/index.php. This site also contains several
          useful links to students. On scholastic conduct see
          also: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
4.   The University of Texas provides appropriate academic accommodations for students with
     disabilities. For more information please contact the Office of the Dean of Students at (512) 471-6259
     or (512) 471-4641.
     o   If you have a disability you must let me know no later than the second week of class. SSD
          accommodation letters must be discussed and delivered in person or by email to Dr. Wade.
          Failure to do so will result in delaying appropriate provisions and will affect testing
          accommodations. Students with viewing disabilities must contact the professor BEFORE THE
          BEGINNING OF CLASSES to assure accommodations can be met.
5.   Please do not ask for grades or grade information by email. Information about grades will only be
     given in person, or through official means.
Weekly schedule
Below is the recommended schedule for viewing the lectures. Because this is an ON-DEMAND course
you do not have to follow it, but we highly recommend you do so, to keep on track and organized.
However, you must comply with the dates for finishing modules, and must attend in person the
workshops and exams on the dates provided.
Class schedule and corresponding material are shown by themes and respective Power Points (PP). If we
need to make any changes you will be informed in class or by email.
Week 1
August 28-30
PP 1 - Introduction - Important issues about this class
What is archaeology and what archaeologists do.
Week 2
September 2 - LABOR DAY HOLIDAY
September 3-6
PP 2 - Archaeological Methods and Techniques
Module 1 covers Weeks 1 and 2.
Week 3


September 9-13
PP 3 - Texas Physiography, Archaeological Regions and Archaeologists
PP 4 - The First Americans - Routes, hypotheses, and evidence.
                    Ethics in Archaeology Lab opens September 13th (due September 20)
Week 4
September 16-20
PP 5 - The Antiquity of humans in America - Blackwater Draw.
PP 6 - Dating Methods and Paleoindian sites. Notes on Social Organization
Module 2 covers Weeks 3 and 4.
                    Material Culture Workshop One (see schedule above).
                    Ethics in Archaeology Lab due September 20
Week 5
September 23-27
PP 7 - Ways of making a living. Video
PP 8 - Paleoindian Burial Behavior. The Late Paleoindian Period/Transitional Archaic.
                Stratigraphy Lab opens September 27th (due October 4)
Week 6
September 30 -October 4
PP 9 - Late Paleoindian Period/ Early Archaic. East and Central Texas.
PP 10 - The Late Paleoindian Period/ Transitional Archaic -Climate and life changes.
Module 3 covers Weeks 5 and 6.
                Stratigraphy Lab due October 4
Week 7
October 7-11
October 7 – TEST ONE
PP 11 - The Late Paleoindian Period/ Transitional Archaic. The Lower Pecos. Microbotanical evidence
to reconstruct the environment.
Week 8
October 14 -18
PP 12 - The Middle and Late Archaic Periods. Landscape and Resources.
PP 13 - The Middle and Late Archaic Periods. Dwellings and structures.
Coastal, Trans-Pecos, Lower-Pecos.
Module 4 covers Weeks 7 and 8.
                    Absolute Dating Lab opens October 18th (due October 25)
Week 9
October 21-25
PP 14 - Late Archaic and Early Prehistoric, general characteristics: Central, South,
PP 15 - Woodlands - The Middle and Late Archaic Periods - Mound Building, Burial Customs.
                    Material Workshop Two (see schedule above)
                    Absolute Dating Lab due October 25
Week 10
October 28 -November 1
PP 16 - The Late Archaic and Prehistoric Periods: Texas Panhandle.
PP 17 - Material Culture and Rock Art. Preservation and Conservation.


Module 5 covers Weeks 9 and 10.
                    Burial Analysis Lab opens November 1st (due November 8)
Week 11
November 4 - 8
PP 18 - Trade and material culture - The Lower Pecos and Trans-Pecos.
PP 19 - Late Prehistoric in Central Texas – Austin and Toyah Phases.
                    Burial Analysis Lab due November 8
Week 12
November 11-15
PP 20 - The Jornada Mogollon and Hueco Tanks
PP 21 - Hueco Tanks and La Junta de los Rios.
Module 6 covers Weeks 11 and 12.
Week 13
November 18-22
November 18 - TEST TWO
                    Field Trip to The Bullock Museum 11/22 and 11/23
Week 14
November 25 -27
               November 27 – 29 Thanksgiving Holiday
PP 22 - Historic Period: European Encounters.
PP 23 - The Spanish Colonial Mission Period.
Week 15
December 2 -5
PP 24 - The Mission Period. Presidios and soldiers. The Red River Wars.
PP 25 - The 1800s in Texas
Module 7 covers Weeks 14 and 15.
Week 16
December 9
December 9 -TEST THREE
December 9: last day of class.
Course Expectations and Outcomes
•   You will not become a Texas Archeologist, but we hope you become one in the future.
•   You will learn about Texas environmental and archaeological diversity and the ways native
    inhabitants made use of the state’s natural resources;
•   You will learn about Texas connections to other archaeological areas and why present state
    boundaries are pointless in terms of archaeology;
•   You will handle and learn about how prehistoric and historic Texas Inhabitants made a living and the
    materials they used in their daily lives;
•   You will have a comprehensive understanding of the methodologies and techniques archaeologists
    use to date sites, discover clues about the ancient environment, classify and study lithic tools and
    ceramics and contribute to the preservation and conservation of archaeological artifacts;


•    By the end of this course, we hope you have develop admiration and respect for the past Texas
    inhabitants and are knowledgeable to contribute to the preservation of the archeological objects that
    are Texas legacy.
•   You will become aware of TARL as a curatorial facility and TARL’s superb archaeological
    collections.
