EE 422C Syllabus                                                             http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~vallathn/ee422c/syllabus.html
                     Syllabus - Electrical & Computer Engineering EE 422C
                       SOFTWARE DESIGN & IMPLEMENTATION II
                           The University of Texas at Austin, Summer 2019
                                        Instructor: Vallath Nandakumar
                                                 Last modified: 5/21/2019
         Description: This course teaches Java data structures and algorithm analysis. All programming will be
         in Java.
         Objectives: This is a third course in computer programming. The purposes of the course are to learn
         more advanced computer science concepts including algorithm development, problem decomposition,
         selecting and using the correct data structures, and debugging and testing.
         Estimates of the required effort to pass the class are:
                3-5 hours per week of studying
                2-10 hours per week of programming (less early in the course, more later)
                7000 lines of Java code.
         Prerequisites: Electrical Engineering 312 with a grade of at least C-.
         Lecture:
         76050, MWF 2:30 PM- 4 PM. ECJ 1.324.
         Recitation (Discussion) Sections:
                          Start Time (of 90
             Unique                                 Day        Location       Recitation Section TA
                          mins slot)
              76050               2:30               TH          EER 1.512               Grant
         Teaching Staff:
                Instructor, Vallath Nandakumar, email: vallathn [at] austin dot utexas dot edu Office: EER 4.826.
                Office Hours: See the Office Hours page. Or by appointment.
                Teaching Assistants:
                Grant Guglielmo (grantguglielmo gmail) (Graduate)
         Class web site: See here and Canvas. Course materials and announcements are available on Canvas and
         Piazza.
1 of 7                                                                                                                 6/6/19, 4:46 PM


EE 422C Syllabus                                                               http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~vallathn/ee422c/syllabus.html
         Required Textbook:
         Intro to Java Programming, Comprehensive Version, 11th Edition, Y. Daniel Liang. ISBN13:
         9780134670942.
         Other editions and varieties of the book may be available, and may be acceptable. If you
         are considering getting another edition, the publisher Pearson may be able to help you
         understand the differences from the recommended edition.
         Recommended Textbooks, for additional reading:
         Thinking Recursively with Java, 20th Anniversary Edition, by Eric S. Roberts, ISBN 978-0471701460.
         Building Java Programs by Stuart Reges and Marty Stepp, 4th Edition. ISBN 978-0134322766, Pearson
         Education / Addison Wesley. Textbook homepage is http://www.buildingjavaprograms.com/. Electronic and
         other editions are also available, and are acceptable.
         Purchase options available at the COOP Bookstore.
         Class Participation, Instapoll on Canvas (Required)
                 Make sure that you can access Canvas and Instapoll using a web browser in class.
                 You may use a phone or other internet-connected device. Participation on the Instapoll questions
                 is graded.
                 In order to get credit for a given day you MUST answer at least 3/4 of the Instapoll questions during
                 class.
               If you do not meet these requirements you will not receive Instapoll credit for that day. Regardless of
         your Instapoll score, you are expected to come to all classes on time, and stay until the end.
               Answering Instapoll from anywhere other than the classroom, answering for another person etc. are
         considered academic dishonesty, and will be grounds for reporting to Student Conduct.
               You are given 2 free Instapoll days, which you can use for any reason (app not working, left phone at
         home, cannot attend lecture, attending interview etc.).For longer absences due to personal issues, etc. come
         and see me as soon as possible if you want to make up the missing scores; I may ask for evidence.
         Class Discussion Tool: I have set up a discussion group for the class on Piazza.
                 Go to the Piazza web site and join the ECE 422C - Nandakumar group, for The University of Texas
                 at Austin. An access code is required to sign up, that you may get from me, if I have not already
                 signed you up.
                 I will post class announcements and information to the discussion group.
                 You must read Piazza posts, especially instructor announcements. Piazza is an official
                 communication channel for this course.
                 Post your questions about the class to the discussion group. You cannot expect to get detailed
                 answers to technical questions by email, so Piazza use is encouraged. Students are also encouraged to
                 discuss important matters with the teaching team in person, typically during recitation or office
                 hours.
         Email: All students must become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy.
         It is your responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in your e-mail address. You are
         expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
2 of 7                                                                                                                   6/6/19, 4:46 PM


EE 422C Syllabus                                                                http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~vallathn/ee422c/syllabus.html
         communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that
         e-mail be checked daily. Instructions for updating your e-mail address are available here.
         You are responsible for checking your e-mail and the class discussion group regularly for class work and
         announcements.
         Contacting the instructors:
         Piazza is to be used for technical questions and questions of general interest. If you have a question
         regarding your grade, attendance, special requirement etc., you must contact the staff by email. Include
         your EID and course name. If relevant, include your TA or grader(s) (and/or Nandakumar), as well as your
         project partner (with his/her EID), in every email. Use Reply All whenever possible to keep everyone in
         the loop. Include the unique or the recitation date and time if relevant, and the same also for your partner.
         Any agreement between you and an instructor must be confirmed by email. Oral agreements may not be
         honored unless confirmed in writing.
         Do not use Canvas mail to contact the instructor staff. Make sure that you state your partner's and TA's
         name in any email that refers to them.
         Software: Required software for programming assignments is described on this web page and/or on
         Piazza.
         Computing Facilities:
         You must log in remotely to the remote 64-bit Linux machines such as kamek.ece.utexas.edu to try out your
         programming assignments.
         Schedule: A schedule of lecture topics is available online, via the class web page. Assignments and their
         deadlines will be posted on Canvas, and required readings on Piazza. Readings are to be completed before
         class. The schedule is subject to change. The schedule on Canvas is to be followed, if there are
         discrepancies.
         Grading: Class components used to determine your final average.
                Component Type                  Number                      Points                       Total Points
          Programming
                                                  6-7                        ~35                            260*
          Assignments
          Quizzes                                6-10                                                       110*
          Instapoll Participation                 ~30                      1 each                             30
          Midterm                                  1                         200                             250
          Final Exam                               1                         350                             350
          Total                                                                                             1000
         * The total assignment+quizzes points will be 37% of your grade. The split between the two is subject to
         change.
                Programming assignments, Instapoll participation, and quizzes add up to 400 points towards your
3 of 7                                                                                                                    6/6/19, 4:46 PM


EE 422C Syllabus                                                                 http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~vallathn/ee422c/syllabus.html
                final score. Quizzes, and Instapoll participation cannot be made up for any reason. For programming
                assignments there is some leeway. See the explanation of slip days below.
                The final letter grades will be assigned based on your earned total points. The maximum possible
                points is 1000. The grade cutoffs will be determined later. There may be upward curving of your
                earned total points. The cutoffs are close to 93% for A, 90% for A-, etc.
                Depending on the results of an exam, exam scores may be adjusted. Exam scores will rarely get
                worse due to a adjustment. No other class components (assignments, Instapoll participation, or
                quizzes) are curved.
                You have 3 slip days (max of 1 per homework assignment) to use through out the term on your
                assignments if you are not able to turn an assignment in on time. If you want to use a slip day, mark it
                in your submitted program file header (the main file's). Slip days are to account for life circumstances
                (My hard drive crashed!! I got a virus downloading an mp3!!) and emergencies. Do not use your slip
                days frivolously. If you use up your slip days and late assignments will not be graded and be assigned
                a grade of 0. Failure to follow instructions on turning in assignments may result in the loss of slip
                days. Once you run out of slip days, you will get a 0 for late work. Turning in work more than 24
                hours late will also earn a 0. Some assignments may not have a slip day.
                The required format and procedures for turning in assignments are available on Canvas on the
                assignments page. Assignments that are not turned in in the correct format will cause you to lose slip
                days, lose points, and/or receive a 0 on the assignment.
                At any time, you might be asked to come to the instructor's office at a mutually agreeable time,
                where you will be asked to write code, explain your submitted homework, etc.
                Quizzes are given at the beginning of some discussion sections. If you are not present when the quiz
                is completed you receive a 0 for that quiz. Quizzes cannot be made up under any circumstances.
                Quizzes are not curved. Quiz grading will be: 10 for a perfect quiz, 7 - 9 for minor mistakes, and 6 or
                less for little or no effort. Your lowest quiz score will be dropped.
                If a student misses the midterm exam with a verifiable excuse, the final exam will count for the
                missed exam.
                If you are dissatisfied with a grade you receive on an assignment or test, you must submit your
                complaint via email, along with supporting evidence, to your grader within 5 days of the date the
                teaching staff first attempted to return the assignment or test to you.
                Questions about your grade are to be sent to the grader assigned to your section. See the table above
                for graders and section unique ids.
                You may request a regrade of the midterm exam if you feel the grading criteria was not applied
                correctly. To ensure accuracy the entire exam will be regraded and your score may go down.
                There are no opportunities for extra credit in this course, other than some bonus credits awarded for
                some assignment features.
                Illness: If you are sick and cannot attend class or turn in an assignment, inform the instructor
                immediately. Be prepared to turn in a doctor's certificate explaining your condition; we may allow
                some adjustment of the deadline.
         Guiding Principle - Feedback and concerns about the course are always welcome; legitimate grading
         errors that are identified in a timely fashion will certainly be corrected, but whining is counter-productive
         and will only irritate those who evaluate your work to determine grades.
         Important Dates for Changing Academic Status and Dropping the Course: Refer to the
         Registrar's academic calendar for the deadlines for changes in academic status. Highlights are:
                6/7/19: Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration require the
4 of 7                                                                                                                     6/6/19, 4:46 PM


EE 422C Syllabus                                                                  http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~vallathn/ee422c/syllabus.html
                 approval of the department chair and usually the student's dean.
                 6/11/19: Last day to drop for a possible refund. Last day to add a course.
                 6/26/19: Last day a student may change registration in a class to or from the pass/fail or credit/no
                 credit basis. Last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean's approval, withdraw from the
                 University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons.
         Students experiencing significant nonacademic problems (extended health problems or family emergencies)
         should contact the Engineering Student Services in EER 2.848.
         Academic Dishonesty:
         Read the academic integrity policy that we expect and enforce at UT Austin.
         "...You and other students are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual
         honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. This is a very basic expectation that is further
         reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams,
         and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
                 acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                 complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in
                 preparing them;
                 follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
                 discipline; and
                 avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student."
         Every piece of work that you turn in with your name on it must be yours and yours alone unless explicitly
         allowed by an instructor in a particular class. Specifically, unless otherwise authorized by an instructor:
                 Students may not discuss their work with anyone except the instructor and other members of the
                 instructional staff (instructor, TA, lab proctor or partner on a pair assignment).
                 Students may not acquire from any source (e.g., another student or an internet site) a partial or
                 complete solution to a problem or project that has been assigned.
         You are responsible for complying with this policy in two ways:
              1. You must not turn in work that is not yours, except as expressly permitted by the instructor of each
                 course.
              2. You must not enable someone else to turn in work that is not theirs. Do not share your work with
                 anyone else. Make sure that you adequately protect all your files. Even after you have finished a
                 class, do not share your work or published answers with the students who come after you. They need
                 to do their work on their own. This means do not post your solution code to any public web site such
                 as pastebin. Also, do not post your work to the web even after you have completed ECE 422C.
         The penalty for academic dishonesty will be a course grade of F and a referral of the case to the Dean
         of Students. Further penalties, including suspension or expulsion from the university may be imposed
         by that office.
         One final word: This policy is not intended to discourage students from learning from each other, nor is it
         unmindful of the fact that most significant work in engineering and computer science is done by teams of
         people working together. But, because of our need to assign individual grades, we are forced to impose an
5 of 7                                                                                                                      6/6/19, 4:46 PM


EE 422C Syllabus                                                               http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~vallathn/ee422c/syllabus.html
         otherwise artificial requirement for individual work. In some classes, it is possible to allow and even
         encourage collaboration in ways that do not interfere with the instructor's ability to assign grades. In these
         cases, your instructor will make clear to you exactly what kinds of collaboration are allowed for that class.
         For ECE 422C the policy on collaboration is modified as follows:
         If you are repeating the course you may reuse code you completed on your own. You may NOT use code
         from a program you worked on as part of a pair or code that was from a program involved in an academic
         dishonesty case. You must start from scratch on any and all programs that:
                 were part of an academic dishonesty case
                 you worked with a partner during a pervious semester
                 you are working with a partner this semester
         You are encouraged to study for tests together, to discuss methods for solving the assignments, to help each
         other in using the software, and to discuss methods for debugging code. Essentially if you talk about an
         assignment with any one else you are okay, but the moment you start looking at someone else's source
         code or showing someone else your source code you have crossed the line into cheating. You should not
         ask anyone to give you a copy of their code or, conversely, give your code to another student who asks you
         for it. Similarly, you should not discuss your algorithmic strategies to such an extent that you and your
         collaborators end up turning in exactly the same code. Discuss high level approaches together, but do the
         coding on your own.
         Examples of cheating are many and include accessing another student's account, looking at someone else's
         solution code, copying or downloading someone else's solution code, referring to solutions from previous
         semesters, having another student walk you through the solution and how to code it, having another student
         perform significant debugging of your code, having another student write your code for you and / or
         allowing others to copy of access your solution code. This means you shall not look on the internet for
         code to solve your problems, unless we allow it for specific projects.
         Examples of allowable collaboration include discussions and debate of general concepts and solution
         strategies and help with syntax errors.
         The code you can reuse in this course are:
             1. You may use any code you develop with the instructor, TAs, or proctors.
             2. You may use code (with attribution) from the class slides and the class coding examples.
             3. You may share additional test cases and expected results of test cases. You may not share solution
                 code or experiment code.
         You shall not make use of code you find from other sources including the world wide web, unless we
         explicitly allow it. Materials from the web should only be used for educational purposes. Thus, you can
         read about linked lists and look at examples of linked list code, but you must not copy any code from the
         web or be looking at any of this code from the web when writing anything you turn in, unless we allow it.
         If you discuss an assignment with another student or look at examples from the web you should employ the
         League of Legends Rule:
         League of Legends Rule: After a discussion with another student or looking at example code you should do
         something that has nothing to do with computer science or programming for at least half an hour -- playing
         League of Legends or other similar activity. (Watching a sitcom, reading a book, working on another class.)
6 of 7                                                                                                                   6/6/19, 4:46 PM


EE 422C Syllabus                                                                http://users.ece.utexas.edu/~vallathn/ee422c/syllabus.html
         You are also allowed to post short segments of code (2 lines or less) of code that are giving you syntax
         errors to the class discussion group in order to get help on fixing the syntax error.
         If you have any doubts about what is allowed, ask the instructor.
         Plagiarism detection software will be used on assignments to find students who have copied code
         from one another.
         For more information on Scholastic Dishonesty see the University Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty.
         Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
         fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
         examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
         opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
         Students with Disabilities: students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
         accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
         Disabilities, 471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability. Please present written proof of your special
         need from the above-mentioned office by the twelfth day of class -- 2/26/19. If your accommodation
         includes a longer duration or quiet facilities for the midterms or final, it is your responsibility to secure a
         spot in the SSD facilities on the day of the exam, overlapping with the regular exam time (if possible). You
         will have to request these facilities a month in advance of the test. The spots fill up fast!
                                                  Back to the EE 422C webpage
7 of 7                                                                                                                    6/6/19, 4:46 PM
