                                HIS 350L | AFR 374F | WGS 340
           Between Nollywood and Hollywood:
        Historical Imagining of Africa in Films
Flags:                 Writing; Independent Inquiry
Course Time:           Tuesday 3:30—6:30 PM
Class Location:        GAR 0.120
Instructor:            Toyin Falola
Office:                Gar. Hall, 2.142
Office hours:          Tuesday and Thursday: 2-3 PM
E-mail:                toyinfalola@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
        Since the late 1980s, the African film industry has undergone radical changes that reflect
increased globalization, the availability of new production and distribution methods, and the rise
of a new generation of African filmmakers. This revolution is characterized, for example, by the
relatively young industry of low budget, direct to video films produced in Nigeria, an industry
commonly referred to as Nollywood. While these films have drawn criticisms for their low
production values and popularization of negative cultural stereotypes, the Nigerian video industry
has become the third largest film industry in the world, following Hollywood and Bollywood,
sweeping across the continent and throughout the global diaspora. This course examines the
genesis of a popular African art form and the rise of Nollywood in particular. Through a
combination of films and readings, students will explore how Nollywood, in comparison to other


major popular film industries, depicts the society and culture of Nigeria, Africa and the African
Diaspora as a whole. Each week addresses a different facet of a general theme in an attempt to
introduce students to the various dynamics that shape African cultures, societies and governments.
Additionally, this course seeks to engage students in a debate about how popular films affect
historical imaginations and memory. While these images have previously been the exclusive
product of primarily Hollywood and European films, this course will introduce Nollywood as an
African alternative to how films depict, and people understand, their history.
READING LIST:
Matthew M. Heaton, A History of Nigeria, Cambridge University Press, 2008.
Historical Grounding: Weeks 1-3.
Jeff Haynes, Nollywood: The Creation of Nigerian Film Genres (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 2016)
Nollywood Grounding: Weeks 7 to 9.
Adeshina Afolayan, ed., Auteuring Nollywood: Critical Perspectives on The Figurine (Ibadan:
University Press, 2014) to be supplied by the Instructor.
Production Grounding: Weeks 9 to 13.
COURSE OBJECTIVES:
    1. To increase the knowledge and understanding of African history, culture, and society.
                                                                                                2


    2. To identify key themes in African history that transcend national boundaries, particularly
        in the diaspora.
    3. To help students understand the social, cultural, political, and economic agents that shape
        African history.
    4. To assess the viability of films as a historical source.
    5. To understand popular perceptions about Africa depicted in films and how they lead to
        misunderstandings of the past.
    6. To teach the art of writing and critical thinking.
ASSSIGNMENTS:
 Assignment                                             Portion of grade
 Attendance and ten            2.5 points per week      30
 short weekly reports          with the report
 See Evaluation
 Worksheet
 Media Project USA-                                     20
 Africa Dialogue
 (Intellectual
 engagements with other
 students and scholars)
 Book Review                                            15
 (Analytical Writing)
 Final Research Paper                                   35
 (Evidence-Based Paper)
*Assignments to be submitted by hardcopy on due days, at the beginning of class.
                          CLASS SCHEDULE
    §   Week One: September 3
        Context and History of Nollywood as an Industry. Artistic Production in Nigeria. African
        Identities.
                 Reading: Femi Okiremuette Shaka. “Nollywood: Reconstructing the Historical and
                 Socio-Cultural Contexts of the Nigerian Video Film Industry.” —
                 http://www.supplemagazine.org/nollywood-reconstructing-the-historical-and-socio-
                 cultural-contexts-of-the-nigerian-video-film-industry.html
                                                                                                  3


       Films:
       http://www.aljazeera.com/programmes/aljazeeraworld/2015/07/nollywood-
       150719092553566.html
       you can watch later: i. Nollywood Babylon (2008) ii.This is Nollywood (2007)
Week Two: September 10, The Wedding Party. 1(Netflix)
Negotiating social complexities
                                                  As their big day arrives, a couple's
                                                  lavish wedding plans turn into a
                                                  nightmare that includes exes,
                                                  fighting parents and uninvited
                                                  guests. When Dunni (Adesua
                                                  Etomi) decides to marry Dozie
                                                  (Banky Wellington), her newly
                                                  wealthy family decides to throw the
                                                  wedding of the century. However,
                                                  Dozie's family believes he's
                                                  marrying beneath his status, so they
                                                  elect to leave all the wedding
                                                  planning to Dozie's parents.
                                                  Almost.
Reading: A History of Nigeria, Introduction & Chapters 1-3.
Week Three: September 17, Seasons of a Life. (amazon prime)
                                                                                       4


      Patriarchy and Society.
                                                   A housemaid, who is sexually
                                                   abused by her boss and impregnated
                                                   is forced to give up her son in order
                                                   to go on with her education. Six
                                                   years later she comes back to claim
                                                   her son. A moving story about
                                                   sexual abuse, women’s rights and
                                                   the legal system in Malawi that
                                                   tackles universal themes in an
                                                   African setting, helping understand
                                                   modernization and democratization
                                                   process.
Reading: A History of Nigeria, Chapters 4-6.
   §  Week Four, September 24, Maami
      Motherhood
                                                         A 2011 Nigerian drama film
                                                         produced and directed by
                                                         Tunde Kelani. It is based on a
                                                         novel of the same name,
                                                         written by Femi Osofisan.
                                                         Single parent, Maami, and her
                                                         young son are desperately
                                                         poor. Gifted with a living
                                                         heart, enterprising spirit and
                                                         brave soul, she is the center of
                                                         her son's world, until he longs
                                                         for the father he has never
                                                         known -- a man with a terrible
                                                         secret.
Reading: A History of Nigeria, 7-10, plus Concluding remarks.
Week Five: October 1, October 1 (2014; Kunle Afolayan)
      Colonial Legacies
                                                       October 1 is a 2014 Nigerian
                                                       dark psychological thriller film
                                                       written by Tunde Babalola,
                                                       produced and directed by Kunle     5
                                                       Afolayan. The film, which is set
                                                       in Colonial Nigeria, narrates the
                                                       story of a police officer who is


Reading: A Mouth Sweeter Than Salt, Chapters 1-3.
Week Six: October 8, The Figurine (2009; Kunle Afolayan)
      Social Fractures
                                                    The movie narrates the story of two friends
                                                    who finds a mystical sculpture in an
                                                    abandoned shrine in the forest and one of
                                                    them decides to take the artwork home.
                                                    Unknown to them, the sculpture is from the
                                                    goddess 'Araromire' which bestows seven
                                                    years of good luck on anyone who
                                                    encounters it, and after the seven years
                                                    have expired, seven years of bad luck
                                                    follow. The lives of the two friends begin
                                                    to change for good, as they become
                                                    successful and wealthy businessmen.
                                                    However, after seven years, things start to
                                                    change for the worse.
              Reading:
                      A Mouth Sweeter than Salt4-6
Week Seven: October 15 Lion Heart (Netflix)
      Capitalism and a new Elite
                                                                                                6


                                                         Lionheart tells the story of
                                                         Adaeze Obiagu who wants to
                                                         substitute for her father, Chief
                                                         Ernest Obiagu when he can no
                                                         longer run his company due to
                                                         health issues. Her father,
                                                         however, asks his brother
                                                         Godswill to take his place, and
                                                         Godswill and Adaeze have to
                                                         work hard together to save the
                                                         company from debt and to not
                                                         lose it to the businessman Igwe
                                                         Pascal
              Reading:
                      A Mouth Sweeter Than Salt, 7-10
Week Eight: October 22: Couple of Days (Netflix)
      Social Contradictions
                                                     Three couples, each in
                                                     different phases of romance,
                                                     head to Ibadan for a fun and
                                                     frisky holiday. But secrets
                                                     soon spill, causing trouble in
                                                     paradise.
              Reading: Haynes, Nollywood, Part 1.
Week Nine: October 29: Chief Daddy
                                                                                          7


      Family and wealth
                                                   "Chief Daddy" tells the story of
                                                   billionaire industrialist Chief
                                                   Beecroft, a flamboyant benefactor
                                                   to a large extended family of
                                                   relatives, household staff and
                                                   assorted mistresses. Chief lives
                                                   large, like there’s no tomorrow,
                                                   until the day he dies suddenly and
                                                   the ‘bullion van’ stops.
               Reading, Haynes, Nollywood, Part 2
               Group A presentation
Week Ten: November 5, Mother of George
      Representations of experience of diaspora
                                                  Ayodele and Adenike marry
                                                  and start a new life. As
                                                  months pass without a
                                                  pregnancy, Adenike feels torn
                                                  between her Yoruba culture
                                                  and her new life in America,
                                                  struggling to save her
                                                  marriage. The film tells the
                                                  story of a newly married
                                                  Nigerian couple in Brooklyn
                                                  who own and manage a small
                                                  restaurant while struggling
                                                  with fertility issues.
Reading: Haynes, Nollywood, Part 3.
Week Eleven: November 12, Gone Too Far! (2013; Destiny Ekaragha)
      Interactions with Africa
                                                                                      8


Reading: Auteuring Nollywood, Chapters 9 and 10.
                                                               ‘Gone Too Far is a British-
                                                               Nigerian comedy that
                                                               follows two estranged
                                                               teenage brothers over the
                                                               course of a single day as
                                                               they meet for the first time,
                                                               and struggle to accept each
                                                               other for who they are.
Week Twelve: November 19, The Price
      Corruption and relationships
                                                Seyi, a 24-year-old Nigerian-
                                                American working on Wall
                                                Street, is caught engaging in
                                                insider trading. When his
                                                entire world comes crashing
                                                down, he is forced to finally
                                                confront his tumultuous
                                                relationships.
Reading: Auteuring Nollywood, Chapters 11 and 12.
                                                                                             9


Week Thirteen: November 26, Funke (amazon prime)
        Sports and feminism
                                                            The story of Funke, a young
                                                            Nigerian girl, who wants to play
                                                            football for the country. A
                                                            personal story of struggle and
                                                            inspiration as she tries to
                                                            convince her family and friends
                                                            to allow her to achieve her
                                                            dream.
 Reading: Auteuring Nollywood, Chapters 13 and 14.
Week Fourteen: December 3
           Research findings and short presentations of papers
Attendance Guidelines:
Students must be present to view each film, and to engage in discussions. Therefore, attendance
is mandatory. Late attendance will disturb the class. You must arrive on time. Make-ups will be
granted only in the case of medical illness or university-related conflict. Such conflicts will require
signed documentation explaining the reason for your absence. Students who miss class must
arrange to view the film on their own time. Each unexcused absence will result in an automatic 5
points deduction from your cumulative grade.
USA/Africa Dialogue Assignment Guidelines
Total points = 20
Join the Dialogue
                                                                                                    10


http://groups.google.com/group/USAAfricaDialogue
or ask the Instructor to subscribe you
Assignment rules:
     -    Students must read articles that are posted during the semester, and not use articles from the
          archives.
     -    Students can read articles based on a certain theme, or by a specific contributor.
     -    Students are to make at least 1 comment on every post they read. Send the post to the Instructor
     -    Write a minimum of three pages on your reflections on the Dialogue—its contributions to public
          information, and to your knowledge of Africa.
Film Review Guidelines:
A good way to write a film review is as follows:
    Watch the film. Give your opinion of the film. What are your overall impressions? Likes and
    dislikes? Make sure to provide impartial details that support your assessments of the film.
    Understand that you are writing to an academic audience. Facts and specifics are mandatory,
    as is objective prose. Saying something “sucks” or “stinks” is unacceptable unless you can
    back up your opinions with facts. Give an outline of the film without excessive details. Too
    much detail will result in summarization, which you want to avoid. Make sure to analyze the
    acting performances. How is the film’s structure? Does the plot flow? Are there continuity
    gaps? How does the film use music? How does the music add or distract from the story and
    your connection with the film? Remember that this is a history class and that readings go along
    with the films. How does the film bring to light aspects in the readings, or vice versa?
Book Review Guidelines:
Each student is required to write a review of Nollywood. Reviews should be between 1000 and
1500 words, typed, double-spaced and stapled. The book is not part of your weekly assigned
readings. Therefore, you are responsible for reading the book apart from you weekly assignments.
Reviews should be analytical, and not just a retelling of the book’s chapters. The best way to do
this is by synthesizing the different aspects of the book in your own mind and then critically
examining such things as the content, style and the overall impression these had on you.
Additionally, you will need to incorporate examples and evidence from the reading that either
support or contradict your statements. Feel free to express your ideas in clear and analytical
statements. Organize and develop the main points you wish to make and re-emphasize them in
your conclusion.
                                                                                                          11


A summarization of the book and its chapters is acceptable in your introduction, but this can be no
more than one page. Do not simply retell the book’s chapters, but discuss the context, style and
perspective of the book.
A good way to learn how to write book reviews is to look up reviews written by others. You can
find these on the university libraries webpage. Go to the “Research Tools” tab at the top of the
library homepage. In the drop-down menu select “Find Articles Using Databases.” Warning:
review the plagiarism guidelines. Reviews are intellectual property, too.
Proofread your review before submitting it. See the format guidelines section of this syllabus for
further information. Turn your review in on time (that means by the beginning of class) because
late reviews will be penalized half a letter grade for each day late. Your book review is worth 15
points of your final grade.
Final Paper: Contextualizing Nollywood
Each student is required to write a research paper that addresses the key theme of the class, namely
the meaning of Nollywood as a local, African form and style and its impact in the African Diaspora
and, more generally, abroad. While other themes are apparent in these films (i.e., colonialism,
traditionalism vs. modernity, relationship, affect, sexuality, love, gender dynamics, corruption, the
diaspora, etc.), the research must be inflected with the interactions between Africa and the
Diaspora, carried out through the use of films and written texts. The professor may also suggest
research topics. While students are allowed to use films and texts from class, they are also required
to explore the growing body of literature about African cinema as well as the increasing number
of African films becoming available, produced in Africa and abroad. The Fine Arts Library and
online databases has a wealth of material available.
Research papers must have a clear thesis statement and organizational structure.
Research papers should be between 2400-3000 words, typed, double spaced, with size 12 Times
New Roman font. Proofread your research paper before submitting it. See the format guidelines
section of this syllabus for further information.
During the next to last week of class, students will present their papers. Presentations should be
between 5-7 minutes long followed by several minutes of questions from the class. You are
allowed to include a power point presentation.
Turn your research paper in on time, because late papers will be penalized half a letter grade for
each day late. Your research paper is worth 35 points of your final grade.
FORMAT GUIDELINES:
All assignments must be typed, double spaced, have 1” margins and size 12 Times New Roman
font. Assignments that do not follow these guidelines will not be accepted.
A part of writing history includes clearly communicating your ideas. As such, written assignments
must conform to standard rules of written English including the organization of essays, grammar
                                                                                                   12


and punctuation. Students who require assistance can use the undergraduate writing center in the
FAC free of charge.
PLAGIARISM:
How do you avoid committing plagiarism? Here are some basic tips:
1. Historians use a variety of citation formats, including footnotes, endnotes, and indicating their
source directly in their text within parentheses. Within those formats, they use a variety of styles.
Ask your instructor for guidance on a uniform system of citations—and follow that advice.
2. Take notes carefully. Whenever you copy a direct quotation, protect yourself by putting
quotation marks around it. Attach a full, accurate citation to any borrowed passage, whether
quoted or paraphrased, and keep it attached as you write.
3. Although borrowed ideas must be fully acknowledged in a citation, you do not need to provide
a citation for information that your reader can reasonably be expected to know. When in doubt,
include a citation.
4. You can avoid plagiarism by learning how to paraphrase. It is much easier to avoid plagiarism
that involves verbatim copying or handing in the same paper twice than it is to avoid plagiarism
that involves paraphrase, probably the trickiest area of all. Certainly it is the area where most
instances of plagiarism occur. Plagiarism includes taking direct quotes or ideas from a source
without giving the original author credit through citation.
CLASS POLICIES:
Make-Ups: Make-ups will be granted only in the case of medical illness or university-related
conflict. Make-ups will only be given when a request is made prior to the date of the exam or
assignment except for documented medical emergencies.
Assignments: All assignments must be submitted on due dates. Half a letter grade per day is
deducted thereafter. Failure to read the assigned materials will incur negative grading and treated
as an evidence of cheating. Answers to questions will be used to reveal the failure to read.
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community. Any student found guilty of scholastic dishonesty may
receive an “F” in the course and be remanded to the appropriate University of Texas authorities
for disciplinary action.         For more information, view Student Judicial Services at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
                                                                                                   13


Use of Class Materials: No material presented in lecture may be directly or indirectly published,
posted to the Internet, or rewritten for publication or distribution in any medium. Neither these
materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer except for personal and non-
commercial use. All information derived from the internet must be adequately cited.
Student Privacy: The Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) require that student
privacy be preserved. Thus the posting of grades, even by the last four digits of the social security
number, is forbidden. All communication will remain between the instructor and the student, and
the instructor will not be able to share details of the student’s performance with parents, spouses,
or any others.
Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937
(video phone).
Grades: Course grades will be evaluated on a +/- scale. Refer to grading scale below for the
letter grade that will be given for the original numerical grade.
    GRADING SCALE:
    93-100: A 90-92: A-
    87-89: B+ 83-86: B          80-82: B-
    77-79: C+ 73-76: C          70-72: C-
    67-69: D+ 63-66: D          60-62: D-
    0-59: F
                    HISTORY 350L/AFR 372G/WGS340 Historical Images
                                 EVALUATION WORK SHEET
Name: __________________________________
Date: ___________________________________
                              PART A: READING FOR THIS WEEK
Materials Read:
Major highlights:
                                                                                                  14


Major Arguments:
Short Review:
                                           PART B: FILM
Movie Title: ______________________________________________________
Main Characters:
Short Synopsis:
During the movie write down any interesting moments, comments, or questions you have
regarding the plot, characters, cultural confusions, or geographical inquiries:
                                                                                     15


Write down a moment in the movie that you were familiar with and/or connect with:
Write down a moment in the movie that relates to our readings. Did the readings help you
understand that scene?
Did you enjoy the movie? If yes, explain why it interested you. If not, explain why and give a
suggestion on a movie that could better supplement your readings:
Did the movie make any historical references? Which historical moments were present and how
were they used in the movie? (May relate to wars, political movements, gender reforms,
government powers, etc.)
Write down a brief paragraph explaining what you learned about Nigerian culture from this film:
(May include attitudes, beliefs, traditions, and practices.)
                                                                                               16


How would you personally compare and contrast the values displayed in the film to what you are
accustomed to in your own lives? How would you respond to cultures totally unfamiliar to you?
                                                                                            17
