                                                                                                     1
Women and Wealth (Wr II): HIS 350L – # 32370; #39225; # 46125
Professor: Indrani Chatterjee (ichatterjee@austin.utexas.edu)
Fall 2018
Class Times: Tuesday 330P - 630P
Classroom: GAR 2.128
Office: GAR 3.412
Office Hours: Thursday 1-2 pm
DESCRIPTION OF COURSE:
This course carries a Writing Flag. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications
objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility,
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. (For understanding Critical
Thinking, please see FAQs at the end of this document) Writing Flag courses are designed to
give students experience with writing in an academic discipline, in this case, History.
This course teaches students two distinct and graduated forms of historical writing. One is
review: it begins with learning the skills of summary (presenting the main points of another text
concisely), and is completed by learning skills of evaluating texts in terms of their ‘sources’,
interpretative methods, persuasiveness in comparison with other similar texts. Students will
acquire a familiarity with writing reviews of both published and unpublished writing by
commenting on the essays published by established authors as well as by their not-yet-published
peers. They will learn to ask the same questions of both. (For the rubric to use and questions to
ask, see ‘Rubric’ in FAQs, and ‘How do I write a review?’). A second form of writing students
will learn is that of narrative: ie the arranging of documents, events according to a timeline that
establishes an unfolding ‘story’. Historical narrative begins with ‘primary’ sources, taken from
the time in which they occurred. Students will write a substantial final essay which brings both
narrative and reviewing skills together.
Goals: 1) to provide students with an intensive writing experience which will lead them to move
from descriptive to analytical and critically engaged writing gradually.
    2) to develop students’ ability to give and take critical feedback on writing. Driving this is
the philosophy that by engaging other people’s ideas ‘actively’, we can clarify our own.
Students will be expected to participate in both peer-reviews and group-discussions in order to
generate feedback and receive it. The instructor will closely review paper(s) and provide written
and oral suggestions for improvements in style and substance. The student will then prepare a
revised version of the paper(s) in light of the instructor's and, when appropriate, fellow students'
comments.


                                                                                                     2
Grading: LETTER GRADES OF A, B, C, D, F will be given in this course in the following
fashion: total of 90-100= A; 80-89=B; 70-79=C; 60-69=D; Under 50 a Fail or F.
Please note also that all discussions of grades will only be done during office hours, within
seven days of the receipt of the grade. Such discussions will not be conducted via email
correspondence, social media outlets or on the telephone generally.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
     1) Reading and Writing: Most readings for this course will be available on Canvas or
         online at University of Austin Library. Students are expected to read the assigned texts
         ahead of the class, and be willing to discuss their responses to these texts in class
         without prompting from the Instructor. The success of the class depends largely on the
         willingness of students to discuss their ideas and questions in class.
     2) Each student should bring to class each week a basic list of 3 questions on the readings.
         After discussion in class, this list of questions is submitted to the instructor and
         contributes 20 points to the total grade earned by a student. Questions should be about
         the author’s arguments and methods, or something that catches your attention but is
         unexplained in the text, etc. For a range of questions that you should begin to ask of all
         things you read, see ‘How do I write a review?’ in the FAQs at the end of this document.
         When writing, use the questions you have asked on your readings to form the key
         organizing principles of your paragraphs. The components of an organized essay are a
         strong thesis statement in the introductory paragraph, clear and consistent paragraphs
         with clear opening statements in each, succinct conclusion. Good spelling will count as
         well.
     3) In addition to regular questions, all students will write 1) a 500-word summary of an
         article (10 points, 2 of these points will be for correct citation of sources according to
         the Chicago Manual of Style)
                                 2) a 8-10 page essay presenting a summary and review of multiple
articles and some primary documents (20 points)
                                 3) 3 sets of peer-reviews (15 points)
                                 4) Final 15-page final essay reviewing a debate on dowry (20
points)
2) Participating in Class-Discussion: (for 15 points) The assessment of oral discussion shifts
in its emphasis from the beginning to the end of the semester. IN the beginning, a student’s
ability to speak coherently will be sufficient; by the middle, a student’s ability to synthesise old
and new readings, to remember the beginning and be able to refer to it in discussion will be
favorably assessed; in the end, bringing all the older readings to bear upon the latest readings or
viewing materials and being able to discuss these in a clear and mature fashion will be rewarded.
3) Attendance: Students will be allowed no more than one unexplained absence, unless there is
a serious, documented, medical or personal problem. Additional absences will adversely affect
the final grade. Keep in mind that attendance is mental as well as physical: parking your body in
a classroom and tuning your mind out on to facebook/twitter/ apps is unacceptable conduct. This


                                                                                                      3
class will proceed on the principle that all students have the right to learn in a supportive
environment: the use of a laptop should not distract others and is acceptable during lectures or
class discussions only for note-taking or instructor-directed web-surfing. All mobile messaging
devices must be turned off and stored away during class. The instructor retains the right to ask
students to shut off devices that are hindering her teaching or other students’ learning.
Everybody is required to develop and demonstrate listening skills. DO- look at the speaker,
take notes, mention an idea that seems to interest you afterwards, ask thoughtful questions
if you need clarifications or further development. DON’T – look bored or indifferent, look at
your watch/phone/computer, yawn, fall asleep, read the papers or play games. The latter is
unprofessional conduct, especially noticeable in a small class. Unprofessional conduct will
affect your grade adversely.
4) Punctuality: The structure of every class meeting will be the same: it will begin with going
round the room taking questions from the students on particular readings on days when they are
required to read. On days that they are to bring in written work, the first half of the class will be
given over to students’ presenting their own work and asking each other clarifying questions,
responding briefly. It is therefore important for each student to be present punctually. Please
enter class on time, and stay till the end – unless you have taken prior permission from the
instructor to depart early. Given the structure of this course, there will be no rescheduling of
missed discussions or classes. Written assignments, turned in late, will be subject to a grade
penalty of minus 1 per 24 hours, except under certified medical or legal emergency.
5) Plagiarism: At the graduate level it is understood that intentional plagiarism of written
assignments is unprofessional behavior and may lead to failure of the course. If anybody is
unaware of definition of plagiarism, please see the instructor for clarifications. The same applies
to cut-and-paste tactics from internet web-sites. Submitting reviews of books or essays you have
not read is a punishable offence under the honor code.
6) Special Accommodations: At the beginning of the semester, preferably within the first three
weeks, students who need special accommodations should notify the instructor by presenting a
letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities (SDD) Office. To ensure that the
most appropriate accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD Office at
471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY. I will not make any accommodations if students provide the letters
in the last four weeks of the semester.
Schedule of Classes with Readings:
PART A.
Sept 4: Introduction: what is History? What is Historical Method and why is citation necessary?
And what can South Asia teach us about anything?
Sept 11: Read and be prepared to discuss in class
     1) Metcalfs: Sultanate and Mughal Empire PDF
     2) Elison Findly, ‘The Capture of Maryam-uz-Zamānī's Ship: Mughal Women and European
Traders’, 227-238, PDF on Canvas


                                                                                                4
Sept 18: Inland Investments of Women’s Wealth: Early Modern Architecture and City Building.
Read each and try to connect or compare with the other
    3) Leslie Orr, ‘Women’s Wealth and Worship’, 124-147, PDF on Canvas.
    4) Stephen P. Blake, ‘Contributors to the Urban Landscape: Women Builders in Safavid
Isfahan and Mughal Shahjahanabad’, 407-428, PDF
    5) Gregory Kozlowski, ‘Private Lives and Public Piety: Women and the Practice of Islam in
Mughal India’, 469-488, PDF.
Begin writing your First Essay of 500 words, summarizing any one of the articles you have
read so far. Bring the essay to class on Sept 25.
Sept 25: This class will be devoted to peer-reviewing each other’s writing. A peer review
assigns values to grammatical writing, active sentence construction, paragraph and citation
practices, organization of arguments, as well as the broader intellectual content of the essay.
Hand-outs will be provided in class to help you assess your peers’ writing. (This is a 5-point
exercise)
Oct 2: Submit Final Draft of Essay 1 to instructor by 11.59 pm +
Read for class discussion (Summarize each article, Compare the lessons learned from each,
Reflect on how they build on the previous articles)
    5) Sumit Guha and Indrani Chatterjee, ‘Waif-Prince and Slave-Queen: Slavery and Social
Capital in Eighteenth-Century Western India’, PDF on Canvas
    6) V. S. Kadam, ‘The Dancing Girls of Maharashtra’, 61-89, PDF on Canvas.
PART B: Over the next four weeks, students will understand the direction of change in women’s
wealth by reading what historians call ‘primary’ records. These are documents from the century
in which the events happened, with case-studies illustrating how wealth was redirected by
governments in the early nineteenth century.
Oct 9: Women Actors in Colonial Economics
Read for class Discussion
            8) Tirthankar Roy, 38-72, PDF on Canvas
           9) Indrani Chatterjee, Monastic Commerce PDF on Canvas
        10) Samira Sheikh, Vernacular Capital.PDF on Canvas
Oct 16: Colonialism and Wealthy Hindu Women in the Law Courts.
Read for discussion in class, practicing skills of summary and review
11) Sudder Adawlut PDF (pp 19-169) of cases and judgments regarding ‘Hindu’ Women’s
Wealth. Pair these with 12) Amar Farooqi’s ‘Baiza Bai’ on Canvas.


                                                                                                    5
Oct 23: Colonialism and Muslim Women in the Law Courts.
Read 12) Sudder Adawlut PDF (pp.172-245) of cases referring to Muslim Women and Wealth.
Pair it with 13) Margrit Pernau, ‘Families and Communities of Descent’ and ‘Courtesans’ pp 57-
151, also PDF on Canvas.
Oct 30: Come to Class with a 2000-word Essay answering the question: Did British rule and
laws redirect the wealth of women of different groups in different ways? You should use all the
readings done till Oct 23 to write your essay. In class, peers will review each other’s essays
(another 5-point exercise).
Nov 6: Presentation of Second Essays. Class Discussions will be centered on 1) Legal and
Social Changes in Women’s Wealth in the 19th century, 2) Comparison with Older Historical
Structures and 3) Reflections on the Gendered and Class Nature of Colonial Legislation.
 PART C: For the next three weeks, the class will prepare for the final essay. This will be a
review of a modern Indian feminist debate on dowry. In each week, students should
summarise the reading, place it against what they have already learned, and evaluate the reading.
Begin by asking the questions from the segment of Critical Thinking (FAQ) here and in order to
save time, begin writing your final essay one paragraph at a time. The final presentation of
essays in class will be on Dec 4.
Nov 13: Read Metcalfs ‘Economy and Industry of Interwar Years to the 1970s in PDF on
Canvas. + Knit it to to Ranjana Sheel, Dowry Legislation 246-264
Nov 20: Read the remaining pages 265-303 of the Sheel readings (Madhu Kishwar, Dowry and
Inheritance, Rajani Palriwala, C.S. Lakshmi, ‘Kidneys and Dowry’, and Kishwar’s rejoinder) +
Bina Agarwal’s Women and Landed Wealth, PDF
THANKSGIVING BREAK
Nov 27: Presentation of First Draft of Final Essay for Peer Review in Class
Dec 4: Final Reviews of Class, 10 minute Presentations, and Submission of Final Essay for
the Semester. Submission is to be electronically completed by 11.59 pm.
FAQs
1. What is critical thinking?
The critical thinker does not simply accept what she/he reads or hears and does not simply make
assertions, but bases arguments on evidence and sound reasoning. A way of practising critical
thinking is to ask yourself questions as you listen, read and study: questions such as a) • What is
really important here? b) How does this relate to what I know already? C) • Is this really true?
Can I check its accuracy? (A statement can be clear but inaccurate, as in “Most Indians are less


                                                                                                     6
than 150cm in height.”) Critical thinking includes such ‘higher-order’ thinking tasks as
reasoning, problem-solving, analysis, synthesis, and evaluation. The skills or tasks involved in
critical thinking will vary, but may include a) Developing a logical argument;
b) Identifying the flaws or weaknesses in an argument;
c) Making relevant connections or links across disciplines, or from theory to practice;
d) Analyzing the material in a range of sources and synthesizing it;
A critical thinker does not simply observe others thinking, but also her/himself thinking and
writing. No matter how brief your response, ask yourself questions such as a) Could I have
expressed this point in another (better) way? Have I elaborated sufficiently? B) Could I have
been more specific? C) How is this related to the topic? Is it really relevant to the question? How
does this follow from what I said before? Does this contradict a previous statement? When we
think, we bring a variety of thoughts together in some order. If the combination of these ideas is
not mutually supportive, or does not make sense, then the combination is not logical. D) Have I
addressed the complexities of the author/article’s questions, or have I just skated over the
surface? E) Are there issues I have omitted? Is there another way to look at this question? These
questions apply sound intellectual standards to your thinking. It involves self-evaluation,
thinking about your thinking, and being sure that you are not jumping to conclusions. You
should be prepared to consider all aspects of an issue before making up your mind, and to avoid
letting personal bias or prejudice interfere with your reasoning. Critical thinking is important for
most academic tasks, including reading, tutorial discussions, written assignments and exam
answers.
2) How do I write a review?
Writing a review is a two-step process: developing an argument about the work under
consideration, and making that argument as you write an organized and well-supported draft. A
series of questions can focus your thinking as you read and take notes with page numbers
from the author’s text.
     •   What is the thesis—or main argument—of the article, essay or book? If the author
         wanted you to get one idea, what would it be? How does it compare or contrast to the
         world you know? What has the article accomplished?
     •   Is the author arguing with other scholars in a bigger field? Does this change the field for
         you in some way?
     •   What exactly is the subject or topic of the essay? Does the author cover the subject
         adequately? Does the author cover all aspects of the subject in a balanced fashion? What
         is the approach to the subject (topical, analytical, chronological, descriptive)?
     •   How does the author support her/his argument? What evidence does she use to prove her
         point? Do you find that evidence convincing? Why or why not? Does any of the author’s
         information (or conclusions) conflict with other books you’ve read, courses you’ve taken
         or just previous assumptions you had of the subject?
     •   How does the author structure her/his argument? What are the parts that make up the
         whole? Does the argument make sense? Does it persuade you? Why or why not?


                                                                                                     7
    •   How has this essay/chapter helped you develop your understanding of the subject? Would
        you recommend the chapter to your friend?
Then, gather up your notes, and beginning with a well-organised Introduction identifying the
task before you, proceed to write out your observations according to the questions you have been
raising while reading. After the first draft is written, read your own writing asking yourself the
questions regarding critical thinking listed earlier. Edit, edit, edit. Then submit.
3) Rubric for Assessing an Essay: Assign the value of 1 for poor, and 5 for excellent in each
category.
                  Excellent (A)     Good (B)          Not Great (C) Needs Work          Poor (F)
                                                                         (D)
 Argument/        Strong thesis     Thesis is not Thesis poorly No thesis               No thesis
 Thesis           is clearly        clear or          defined or         and/or         and
                  stated in first   difficult to      vague and          inconsistent   inconsistent
                  paragraph;        locate, or        inconsistently argumentatio       argumentatio
                  argument is       inconsistently supported             n              n
                  consistently      supported
                  supported
 Understandin     Informative       Demonstrates      Passive            Does not       Failure to
 g/ Content       and original      significant       understandin       demonstrate    address the
                  analysis          level of          g with little      clear          sources or
                  demonstrates      understandin      analysis;          understandin   prompt
                  high level of     g with some       mostly             g or
                  understandin      analysis          summarizes         knowledge of
                  g of multiple                       documents          the material
                  sources
 Use of           Expert use of     Uses              Some use of        Poor or        No use of
 Evidence         evidence:         evidence well     evidence:          insufficient   evidence
                  Sources are       to support        Sources are        use of
                  selected,         thesis:           used but not       evidence:
                  introduced,       Sources are       properly           Sources are
                  contextualize     selected,         introduced,        used
                  d, interpreted,   introduced,       contextualize      inappropriatel
                  and cited         contextualize     d, interpreted     y or without
                  correctly.        d, interpreted,   or cited.          proper
                                    and cited                            citation.
                                    adequately.
 Organization/    Sophisticated     Functional        Confused or        Confused       Minimal
 Style            arrangement       arrangement       inconsistent       arrangement    control of
                  of content        of content        arrangement        of content     content
                  supports          sustains a        of content;        obscures       arrangement;
                  argument;         logical order;    limited word       argument;      problematic
                  writer’s voice    generic use of    choice and         problematic    word choices


                                                                                            8
                 clear through  words and       control of       word choices; and sentence
                 illustrative   sentence        sentence         relies on     structures
                 use of         structures      structure        quotations/
                 language                                        paraphrasing
                                                                 with not
                                                                 authorial
                                                                 voice
 Grammar/        Evident        Sufficient      Limited          Minimal       Grammar
 Usage           control of     control of      control of       control of    and usage
                 grammar,       grammar,        grammar,         grammar,      errors
                 mechanics,     mechanics,      mechanics,       mechanics,    impede
                 spelling,      spelling,       spelling,        spelling,     clarity
                 usage and      usage and       usage and        usage and
                 sentence       sentence        sentence         sentence
                 formation.     formation.      formation—       formation—
                                                begins to        impedes
                                                affect clarity   clarity
Citations! The Chicago Manual of Style
        http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html
