                                                   RHE 321 l Principles of Rhetoric l
                                                                   Summer 2019
                                                                     SAC 5.102
                                                              MTWTHF 11:30-1:00
Prof. Linda Ferreira-Buckley
Unique #: 83400
Flag: Writing
Restrictions: credit for RHE 306 & E 316, upper-division standing
lfb@utexas.edu
Office: Parlin 16
Office Hours: Thursdays 1:00—3:00; Friday 10:00—11:00 & by appt.*
                    *If you cannot attend my office hours, I will happily find other times when you can meet
The study of rhetoric, one of the original seven Liberal Arts (along with logic, grammar, arithmetic, geometry, astronomy, and
music) has a long and proud history, stretching back to the 5th century BCE and forward to the present day. Both a productive
and interpretive art, rhetoric is decidedly cross-disciplinary: its principles (audience, context, kairos, exigency, ethos, pathos,
logos, and so forth) are employed in and draw from law, politics, literary studies, education, science, and religion, among others.
This course will introduce you to common rhetorical principles and to the disciplinary history of rhetoric and writing studies.
Assignments in this class require you to identify and apply these rhetorical principles while composing, interpreting, and
presenting “texts.” Throughout the course, you’ll work on invention and revision and you’ll do peer reviews.
You’ll read and discuss excerpts from and scholarship about significant works from two major historical periods in the West—
ancient and modern/ contemporary—and consider the development of rhetorical practices specific to oral, print, and electronic
technologies of interaction. Although we will engage with culturally specific rhetorics (e.g., African American, feminist, queer) in
the last third of the course, the first half will be devoted to the classical bases for much of today’s rhetorical theory.
You’ll do rhetorical analyses of different kinds of texts (e.g., political speeches, advertisements, editorials, songs, videos). We'll
practice close critical reading as we try to determine as precisely as possible what the writer or speaker intends to convey. We’ll
study both effective and ineffective texts to determine how the argument likely works for some audiences, but not others (i.e., how
particular words, references, claims, sentences, organizational patterns, etc., create an overall argument and shape particular
readers’ interpretations). Although the course does not include a formal research project, it is indeed a course that requires
researching, understanding, taking stock of many and diverse sources. You will need to do independent research throughout the
course in order to understand what you’re reading, hearing, seeing, presenting, representing, and arguing. Be prepared to take
responsibility for your learning. This said, I also want you to let me know what you find confusing, etc.; I will be happy to review
it with you in class, in my office, and over email.
You will be expected to adopt a professional attitude toward revising, editing, and proofreading your work. Please come to my
office hours as often as you like so that we can focus on your particular strengths and weaknesses. If you cannot make my office
hours, we will arrange a time you can meet. Additionally, visit the Undergraduate Writing Center to work one-on-one with
experienced consultants trained in writing. My hope is that you will leave RHE 321 more skilled at examining oral, written, and
visual texts and at constructing effective, imaginative, ethical arguments. Given our short time together—a mere 5 weeks—you
will need to be proactive, vigilant, and industrious to get what you need from the course.
RHE 321 requires your intense participation in class activities. To state the obvious: you need to read (and reread) assignments
carefully and critically and to contribute enthusiastically to discussion. The success of this course—what you learn and whether
you are engaged or bored— depends on you and your colleagues. This is not a lecture course. For this course to be worth your
time and that of your colleagues, you must be an engaged participant in discussion, so be an active listener. Take notes. Much of
your success in and after this course requires you to be organized and anticipatory.
Take note: students sometimes present lifeless summaries of conventional wisdom or common prejudices; they write what they
believe the teacher wants to read. More than anything, I want to read papers that show you genuinely working through complex
issues.


                                                                                                                                                                2
Requirements & Grading
plus/minus grading
The course grade will be calculated as followed*:
05% Canvas assignments (homework, exercises, etc.)
15% Paper 1 (editorial argument; peer review due Monday, June 17; final due Tuesday, June 18)
15% Paper 2 (rhetorical analysis; peer review due Friday, June 28; final due Monday, July 1)
15% Paper 3 (revision of weakest paper; paper due Saturday, July 13)
15% Quizzes (unannounced)
15% Midterm exam (on Wednesday, June 26)
20% Final exam (on Friday, July 12, 9:00 pm-12:00 pm)
100%
*Homework exercises, peer reviews, self-assessments, class attendance, & participation: MANDATORY TO PASS THE COURSE. To count, all homework
must be done with care and thought and on time, and to count, all papers must be on the common class topic, be accompanied by all ancillary materials, and be on
time.
Note that I will grade the version of the paper you hand in on its due date; that grade is not merely advisory since you will
have had ample opportunity to meet with me and to go to the UWC before the paper is due.
Note too that your third paper will be a major revision of paper 1 or paper 2 (whichever is weakest) for a separate grade.
Attendance is mandatory. If you have three absences, you’ll fail the course. The only excused absences per UT policy are religious
holidays or active military service (http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/ ).
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious
holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a paper in order to observe a religious holy day or serve
active military duty, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Save your absences for an illness, car breakdown, sister’s graduation, brother’s wedding rehearsal, etc.
Arrive on time. If you arrive late, be sure to sign the attendance sheet and indicate what time you arrived— otherwise, you’ll be
marked absent. Signing the attendance sheet is your responsibility. Three tardies count as an absence.
Readings
You are responsible for completing all readings assignments. You are responsible for checking Canvas for assignments. Readings
will be posted on Canvas, will be distributed in class, or will be from our class texts.
      •   Crowley & Hawhee, Ancient Rhetoric for Contemporary Students (pdf posted on our Canvas site)
      •   James Jasinski, Sourcebook on Rhetoric (available electronically with your eid via UT Libraries)
      •   Any writing handbook or online guide (e.g., http://writingcenter.unc.edu/tips-and-tools/ ) that you find helpful (required,
          become intimate with it)
      •   Readings as assigned (distributed in class and/or available on Canvas)
Common pitfalls
      • Not reading assignment instructions carefully, not treating them as part of your learning, not following even the basic
          instructions
      • Not studying handouts
      • Not taking notes in class because you have “a photographic memory” or discussions seem obvious
      • Not working through readings. (Working through readings requires rereading, annotating, looking up unfamiliar words
          and illusions, etc.)
      • Not mulling over ideas, theories, practices, etc.
      • Dismissing “x”, “y” or “z” as obvious. At the surface, many complex ideas seem simple. (When you grapple with texts and
          begin to notice the speaker’s or writer's use of enthymemes, ethos, nuance, irony, etc., “x,” “y” or “z” will likely seem less
          simplistic and obvious.)
      • Not drawing connections between and across concepts and not looking for differences and nuances that work against
          overgeneralizations born of surface understanding
      • Mistaking surface understanding for deep understanding
      • Not following up on your questions, confusion, or objections in our class and in conference
      • Treating homework as busywork
      • Mistaking principles for formulas
      • Expecting to be given formulas


                                                                                                                                        3
     •     Underestimating what you’re capable of
     •     Underestimating the time it takes to develop a paper
     •     Giving short shrift to invention, revising, editing—and instead relying primarily on composing and proofreading
     •     Not studying, mulling over, and learning from feedback, including comments made in class
     •     Forgetting to submit a meaningful writer’s memo
     •     Not seeking my help when you need it. Don’t be embarrassed, don’t hesitate, don’t forget that we can make appointments
           outside of office hours
     •     Not taking advantage of the University Writing Center, which is in the Learning Commons in the PCL and which is free
Policies
Phones, laptops, etc. Do not use them in class. Take notes by hand, photograph them, and then upload them onto your
computer. If there’s a reason you can’t take notes by hand, see me. The first time you use a device, I will remind you of the rule.
The second time, I will ask you to leave class. (That will, of course, count as an absence.)
Bring paper copies of your readings, rough drafts and other Canvas exercises to class so that we can refer to them.
Documented Disability Statement: UT provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. Please do not hesitate to look into whether services and accommodations might benefit you and your education. For
more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at, or see http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/, call (512) 471-
6259 (voice) or (512) 410-6644 (video phone), or email ssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student's own work. Turning
in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will usually result in failure of the course. At the very
least, it will result in a major course penalty. This standard applies to all drafts and assignments, and a report of the incident will
be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the
Dean of Students will initiate proceedings to expel you from the University. Take care to read and understand the Statement on
Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php. If you have any doubts about your use of
materials, please see me.
Email Accounts: Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin. You are required to obtain a UT email account and to
check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to https://it.utexas.edu/services/email-calendar-
collaboration.
Emergency Information
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may
not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
Fire Prevention Services office.
Other important emergency information:
     • http://emergency.utexas.edu/preparedness
     • http://emergency.utexas.edu/preparedness/communication-tools
     • Emergency Information: 512-232-9999
     • University Police: 911
