                                                                                   Version 5-30-2019
                      PHM F338: INTRODUCTION TO PHARMACOLOGY
                                   Monday - Friday 8:30 - 10:00 a.m.
                                         Room: PHR 2.108
                             First Summer Session 2018 – Unique #87905
Course Director:               James Karboski, PharmD
    Office:                    Pharmacy 2.222
    Contact:                   Telephone:      (512) 232-2628
                               E-mail:         karboski@austin.utexas.edu
    Office Hours:              After class by appointment
Description:
Through this course students will gain an understanding of how medications work, the
appropriate use of medications and how to monitor medication use to insure maximum safety
and efficacy.
Goal:
The goal of Introduction to Pharmacology is to assure that students obtain a thorough
comprehension of the basic pharmacological principles necessary for the care of their patients.
Objectives:
At the end of this course, each student should be able to:
1. Demonstrate an understanding of the terminology used to describe basic pharmacologic
    principles and drug classification.
2. Describe the basic pharmacokinetic principles governing uptake, distribution, metabolism
    and elimination of drugs and apply these principles in the therapeutic management of
    patients.
3. Describe and explain pharmacodynamic concepts of drug-receptor interaction.
4. Demonstrate an understanding of the basic mechanisms of drug-induced toxicity and drug
    interactions and develop appropriate approaches to their management.
5. Describe selected major drug classifications based upon both drug actions and use in specific
    illnesses and diseases.
6. Describe the mechanism of action, indications, adverse drug reactions, appropriate dose
    range and uses for the medications discussed in class.
7. Describe the rules and laws that govern drug distribution.
Prerequisites:
Credit or registration for:
Biology 365S, 416K, or 446L
Kinesiology 324K
Biomedical Engineering 365R or 365S


Required Materials:
1. Copies of lecture slides will be available from the course Canvas website
     (http://canvas.utexas.edu). It is highly recommended that all students bring these notes with
     them to class to significantly cut down on the amount of note taking. Instructors will assume
     that you have these notes and will pace their lectures accordingly. You can find support in
     using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday-Friday 8AM – 6PM.
Optional Material:
Pharmacology: Connections to Nursing Practice, 3rd Edition – Adams & Urban
Classroom Conduct:
It is your responsibility to attend class and conduct yourself in a manner respectful to both
faculty and fellow students in the classroom. If you miss a class for any reason, you will be held
responsible for all material covered and announcements made in your absence. It is your
responsibility to be on time and remain for the entire class period so as not to be inconsiderate of
your colleagues in learning.
Redistribution of Class Recordings:
I will attempt to audio record lectures this semester. These recordings are made available by the
University of Texas, and are intended solely for the purpose of review by students currently
enrolled in this class. Students utilizing class recordings should be careful to not compromise the
privacy of either themselves or other users
(http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/records/ferpa). Students are free to make their own
recordings of lectures in this course. Any additional distribution of University- or student-
generated recordings (regardless of format) is prohibited without the written and signed
permission of the presenter and all students identifiable on the recording.
Please remember that this service is offered to supplement (not replace) lecture attendance. An
issue might arise that could prevent material from being made available in a timely fashion or at
all. Although every effort will be taken to keep the system running, UT does not guarantee the
availability of these recordings. Attending class is the only way to insure your viewing of the
professor's presentation.
Assessment:
Canvas-based quizzes will be administered throughout the semester. The time and frequency of
the quizzes will be at the discretion of the instructor.
There will be no make-up quizzes offered. The lowest quiz score will be dropped from grade
calculations. Using another student’s Canvas account to take a quiz is considered academic
dishonesty and will be reported to the Dean of Students.
The first two examinations will be administered in the evening and the third exam at the
regularly scheduled class time in the regular lecture room. The comprehensive final exam will be
administered at the date/time/place listed in the official UT Final Examination Guide.
Students must arrive on time for examinations. All instructions and corrections will be made at
the beginning of the examination period and will not be repeated. Students arriving after a test
has been handed in by another student will not be allowed to sit for the examination and will
receive a score of zero for the exam.


The only items allowed during examinations are pencils and a calculator (if needed). Books,
bags, and coats will need to be left in a location designated by the faculty proctor. No student
may possess a cell phone, digital music player or any other type of electronic device during the
exam. Students caught with any of these devices will be reported to the Dean of Students and
may receive a score of zero on the exam.
Absences on test days must be approved by the Course Director prior to the scheduled test.
Requests must be in writing and delivered to Dr. Karboski. If permission is granted by telephone
at the last minute (e.g. due to illness), it is the student's responsibility to confirm the request in
writing as soon as possible. If permission is given to miss any of the first three tests, the
weighting of the comprehensive portion of the final exam will be increased proportionally. No
make-up test will be given for any reason for any of the first three exams scheduled during
the course. An unexcused absence from a test may result in a grade of "0" for that test. Please
do not request a "special" exception such as taking a test either early or late.
All students must take the final examination. A student who must miss the final examination for
an approved reason will receive an incomplete for the course and must make up the final exam at
the time and place designated by the instructor. A student who misses the final exam without an
approved excuse will receive a grade of F for the semester.
The Course Coordinator will retain all examinations. Any student who removes an examination
from the testing room may receive a score of 0 for the exam. Students will be provided an
opportunity to view their scantron in order to verify answers with the posted key.
Answers to multiple choice questions are based on the scantron sheets and not answers written
on the test papers. All tests are taken to the Scanning Office for grading. After the tests have
been graded and an item analysis is performed, questions may be discarded at the discretion of
the Course Coordinator.
Examinations:
         Quizzes                         15%
         Examination #1                  20%
         Examination #2                  20%
         Examination #3                  20%
         Comprehensive Final             25%
                                         100%
Posting Class Scores:
Following each examination, the scores will be posted on the password-protected course Canvas
website.


Grading Policy:
        A      93 -100%                    C       73 - 76%
        A-     90 -92%                     C-      70 - 72%
        B+     87 -89%                     D+      67 - 69%
        B      83 -86%                     D       63 - 66%
        B-     80 -82%                     D-      60 - 62%
        C+     77 -79%                     F       Below 60%
A curve may be used in assigning grades in this class at the discretion of the Course Coordinator.
No test scores are "dropped" and no "re-takes" will be offered for poor performance.
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support
for your learning:
  • The UT Learning Center: www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/
  • Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
  • Career Exploration Center: www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
  • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Use of Personal Electronics
Laptop computer use during class is strictly limited to viewing lecture handouts and taking notes.
Cell phones must be put away during class. Any other use of personal electronics without
instructor approval will result in referral to the Dean’s Office for unprofessional behavior.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Students with Disabilities:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice), 232-2937 (video phone) or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
I will use e-mail for official course announcements. You are required to check the e-mail account
officially listed with the University on a regular basis, but no less than every day during the
semester. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail
address.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.


Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/
Emergency Evacuation Policy
• Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
    outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
    following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the
    classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you
    used when you entered the building.
•   If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. In
    the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-
    enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
    Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Campus Concealed Handgun Policy (Campus Carry)
    Students should familiarize themselves with the information provided by the University
    regarding the implementation of “Campus Carry” legislation. You will find an information
    sheet specifically for students (as well as sheets for parents, visitors, faculty, and staff)
    at http://campuscarry.utexas.edu/info-sheets
    During examinations, back-packs and other bags will be stored away from the students. In
    labs, dress requirements will be tank tops and shorts. Backpacks and other bags will be stored
    at the back of the room.
Q Drop Policy
Texas law limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six. Senate Bill 1231 says:
“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit
an undergraduate student a total of more that six dropped courses, including any course a transfer
student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more that that number.”


                   PHM F338: INTRODUCTION TO PHARMACOLOGY
                                  Spring 2019 – Unique #87905
Date                                              Topic/Activity
June            6  Fundamentals
                7  Basic Pharmacology
                10 Basic Pharmacology
                11 Drug Interactions
                12 Renal Function and Diuretics
                13 Upper Gastrointestinal
                14 Lower Gastrointestinal
                17 Contraception
                18 Thyroid
                19 Analgesics + EXAM 1
                20 Depression
                21 Anxiolytics and Sedatives
                24 Antipsychotics
                25 Diabetes Mellitus
                26 Diabetes Mellitus
                27 Hyperlipidemia
                28 Hypertension
July            1  Blood/Anticoagulation/Antiplatelets + EXAM 2
                2  Antibiotic Classification
                3  Antibiotic Classification
                4  Independence Day – University Holiday
                5  Tuberculosis and Antivirals
                8  Antifungals and Parasites
                9  Osteoporosis
                10 Seizure Disorders
                11 EXAM 3
July 12 9:00 AM    FINAL EXAM
PHR 3.106
