                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                                             PED 103L:
                                   BEGINNING SOCIAL DANCE
                                        Course Information
GENERAL INFORMATION
Instructor:      Nick Enge
                 nickenge@austin.utexas.edu
                 (650) 814-4760
Office Hours: TTh mornings, by appointment
Course Numbers:
                Leads                Follows
 TTh 12 pm 74785                     74790
Course Times
    Class will start at 12 pm and end at 2:30 pm.
Course Location
    Bellmont 628
Prerequisites
    There are no prerequisites for the course, and no prior experience in dance is necessary.
Course Websites
    Announcements, assignments, and grades will be posted on Canvas.
    Review videos, practice music, and other links will be posted at: libraryofdance.org/ut
Textbook
    Waltzing: A Manual for Dancing and Living by Richard Powers and Nick Enge
    The textbook is available for purchase in class or at Amazon.com for $25.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                               Summer 2019 - Page 1


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
COURSE CONTENT AND OBJECTIVES
Course Philosophy
    This is an introductory social dance course, designed for absolute beginners and taught
    with an emphasis on the social aspects of dance as a form of communication between two
    people and among members of a group. The basics of several dance styles are taught, with
    attention paid to the arts of leading, following, and co-creating a dance.
Learning Outcomes
    Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:
        1. Execute (lead or follow) the basic footwork, partnering skills, and variations for a
                    variety of social dances, including East Coast Swing, Country Two-Step,
                    Waltz, Cross-Step Waltz, Nightclub Two-Step, Tango, Merengue, Bachata,
                    Salsa, and West Coast Swing (exact dances may vary by semester).
        2. Differentiate the rhythm patterns and music appropriate for each dance style.
        3. Collaborate with partners of all backgrounds and ability levels.
        4. Experience the benefits of social dance, such as body awareness and fitness,
                    creativity and self-expression, social interaction and community-building,
                    stress reduction, and self-confidence.
GRADING OPTIONS
Pass/Fail: You have the option to take the class Pass/Fail. In order to pass, you must earn at
least 60 points.
Graded: If you take the class for a grade, grades will be assigned with the +/- system:
A = 93-100%, A- = 90-92%, B+ = 87-89%, B = 83-86%, B- = 80-82%, C+ = 77-79%, C =
73-76%, C- = 70-72%, D+ = 67-69%, D = 63-66%, D- = 60-62%, F = 0-59%.
GRADED ELEMENTS
There are two components of your grade:
    1. Attendance (50% of your grade)
    2. Assignments (50% of your grade)
Details on both components can be found on the next page.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                Summer 2019 - Page 2


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
ATTENDANCE (50% of total grade, 50 points)
Signing In
    Each day, you will sign in on the sign-in sheet by putting a red bullet to the left of your
    name, like so: ● Nick Enge
Recording Attendance
    We will record each day of class you miss by adding a letter to the right of your name,
    which corresponds to the day of class you missed (i.e., Day 1 = a, Day 2 = b). For example,
    “Nick Enge cf” means that Nick missed the third day of class and the fifth day of class. If
    you believe you have been marked absent in error, please email the instructor.
Arriving on Time
    You are expected to sign in and be ready to dance by the class start time. The sign-in sheet
    will be removed 10 minutes after the start of each class: if you have not signed in by then,
    you will be marked as absent.
Grading Attendance and Make-Up Assignments:
    Although we hope you make it class every day (and we think you will find that you want to!),
    we realize that you may miss class occasionally. Here’s our policy on excused absences:
    Your first absence is automatically excused. This means that you can miss 1 class for any
    reason without having to make it up.
    In order to excuse a second absence (for any reason), you will need to complete a make-up
    assignment. A make-up assignment is a regular assignment that you do a second time (see
    below for Assignments). This assignment is submitted in the “Make Up” assignment on
    Canvas. In the case of extended illness or injury, please talk to the instructor to discuss your
    situation.
    Each absence that is not made up will subtract 5 points from your final grade.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                 Summer 2019 - Page 3


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
ASSIGNMENTS (50% of total grade, 50 points)
#1: One-on-One Feedback: 10 points
    At least once during the semester, you will find a member of the teaching team (CA or
    instructor) before/after class or during Dance Lab and get feedback on your dancing.
    You will then submit a short write-up on Canvas in response to their feedback, in which you
    report what you learned and how you plan to apply it in the future.
#2: Social Dance Reflection Essay: 10 points
    Once during the semester, you will write a short (250+ word) essay reflecting on your
    experiences with social dancing.
    More detailed prompts for this essay can be found on Canvas.
#3: Dance Music: 10 points (2 pt each)
    Throughout the semester, you will identify five new danceable songs (not heard in class or
    Dance Lab*) and submit them along with your recommendation of what you would dance
    to it here: http://www.libraryofdance.org/ut/music/submit
    Particularly good submissions may be heard in future classes, Dance Labs, or at the Soirée!
    * Don’t worry if you’re not sure if it’s ever been played or not—as long as you discover the
    song on your own time, it counts!
#4: Off-Campus Outing: 10 points
    At least once during the semester, you will attend a social dance event other than Dance
    Lab or the Soirée, and upload a picture you take there (of the venue, your ticket, yourself,
    etc) to Canvas.
#5: Social Dance Soirée: 10 points
    The final class, a social dance party with all the dances we’ve done throughout the
    semester, will serve as your “final exam” and count for 10 pts of your grade.
    Note: Assignments submitted late will lose 1 point per calendar day after the deadline.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                               Summer 2019 - Page 4


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
OPPORTUNITIES TO PRACTICE
Class Assistants (CAs)
   The CAs are students who have previously taken these classes and volunteer their time to
   help because they love dancing and want to help you learn. They are fantastic resources —
   ask them questions, request feedback, or just dance with a more experienced partner!
   In Class: The CAs will be assigned different duties in class, sometimes rotating in and
   sometimes walking around to help. If you have a question, call one of them over, especially
   before/after class!
   Outings: The CAs want to dance with you at outings so please feel free to find them and
   ask them for a dance!
Pre-Class and Post-Class
   We play music before and after each class to give you more opportunities to dance. If you
   arrive early, or have time to stick around late, please find a partner and dance!
Outings
   Outings will be organized throughout the semester, so that you have the opportunity to use
   your dance skills in the real world. You’re required to attend at least 1 outing, but you’re
   encouraged to attend as many as possible!
   For the latest announcements about all of our outings, join this Facebook group:
   https://www.facebook.com/groups/UTSocialDanceOutings/
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                Summer 2019 - Page 5


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
CLASS POLICIES
Respect
   You are expected to demonstrate sincerity, discipline, and a desire to learn through proper
   dress, punctuality, and respect for the instruction.
   Social dancing requires practice, cooperation, and communication with a variety of
   partners. Be respectful and considerate of your partners in how you speak to and touch
   them. If you are treated in a way that makes you uncomfortable, please notify the instructor.
Rotation of Partners
   We rotate partners frequently throughout class, and everyone is expected to dance with all
   available partners. It is beneficial to experience working with dancers who are more or less
   skilled than you are, and helping each other learn to dance is a valuable part of the partner
   dance experience.
Footwear
   No street shoes of any kind are allowed in class (or Dance Lab).
   Instead, we recommend you dance in socks. This will not only protect your own and other
   students’ feet: it will also protect your knees by allowing you to turn more easily. Please
   remember to bring socks everyday (maybe tuck an extra pair into your bag to be sure.)
   Dedicated dance shoes without a high heel (e.g., jazz shoes and ballet shoes with suede
   soles) are also okay, if you have them or want to get them, but they are not required. If
   you’d like to buy a cheap pair of dance shoes, we can recommend places to get them.
Dance Hygiene
   Please use hand sanitizer and/or wash your hands before and after class! Also, please take
   measures to make your partners comfortable: brush your teeth, take a shower, wear
   deodorant, avoid strong perfumes, secure your hair, and cut your fingernails.
Mints
   Each student is asked to contribute a bag of individually wrapped breath mints to our
   communal jars. Regular (not sugar-free) Lifesavers Wint-O-Green (green) are preferred.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                               Summer 2019 - Page 6


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
Drink Containers
   If you plan to bring a drink to class, make sure it is in a sealed bottle. There are water
   fountains and a water bottle filler just outside the gym.
Cell Phones
   Please put away and silence all cell phones during class.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Honor Code
   The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
   leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
   expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
   toward peers and community. (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
   standardsofconduct.php)
Scholastic Dishonesty
   Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
   penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
   University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
   University, policies on scholastic dishonesty are strictly enforced. (http://
   deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/)
Sexual Harassment
   Sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and sexual misconduct in any form will not be
   tolerated, and individuals who engage in such conduct will be subject to disciplinary action.
   The University encourages students to promptly report sex discrimination, sexual
   harassment, or sexual misconduct to Dr. LaToya Hill, Coordinator of Student Emergency
   Services, at (512) 471-5017 or via email at lchill@mail.utexas.edu. (http://
   deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/)
Disability Accommodations
   The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
   accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
   Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone), or
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                 Summer 2019 - Page 7


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
   ssd@uts.cc.utexas.edu. Please notify the instructor of any special accommodations that you
   may need during the first week of class. (http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/)
Campus Carry
   Please note that this is an active class with movement and physical interaction that will
   make the concealed carry of a handgun very difficult. It is the responsibility of the LTC
   permit holder to know and understand the university policies regarding campus carry, so
   please plan accordingly.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                               Summer 2019 - Page 8
