                                               RADICAL RELIGION:
                                       ASCETICS AND HOLY PERSONS
                                              ANS 379 / R S 375S, Fall 2019
                                         Instructor: Dr. Oliver Freiberger
                                              E-mail: of@austin.utexas.edu
Asceticism, as a concept and a way of life, exists in many religious traditions. Ascetics commit to bodily restraints
that can be manifold and are practiced at various levels of intensity. From specific food restraints (for example,
vegetarianism) to fasting to death; from celibacy to self-castration; from wearing simple robes to going naked;
from shaving one’s head to severe self-mutilation; from living in a monastic community to locking one-self in a cell
to constant wandering. Using case studies from various religions, this course discusses the concepts, practices, and
goals associated with this radical way of life. It also introduces students to scholarly approaches to asceticism,
which includes theories of the body and of culture more generally. Other topics discussed in class are the social
status of the ascetic; asceticism and gender; asceticism and devotion; and asceticism and violence. Historical
examples will be taken primarily from India (Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism) and Mediterranean late antiquity
(Greek/Roman religions, Christianity, Judaism).
Readings:
Course packet, available at Paradigm Books. The discussion in class will be based almost exclusively on the readings
assigned for that day.
Grading:
20% Attendance/participation
20% Reading responses
15% Partner project
45% Research essay (proposal 5%; first draft 15%; class presentations 5%; final draft 15%; peer review 5%)
Grading scale: 93–100: A. 90–92: A-. 87–89: B+. 83–86: B. 80–82: B-. 77–79: C+. 73–76: C. 70–72 C- etc.
Writing Center
I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, (512) 471-6222:
http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The UWC offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT
undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. These services are not just for writing that has "problems":
Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. The UWC’s trained
consultants work with students from every department on both academic and non-academic writing. Using
methods that preserve the integrity of your work, they help you develop strategies to improve your writing and
become a more independent writer. Whether you are writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for
an application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants will be happy to work with you.
Scholastic dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
“Scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records,
and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor, providing
false or misleading information in an effort to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other
assignment), or the attempt to commit such an act. For further information please visit the Student Judicial
Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Flags


                                                                                                                    2
This course carries three flags: Global Cultures, Writing, and Independent Inquiry. Please check out the definitions
of these flags here: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/ccc/teaching-resources/syllabus
Students with disabilities
The Faculty Council's Educational Policy Committee states, "Providing a quality educational experience for all
students includes adapting the instructional environment to accommodate the educational needs of students with
information about Services for Students with Disabilities through the course syllabus." At the beginning of the
semester, students should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) Office (phone 471-6259), which
will prepare an appropriate letter to the instructor to guide you. See also the SSD website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/
SCHEDULE
Week 1: Introduction: What is Asceticism?
Part I: Asceticism in India
Week 2: Hindu Asceticism I
Week 3: Hindu Asceticism II
Week 4: Hindu Asceticism III
Week 5: Jain Asceticism
Week 6: Buddhist Asceticism
Part II: Asceticism in the Greco-Roman World
Week 7: Pagan Asceticism
Week 8: Jewish Asceticism
Week 9: Christian Asceticism: Early Developments
Week 10: Christian Asceticism: Desert Fathers of Egypt
Part III: Theory and Case Studies
Week 11: Asceticism Defined
Week 12: Critical Perspectives on Asceticism
Week 13: Asceticism and Wellness
Week 14: Concluding Discussion
