                                      ANS 302 K / ANT 310L
                        Introduction to South Asia
                                  TTh 12:30-2:00 PM at WAG 201
                                  Instructor: Dr. Dalpat Rajpurohit
                                 Email: drajpurohit@austin.utexas.edu
                       Office hours: TTH 2:30 to 3:30 pm. Office WCH 4.104B
Course Description
This course is an introduction to South Asian cultures and histories. Students will be introduced to
major thinkers, ideas, histories, issues, and movements of South Asia. While a clear set of factual
information will be integral to the course, the equally important goal of the course is to learn to
understand South Asian literatures, art, religion, law, or other cultural expressions as sources for
our own humanistic and ethical development. Thus, the primary goal of this course is to train
students in how to “read” South Asia in such a way that it can mean something to them.
Goals
    • By the end of the course, students should be able to:
    • Describe the diversity and richness of South Asian history, culture, and ideas
                                                                                                   1


     •   Name and discuss important figures in South Asian history and today
     •   Identify different regions and languages used in South Asia
     •   Communicate the effects of colonialism on South Asia
     •   Express major areas of political and cultural concern in South Asia today
Textbook
For this course, you are required to purchase a course packet, a book, and rent two movies online:
     1. The course packet can be ordered online from Paradigm Books
         http://www.paradigmbooks.com/
     2. Anand, Mulk Raj, 2014. Untouchable. Penguin Books Ltd: London. (first published by
         Wishart in 1935).
     3. If you do not have Netflix, rent and watch online the movies:
         Toilet: Ek Prem Katha (Toilet: A Love Story) by Shree Narayan Singh
         Jodhaa Akbar by Ashutosh Gowariker
Requirements
     1. Attendance and Participation (20% of final grade)
Attendance is mandatory. Each absence automatically lowers your grade. You are expected to have
read the assigned readings of the week and to contribute meaningfully to the group and class
discussions. You should always come to class with a printed copy of the reading assignments(s)
(i.e. your course packet) for that day. At the end of each class you are required to submit on a piece
of paper one interesting fact you’ve learned during the class and one question related to the topic
discussed in class. You can be as creative as you want. This is the occasion to show that you were
present not only physically but also mentally. Do not forget to write your complete name on the
piece of paper. It will be used to keep track of your attendance, so make sure to submit it.
     A student who misses class or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the teaching assistant as far in advance of the
absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete the assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence.
     2. Reading responses and Documentary and Film Reviews (25% of final grade)
In this course, watching and reviewing films and documentaries will constitute an important part
of your learning experience and grade. Through a carefully selected set of five documentaries and
films, you will reflect about a wide variety of topics in South Asia: freedom struggle, partition and
its aftermath, Modi’s clean India campaign, diaspora experiences, South Asia in Mughal times,
etc. For all five documentaries and films, you need to write a review that complies with the
instructions mentioned on the review sheets posted on Canvas. Upload your review on Canvas on
or before the due date and time. Late submission will affect your grade. For the reading responses
students will post table of contents of assigned readings and write their thoughts on short stories
and poems. (Five film reviews 5x3=15% and reading homework 20x0.5=10% of final grade)
3. Three in class written quizzes (30% of final grade)
These quizzes will be on the topics covered throughout the semester. The instructor will give you
total five questions to prepare for each quiz a week in advance. Three will be asked on the quiz.
Dates of each quiz is mentioned on the syllabus.
                                                                                                     2


    3. Book Review – Mulk Raj Anand: Untouchable (Mid-Term, 10% of final grade)
By you need to read Mulk Raj Anand’s Untouchable and write a three-page (12 pt. font, standard
margins, double-spaced) review of the book. Upload your review on Canvas. In your review, you
should reflect on the book in light of our class discussions. While the current Penguin edition of
the book dates from 2014, the book was first published in 1935. This is an important fact to
consider in your review, since the 1930s were marked by Gandhian nationalism, civil
disobedience, and mass protests against the British Empire. How do you experience this historical
time period when reading about a day in the life of a young Indian sweeper named Bakha? Come
prepared to discuss your review in class.
    This assignment will be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an
archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be
used to determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn
submission, the faculty member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has
been plagiarized.
    4. Final Presentation: Touring South Asia (15 % of final grade)
During the last three weeks of class, we will take a “tour” of South Asia. In groups of three to four,
you will give presentations on one particular topic related to South Asia. BE CREATIVE AND
ENGAGING! You can make a film, a skit, write a song, or do a more traditional PowerPoint-style
presentation. The goal is to teach your peers about your selected topic in a memorable way with
accurate information that goes beyond surface-level descriptions found on sites like Wikipedia.
How to proceed. Each group selects one topic from the list of suggested topics or agrees with the
instructor on a different topic. Enter the names (first and last) of all group members (minimum
three and maximum four) next to the topic and date you would like to present. First come, first
served! Schedule your presentation by March 31st.
For the actual presentation, follow these instructions:
    • The presentation must not exceed 15 minutes, if you are a group of three, and 20 minutes
        if you are a group of four.
    • All members of the group must have an equal share in both preparing and presenting the
        issues.
    • Create a concise and clearly arranged handout with relevant data of your presentation. Do
        not simply print your presentation slides! Include the complete bibliography of at least
        two works you consulted for your presentation. Bring a minimum of 25 copies.
    • Contextualize the topic you are presenting and explain how it relates to the issues
        discussed in the course.
    • Demonstrate in your performance that the topic is fascinating! The grade will be largely
        based on whether you succeed in making the issue comprehensible and interesting to the
        class.
    • Conclude your presentation with a short quiz (3 questions) for your fellow students.
Grading Policy
Attendance and Participation (20 %)
Homework assignments: reading responses and documentary/film reviews (25 %)
Three in class written quizzes (30%)
                                                                                                     3


Midterm (10%)
Final Presentation (15 %)
Grading Scale:
A 93-100,        A- 89-92,
B+ 86-88,        B 82-85,      B- 79-81,
C+ 76-78,        C 72-75,      C- 69-71,
D+ 66-68,        D 62-65,      D- 59-61,
F 0-58
Global Cultures
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Class Policies
Come to class on time. During class, all electronic devices must be switched off or put on silent
mode. Since using a laptop distracts oneself and other students, laptops may not be used in class
either.
University Policies
Honor Code: The core values of UT Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty and Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for
academic credit will be the student's own work. Students who violate University rules on academic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. “Scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to,
cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to give unfair
academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of essentially the same
written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor, providing false
or misleading information in an effort to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or
other assignment), or the attempt to commit such an act. For further information please visit the
Student Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Documented Disability Statement: UT Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
                                                                                                   4


for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Observances: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Mental Health Resources: Mental health concerns such as anxiety, stress, and depression are very
common among college students. If you are struggling with any of these or other mental health
concerns, you are not alone! I encourage you to seek help and to encourage others who need help
to do so. There is a 24/7 Crisis Line for UT students: 512-471-CALL (2255). Additionally, the UT
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) can be reached at 512-471-3515 during regular
hours. There are a variety of self-care programs (MindBody Labs, etc.) available to students in
addition to more traditional counseling services.
                                                                                                  5


                                      Class Schedule
       The instructor reserves the right to modify this syllabus during the semester
                                    CP = Course Packet
              UNIT 1: DEMOGRAPHICS AND HISTORY
Week 1: Orientation (January 21 and 23)
    Tuesday January 21st: Welcome to Introduction to South Asia: overview of the course’s
            topics and requirements.
    Thursday, January 23rd: South Asia in global context
    Read and post a table of contents: Bradnock and Lawrence: “The Global Context”, CP 1
                                                                                     to 11
Week 2: Demographics of South Asia (January 28 and 30)
    Tuesday, January 28th: South Asia in the World
    Read and post a table of contents: Bradnock and Lawrence “South Asia: the cultural
    fabric” CP 11 to 16
    Thursday, January 30th : Climate and Environment
    Read and post a table of contents: Bradnock and Lawrence: “Environmental Security”
    and “Climate Change in South Asia,” CP 17 to 28
    Just to read: NYT article (Nov. 29, 2012): “Giving New Life to Vultures to Restore a
    Human Ritual to Death,” CP 29 to 32
    Just to read: Atlas Obscura (Nov. 17, 2014): “What Became of India’s Corpse-Eating
    Turtles. CP 33 to 36
Week 3: Modern South Asian History I (February 4 and 6)
    Tuesday, February 4th : The Road to Independence
    View and post film review: Documentary Mahatma Gandhi -Dying for Freedom (42
    mins) YouTube link https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hpZwCRInrgo&t=1s
    &
    Just to read: Bose and Jalal: “Gandhian Nationalism,” “The Depression Decade” and
                                   “Nationalism and Colonialism” CP 37 to 53
                                                                                           6


    Thursday, February 6th: Voices for Independence
    Read and post a table of contents: A Selection of Writings and Speeches given by
                           Gandhi, Naidu, and Jinnah. See McDermott (et al, eds.), Sources of
                           Indian Traditions. CP 54 to 69
WEEK 4: Modern South Asian History II. (February 11 and 13)
    Tuesday, February 11: The Partition of India and the Creation of Pakistan I
    View and post a film review: Documentary by the BBC: My Family, Partition and Me:
    India 1947. Episode 2 (2017, 58 min) YouTube link:
    https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9DA7TU72bOQ
    &
    Just to read: Manto’s short story “Toba Tek Singh” CP 70 to 77
    Thursday, February 13: Quiz-1
               UNIT 2: DIASPORA AND NATIONALISM
WEEK 5: South Asian Diaspora (February 18 and 20)
    Tuesday, February 18th : International Migration since 1947
     View & post • Documentary by Harjant Gill: Sent Away Boys (2016, 40 min)
     a Review:           YouTube link: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jtGf9Hs6v54&t=507s
     Just to Read:   •   Chatterji: “From Imperial Subjects to National Citizens,” CP 78 to 95
                     •   Jhumpa Lahiri: “The Third and Final Continent,” CP 96 to 109
    Thursday, February 20th: Nepal
    Read and post a gist of the story in one page: Rana’s “City of Dreams” CP 110 to 120
    Guest lecture by Professor Dr. Hindman (Asian Studies, UT Austin).
Week 6: Religious and Linguistic Nationalism (February 25 and 27)
    Tuesday, February 25th: Religious Nationalism: Ayodhya and the 1992-1993 Riots
                                                                                             7


       To Read and     •   Suketu Mehta: “Powertoni,” CP 121 to 161
       post a table    •   The Economic Times (June 10, 2015): “Modi Government Planning to Build
       of contents:        High-Tech Ram Museum in Ayodhya,” CP 162
      Thursday, February 27th : Linguistic Nationalism: The Rise of the Bangladesh
              Movement, Guest lecture by Ahmad Shamim (Asian Studies, UT Austin)
      Read and bring three questions in writing: “Pakistan and the language movement” and
      “the nationalism project: three scholars defining nationalism” CP 163 to 170
Week 7: Bollywood and Nationalism (March 3 and 5)
Tuesday, March 3rd: Modi’s Clean Indian Mission
      View and post a film review: Film ‘Toilet: Ek Prem Katha’ (Toilet: A Love Story). On
      Netflix (2017, 155 Mins)
      Just to read: Article in DW (Nov. 19, 2018) ‘World Toilet Day: A Private Matter of
      Public Health,” CP 171 to 174
      Just to browse: website: www. Worldtoiletday.info
Thursday, March 5th: Quiz-2
                                    UNIT 3: CASTE
Week 8: Caste and Social Discrimination (March 10 and 12)
      Tuesday, March 10th: Being Untouchable
      To read and post a table of contents: Hirst and Zavos, “ Caste: Social relations, Cultural
      Formations” and “The Confluence of Caste and Religion” CP 175 to 209
      Thursday, March 12: MIDTERM
      (Submit your Book review and get ready for class discussion) bring a hard copy to class.
                      ******SPRING BREAK (March 17-19)*******
       UNIT 4: RELIGIONS AND EMIPRES IN SOUTH ASIA
Week 10: Religions and Ethics (March 24 and 26)
      Tuesday, March 24th: Buddhism and ethics
      Read and post a table of contents: Prebish and Keown, “the Dharma” in
                                                                                                 8


                                   Buddhism, State College: Journal of Buddhist ethics online
                                   books, 2010. CP 210 to 227
    Thursday, March 26 : “Islamic mysticism in India” in Sources of Indian tradition, vol.1
                         th
     CP 228 to 238
Week 11: the Mughal Empire (March 31 and April 2)
    Tuesday, March 31st: Career of the Mughal emperor Akbar
    Read and post a table of contents: “the career of Akbar” in India before Europe. CP 239 to
     255
    Thursday, April 2nd: The Mughal and Rajput marital relations
    View and post a Review: Jodha Akbar, the movie is on Netflix
Week 12: The Bhakti Movement – 1 (April 7 and 9)
    Tuesday, April 7th: Poet Kabir and the idea of a saint
    Read and post table of contents: “Kabir” in Songs of the saints of India. CP 256 to 265
    Thursday, April 9th: Poems of the saint-poet Kabir
    Post your response to the poems: “Poems and epigrams of Kabir” in Songs of the saints of
                                      India. CP 266 to 271
Week 13: The Bhakti Movement - 2 (April 14 and 16)
    Tuesday, April 14th: Mirabai: poet, ascetic or a rebel?
    Read and post table of contents: “Mirabai” in Songs of the saints of India. CP 272 to 280
    Thursday, April 16th: Quiz-3
                        UNIT 5: SOUTH ASIAN ART
Week 14: South Asian Art (April 21 and 23)
    Tuesday, April 21st: Guest lecture by our T.A. Katie Lazarowicz
    Reading: a selection from the book “Midnight to the boom: Painting in India after
    Independence”
    Thursday, April 23rd: The sacred and the sensual (Khajuraho temples)
    Read and post a table of contents: S. Vijaykumar, “the sacred and the sensual: Experiencing
                                   Eroticain Temples of Khajuraho.” CP 281 to 298
                                                                                              9


Week 15: TBA (April 28 and 30)
     Tuesday, April 28: TBA
     Thursday, April 30: Group presentations
                      UNIT 6: TOURING SOUTH ASIA
Week 16: Touring South Asia (May 5 and 7)
     Tuesday, May 5th: Group Presentations
     Thursday, May 7th: Group Presentations
Final Exam: No Final Exam!
                                                 10
