                         AFS 331 SYLLABUS
                       Unique Number 30950
                  Senior Air Force Studies
             (Preparation for Active Duty)
Course Syllabus AY 18/19 - Spring Semester
                           AFROTC Detachment 825
                       The University of Texas at Austin
                           Colonel Paul A. Tombarge
                          Professor, Air Force Science
                             Phone: (512) 471‐1776
Office: RLP 5.726 (Hours by Appointment at https://calendly.com/paul-tombarge)
                                                                               1


                                                                      Spring Semester, AY2018/2019
MEMORANDUM FOR AS 400 STUDENTS
FROM: Colonel Paul A. Tombarge
SUBJECT: Welcome to AS400 -- National Security Affairs / Preparation for Active Duty
1. Welcome to AS400 - National Security Affairs and Preparation for Active Duty. We designed
this course to equip you with the working knowledge necessary to make the transition from a
Professional Officer Course cadet to a commissioned Air Force officer. The expectations placed
upon you by the profession of arms are extraordinarily high. This is your time to think critically
about your role as a future Air Force officer.
2. The AS400 curriculum places emphasis on the basic knowledge and skills you will need as a
second lieutenant. During the fall semester, we will discuss civilian control of the military,
examine the Department of Defense structure, and delve into subjects such as the national
security policy-making process, terrorism, and joint military operations. During the spring
semester, we will focus on special topics in preparation for active duty such as ethics, military
law, civilian personnel, the enlisted and officer evaluation systems, pay and allowances, and
other current topics affecting the military as a profession. Writing and briefing assignments will
simultaneously refine your communication skills.
3. No matter what Air Force Specialty Code you are eventually awarded – pilot, space
operations, logistics, engineer, personnel, etc. – you will be first and foremost an Air Force
officer; a leader of Airmen. This is your chance to enhance your military knowledge, expand
your worldview, increase the depth and breadth of your leadership fundamentals, and honestly
assess your strengths and weaknesses. Today you are warriors in training. Soon, you will be
entrusted to lead Airmen in the world’s greatest Air Force.
                 Integrity First — Service before Self — Excellence in All We Do!
                                                       PAUL A. TOMBARGE, Colonel, USAF
                                                       Professor, Air Force Science
                                                                                                   2


                      National Security Affairs/Preparation for Active Duty
                                     Course Syllabus AY18-19
                                    AFROTC Detachment 825
                                The University of Texas at Austin
1. Instructor:                         Colonel Paul Tombarge, Professor of Air Force Science
                                       Office: RLP 5.726
                                       Hours by appointment: https://calendly.com/paul-tombarge
                                       Phone: 512-471-1776
                                       E-mail: paul.tombarge@austin.utexas.edu
2. Class Hours and Location:           Tuesdays & Thursdays, 1230-1400, RLP 5.404
3. Course Description: Air and Space (AS) 400, "National Security Affairs/Preparation for
Active Duty," is an overview of the complex social and political issues facing the military
profession. It is designed to provide college seniors with a foundational understanding of the
role military officers play in American society.
4. Course Objectives:
    a. Comprehend the basic elements of the national security policy and process.
    b. Know the air and space power functions and United States Air Force (USAF)
        capabilities.
    c. Appreciate selected roles of the military in society and current issues affecting the
        military profession.
    d. Understand the responsibility, authority, and functions of an Air Force commander in
        what is inherently a joint-service warfighting environment.
    e. Comprehend the factors that facilitate a smooth transition from civilian to military life.
    f. Apply listening, speaking, and writing skills in Air Force-specific formats and situations
        with accuracy, clarity, and appropriate style.
                                               NOTE
  Specific lesson objectives are included with reading/lesson materials (posted in Canvas).
5. Course Textbooks: The primary textbook is AS-400 Student Study Guide, T-408.
Supplemental readings are from a variety of sources. The Tongue and Quill (AFH 33-337, 7 May
2015 edition) is the primary source to support writing/briefing assignments. All course material
will be posted on Canvas. All textbooks are available electronically via the Holm Center website
(www.holmcenter.com). You will not be required to purchase commercial texts.
                                                                                                  3


6. Attendance Policy: I expect you to attend all AS400 classes. You must be present at 80%
of class sessions to receive a passing grade. If you will be late or unable to attend a class, you
must make every effort to coordinate with the instructor in advance. In the case of unexpected
circumstances (i.e., emergencies), notify the instructor no later than 24 hours after class.
Regardless of circumstance, if you miss a class, email the course instructor within 24 hours about
the absence with “ABSENT” as your subject line. If this is not accomplished, your absence will
be “unexcused.” Opportunity for make-up assignments will be at my discretion. If approved and
you do not complete the make-up assignment within one week, I will consider the absence
unexcused. An unexcused absence will result in a 2 percent reduction of your class grade.
             Examples of Excusable                             Examples of Unexcusable
               Tardiness/Absence                                  Tardiness/Absence
    Death in the family or family emergency           Studying for a test
    Automobile accident                               Sleeping in
    Significant illness or medical confinement        Fraternity or sorority functions
    An approved field study trip                      A “headache” from staying out late the
    A mandatory official University activity           night before
7. Timeliness: I expect students to be present and seated in the classroom prior to class start
time. Assignments are due at 1200 on the due date. Submissions after 1200 are late and the
assignment grade will be reduced by 2 percent for every 24 hours it is late.
8. Preparation and Participation: We will conduct academic classes as a combination of
lecture and guided discussion. Guided discussion only works if you share your knowledge and
personal views in class. I expect you to complete reading assignments in advance and that you
come to class prepared to participate in discussion. Class preparation and participation will count
towards 10 percent of your overall class grade. I will deduct points if you are not prepared to
participate.
9. Dress and Appearance: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008, POC cadets will wear the
designated UOD to their AS class and be in compliance with USAF grooming and appearance
standards. If an Operations Order does not apply on class day or does not dictate military
uniform, cadets will wear civilian attire in good taste. Note that AFI 36-2903 requires that dress
and appearance standards be followed both on- and off-duty.
10. Protocol and Classroom Conduct:
    a. Cadets will adhere to military customs and courtesies at all times. When a ranking
        officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to attention until told
        to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the classroom, the students
        will again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer leaves the classroom.
    b. Students are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class
        discussions, but must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address the
        instructor as “sir” or “ma’am” or by rank (e.g., “Captain,” “Major,” or “Colonel”) and
        address Noncommissioned Officers as “Sergeant.”
                                                                                                    4


    c. The classroom is a non-attribution environment and cadets are encouraged to discuss and
       challenge any theory or opinion in order to enhance the learning process. However, non-
       attribution does not relieve cadets from the responsibility for proper respect towards one
       another, and for the military chain of command, to include the Commander-in-Chief.
    d. Students will not eat, smoke, or use other tobacco products while in class. Tobacco use
       of any kind is prohibited on the UT campus. Drinks are allowed, but containers must
       have a lid to prevent spills.
    e. Students will turn off cell phones during class.
    f. Students will only use laptops/tablets to take notes unless otherwise authorized by the
       instructor to support class objectives.
11. Assignments:
    a. Current Events News Briefs:
          i.   Overview: Being aware of current events and understanding how they affect the
               military profession is an important aspect of officership. As such, I expect you to
               keep abreast of Air Force and military-related news from a variety of publicly
               available news sources.
         ii.   Task: Each class, I will assign a different cadet to provide a short, informal
               briefing on a military news item related to that day’s discussion topic. The intent
               is not simply to regurgitate a news article, but rather to identify the key highlights
               and provide your assessment of why it is important to us as Air Force officers. In
               other words, you need to provide a brief analysis.
        iii.   Deliverable: A short, informal briefing (5 minutes or less, slides not required) as
               tasked below:
                      24 Jan: Bath – “Unprofessional Relationships”
                      29 Jan: Cantu – “Ethical Decision-Making”
                      31 Jan: Chapman – “Leadership (Legal Authority and/or Lawful Orders)”
                      5 Feb: Copp – “Leadership (Responsibility)”
                      7 Feb: Duhaime – “Sexual Assault Prevention and Response”
                      12 Feb: Ellsworth – “Religious Accommodation”
                      14 Feb: Fagan – “Suicide Prevention”
                      19 Feb: French – “Law of Armed Conflict”
                      26 Feb: Lively – “Military Justice”
                      28 Feb: Shrader – “Military Justice”
                      21 Mar: Smith – “Cybersecurity, Managing Air Force Resources, Risk
                        Management, or Civilian Personnel”
                      26 Mar: Towlson – “Blended Retirement System”
                                                                                                     5


    iv.   Grading Criteria: These short briefings will be part of your participation grade.
                  Student must prepared to brief on the assigned day and assigned topic;
                   participation points for that day will be reduced if not prepared
b. Officer Performance Report (OPR):
      i.  Overview: The intent of this assignment is to practice preparing an OPR and to
          learn what is “good” and what is not so good with regards to bullet writing. I will
          provide you with a training “RIP,” a blank Air Force Form 707 – Officer
          Performance Report (AF Form 707), and the information for the rater, additional
          rater, and reviewer blocks.
     ii.  Task: Throughout the semester, you will be responsible for tracking your
          individual accomplishments in your assigned cadet wing leadership position. You
          will convert these accomplishments into specific OPR bullet statements that
          follow the “Action; result--impact” format and then draft your own cadet OPR
          using the provided RIP and Air Force Form 707.
    iii.  Deliverable: Submit a completed OPR to me NLT 1200 on 18 April 2019.
    iv.   Grading Criteria: worth 10% of your final grade
                  Administrative data on AF Form 707 must be correct IAW the provided
                   RIP; one point deducted for incorrect data
                  Text must be free of typographical errors; one point deducted for errors
                  Bullets must be in “Action; result--impact” format; one point deducted for
                   incorrect format
                  Acronyms must be defined in section X (Remarks) using the following
                   example format: Active Duty (AD); Air Force Reserve Officer Training
                   Corps (AFROTC); one point deducted for undefined acronyms
c. First Assignment Briefing:
      i.  Overview: The intent of this assignment is for cadets to become familiar with
          multiple Air Force bases, available resources, and how to obtain “self-sponsor”
          information. I will provide you with an Assignment “RIP.” A list of
          recommended information websites is listed below:
                  https://www.af.mil/AF-Sites/
                  https://www.military.com/base-guide
                  www.mybaseguide.com
     ii.  Task: You will prepare a 5-10 minute briefing on your base and unit of
          assignment. Mandatory topics to be covered include:
                  Assigned unit name, parent MAJCOM, mission, and commander
                  Base name, location (city/state/country), parent MAJCOM of owning
                   wing (i.e., your unit might be a tenant), and brief history
                                                                                            6


                 Basic arrival information (e.g., closest civilian airport, closest highway
                  exit, gate hours, etc.)
                 Temporary lodging options and contact information
                 Permanent housing options
                 Local community information and attractions
    iii.  Deliverable: All students will prepare and submit PowerPoint slides NLT 1200
          on 30 April 2019, regardless of briefing date. Students will then present a 5-10
          minute briefing on either 30 April or 2 May 2019 as assigned.
    iv.   Grading Criteria: worth 10% of your final grade
                 Mandatory topics must be covered; one point deducted if not all are
                  covered
                 Presentation must be no longer than 10 minutes due to overall time
                  constraints; one point deducted for exceeding the time limit
d. “What Now Lieutenant?” Paper:
       i. Overview: The intent of this activity is to reinforce self-reflection, self-
          assessment, and individual accountability concepts introduced throughout ROTC
          curriculum and activities and to allow cadets to establish specific leadership goals
          for themselves as second lieutenants. A secondary intent is to reinforce written
          communication skills.
     ii.  Task: Reflect on several questions regarding your own leadership development
          and goals as you prepare to transition into your role as officers and leaders:
                   Who are you as a leader today? Who do you want to become as a
                      leader?
                   What is your leadership philosophy? What is your vision?
                   What characteristics of a leader are most important to you?
                   As a second lieutenant, how will you inspire and motivate your
                      subordinates? Your peers? Your leadership?
                   What are your goals as a second lieutenant? How will you accomplish
                      those goals?
                   What do you never want to lose sight of as a leader, regardless of the
                      rank you wear?
                   How will you care for your Airmen and accomplish the mission?
                   How will you conduct yourself as a leader, both on- and off-duty?
     iii. Devliverable: Submit a one-page paper (Arial or Times New Roman, 12 point,
          single-spaced) that answers one of the aforementioned questions NLT 1200 on
          7 May 2019. Content should be clear, concise, correct, and complete.
     iv.  Grading Criteria:
           Text must be no more than one page in length; one point deducted for
              exceeding one page
                                                                                              7


                 Text must be free of typographical errors; one point deducted for errors
12. Midterm and Final Exams: Exam questions will be derived from each lesson’s samples of
behavior (SOB). If you can correctly answer the SOBs from the readings and class lecture, you
will do well on the exams. Some SOBs may only be covered in your readings and will not be
explicitly discussed during the class lecture while others may not be covered in the readings and
are only discussed in the lecture. If you have any questions about the SOBs, do not hesitate to
ask. Exams may include multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer questions.
13. Grading: Your grade will be computed using the following scoring system. The total score
possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter grade/4.0 GPA scale used by The
University of Texas at Austin. Grades will be determined based on individual performance; I will
not utilize a curve system.
                              Activity                        Points    % of Overall Grade
                     Class Participation Points                 10              10%
                    Officer Performance Report                  10              10%
                     First Assignment Briefing                  10              10%
                   What Now Lieutenant? Paper                   10              10%
                           Midterm Exam                         30              30%
                            Final Exam                          30              30%
                               Total                           100             100%
                                                NOTE
Cadets must pass all AS courses with a C- or better. Cadets must maintain a cumulative
GPA of 2.00 or greater to retain AFROTC membership.
Cadets must maintain a term GPA of 2.50 to maintain a scholarship. Should a scholarship
cadet’s term GPA drop below 2.50, I will issue an Academic Conditional Event (CE).
Academic CEs could result in suspension or termination of the scholarship.
                    Score                    Letter Grade                 GPA Points
                    94-100                         A                          4.00
                     90-93                         A-                         3.67
                     87-89                         B+                         3.33
                     84-86                         B                          3.00
                     80-83                         B-                         2.67
                     77-79                         C+                         2.33
                     74-76                         C                          2.00
                     70-73                         C-                         1.67
                     67-69                         D+                         1.33
                     64-66                         D                          1.00
                     60-63                         D-                         0.67
                      0-60                          F                         0.00
                                                                                                  8


14. Course Outline:
                                          NOTE
                       The following schedule is subject to change.
              Date                      Topic                    Assignment / Task
      Tue, 22 Jan 2019   Welcome, Course Overview,
                         Decision Briefing Requirements,
                         and Effective Communication
      Thu, 24 Jan 2019   Professional and Unprofessional     Cadet Reader
                         Relationships
      Tue, 29 Jan 2019   Ethical Decision-Making
      Thu, 31 Jan 2019   Leadership (Authority)              Cadet Reader
                                                             * Be Prepared To (BPT)
                                                             discuss case studies
      Tue, 5 Feb 2019    Leadership (Responsibility)         Cadet Reader
                                                             * BPT discuss case studies
      Thu, 7 Feb 2019    Bystander Intervention Training     Cadet Reader
                         * Guest Lecturer: Ms. Marian
                         Trattner, UT Title IX Office
      Tue, 12 Feb 2019   Religious Accommodation             Cadet Reader
                         * Guest Lecturer: COL Brad
                         Baumann, U.S. Army Chaplain
      Thu, 14 Feb 2019   Suicide Prevention                  Cadet Reader
      Tue, 19 Feb 2019   Law of Armed Conflict               Cadet Reader
      Thu, 21 Feb 2019   Optional - USAA Financial Fair
      Fri, 22 Feb 2019   Code of Conduct                     Cadet Reader
      Tue, 26 Feb 2019   Military Justice                    Cadet Reader
      Thu, 28 Feb 2019   Military Justice Case Studies       Cadet Reader
                         * Guest Lecturer: Capt Michael * BPT discuss case studies
                         Whiteside, USAF Judge Advocate
      Tue, 5 Mar 2019    Corrective Supervision and          Cadet Reader
                         Counseling
      Thu, 7 Mar 2019 Corrective Supervision and             Cadet Reader
                         Counseling Practicum
                                                             * BPT participate in role
                                                             playing exercises
      Tue, 12 Mar 2019 Exam #1
      Thu, 14 Mar 2019 No class – Spring Break               Cadet Reader
      Tue, 19 Mar 2019 No class – Spring Break               Cadet Reader
                                                                                        9


Thu, 21 Mar 2019 eLearning - Cybersecurity,    TBD
                 Managing Air Force Resources,
                 Risk Management, Civilian
                 Personnel
Tue, 26 Mar 2019 Blended Retirement System     Cadet Readers
Thu, 28 Mar 2019 Sexual Assault Prevention and Cadet Reader
                 Response
                 * Guest Lecturer: Ms. Breall
                 Baccus, UT Title IX Office
Fri, 29 Mar 2019 Optional – Joint Leadership
                 Development Session with
                 Col Tombarge, CAPT Koss, and
                 LTC O’Neill
Tue, 2 Apr 2019  Airman Comprehensive          Cadet Reader
                 Assessment                    - AFI 36-2406, Officer and
                                               Enlisted Evaluation Systems,
                                               Chapter 2
Thu, 4 Apr 2019  Bullet Practicum: Evaluation  Cadet Reader
                                               * Individually score
                                               awards packages prior to
                                               class to enable class
                                               discussion
Tue, 9 Apr 2019  Enlisted Evaluation System    Cadet Reader
Thu, 11 Apr 2019 Officer Evaluation System     Cadet Reader
Tue, 16 Apr 2019 Mock Promotion Board          Cadet Reader
Thu, 18 Apr 2019 Career Progression            Cadet Reader
                                               * Submit Cadet Officer
                                               Performance Reports
Tue, 23 Apr 2019 Pay, Allowances, and Leave    Cadet Reader
Thu, 25 Apr 2019 Base Agencies                 Cadet Reader
Tue, 30 Apr 2019 Your First Officer Assignment Cadet Reader
                                               * Submit Briefing Slides
                                               * Assignment Briefings
Thu, 2 May 2019  Your First Officer Assignment Cadet Reader
                                               * Assignment Briefings
Tue, 7 May 2019  The Commission/Oath of Office Cadet Reader
                                               * Submit “What Now Lt”
                                               papers
Thu, 9 May 2019  Exam #2 – Last Day of Class
                                                                            10


15. Administrative Information:
    a. Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011 and detachment policy,
       each cadet will meet with their course instructor for an academic plan review and term
       counseling interview. Each cadet will schedule an appointment with their instructor to
       complete a counseling session and will bring an updated Academic Plan to the
       appointment.
    b. Academic Plan Review: All cadets must have their academic plan reevaluated and
       recertified by their university academic advisor every fall term.
    c. Office Hours: If you need my assistance or wish to discuss the course, the Air Force, or
       anything else, do not hesitate to schedule an appointment with me. An open door policy
       is always in effect; however, an appointment will ensure I am available and not
       committed to another task. Please schedule via https://calendly.com/paul-tombarge
    d. Academic Integrity: Integrity is an Air Force core value. Plagiarism and cheating are
       examples of behavior that show a lack of integrity. I will not tolerate a lack of integrity.
       Academic integrity means honesty and responsibility in scholarship. Both professors and
       students must obey the rules of honest scholarship. Additionally, the core values of the
       University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
       opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
       these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
       community. For further information on academic dishonesty, please visit
       http://catalog.utexas.edu/generalinformation/the-university/
    e. Students with Disabilities: Students with Disabilities may request appropriate academic
       accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
       for Students with Disabilities, (512) 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
    f. Accommodations for Religious Holidays: In accordance with UT policy, you must
       notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
       of a religious holy day. If you must miss class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
       project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will have an opportunity to complete
       the missed work within a reasonable time following the absence.
    g. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about your safety or the
       safety of another student, please call the BCAL at (512) 232-5050.
16. Additional AFROTC Cadet Responsibilities and Standards: Cadets must be aware of
AFROTC standards (refer to AFROTCI 36-2011). While not all-inclusive, the following are key
reminders. Cadets must:
    a. Report ALL negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72
       hours. If the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets
       will report the involvement not later than 72 hours after their return following the break.
                                                                                                    11


b. Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours (exceptions for final semester).
c. Maintain a cumulative GPA of 2.00 or greater to retain AFROTC membership.
d. Maintain a term GPA of 2.50 to activate or maintain a scholarship. Should a
   Scholarship Cadet’s term GPA drop below 2.50, I will issue an Academic Conditional
   Event (CE). Academic CEs could result in suspension or termination of the
   scholarship.
e. Pass all AS courses with a C or better.
f. Remain in good standing at your institution.
g. Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with your course instructor in
   advance.
h. Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
i. Meet medical standards and advise cadre of any changes in your status.
j. Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
k. Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all
   military officers outside, and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all
   ranking cadet officers, of all military services, when in uniform.
l. Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming
   and weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and
   appearance standards are followed both on- and off-duty.
m. Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008, cadets will wear their
   uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and
   for Practical Military Training (PMT). GMC cadets will wear appropriate civilian attire
   to their AS class. POC cadets will wear UOD to their AS class. Cadets may wear
   appropriate civilian clothes at other times while in CLA. Cadets will not wear any hats
   inside the building at any time.
n. Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with
   military order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of, or inflict
   cruelty on subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or
   privilege to which they are legally entitled. Be honorable and be respectful.
o. Drugs and Alcohol: Using prescription drugs without a prescription or using illicit drugs
   is illegal. No drugs, period. Drinking alcohol while under age is illegal. No drinking
   alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be responsible; do not abuse alcohol and never drive
   while under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
                                                                                             12


17. Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
    1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
       evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
       requires exiting and assembling outside.
    2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
       Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
       building.
    3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
       the first week of class.
    4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
       Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Other important
       Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                                                                                 13
