                                                                                            1
                                University of Texas at Austin
                             ARH 347K | ANT 324L | LAS 327
                     Art and Archaeology of Ancient Peru
             Spring 2020 | DFA 2.204 and PCL 2.358 | 11:00a – 11:50a | MWF
                                  Prof. Astrid Runggaldier
                    Syllabus – Complete with Policies and Readings List
                                            (v.01)
Instructor: Prof. Astrid Runggaldier               Pronouns: she, her, hers
Email: astrid@austin.utexas.edu                    Office Phone: (512) 471-6292
Office: ART 1.412D (Mesoamerica Center)            Office hours: Mondays 1pm-3pm or by
                                                   appointment with 48 hours notice
Additional Instructors: Albert Palacios (Digital Scholarship); Joshua Ortiz (Digital
Scholarship); Katy Parker (Fine Arts Library)
Classroom: DFA 2.204 (Mondays and Wednesdays) and PCL 2.358 (Fridays DH Labs)
Class times: MWF 10:00 am – 10:50 am
Online classroom: https://utexas.instructure.com
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course is intended to provide a comprehensive survey of the cultures that occupied
the Andean coast and highlands prior to and immediately following the Spanish
Conquest in the 16th century. Given the lack of written history prior to the Spanish
arrival, investigations of the ancient Andean visual arts – the elaborate textiles, fine
ceramic vessels, carved stone sculptures, and monumental architecture – have
advanced through multidisciplinary approaches. We will thus examine various culture
groups by engaging both the iconography and archaeology of the regional traditions.
In this course, we will address pertinent environmental and ecological factors, evidence
of ritual practices, such as human sacrifice and water management, techniques and
materials of manufacture of art and architecture, and issues in looting and collecting
antiquities, as well as preserving and presenting collections. Additionally, we will
work with primary materials comprising the ceramic objects in the Art and Art History
Collection (AAHC) to create digital humanities projects focused on these artworks. To
that end we will work weekly in a digital humanities lab workspace focusing on group-
work and collaborative projects in digital curation to create online exhibits for a virtual
museum.
Upon successful completion of this course you will be able to:
    1. Appreciate Andean visual arts through humanities and social sciences
          approaches in art historical and anthropological analyses (Visual Literacy).


                                                                                          2
   2. Identify the culture, period, style, and subject of select works of ancient Peruvian
          art and archaeological finds covered in this course (Subject Knowledge).
   3. Describe the formal qualities and critically evaluate Andean objects in an
          argument supported with relevant observations and facts (Research Methods).
   4. Understand current debates on ethical issues in museum practices, and engage
          with digital humanities methods and goals (Contemporary Relevance).
   5. Broaden your perspective on world cultures through in-depth analysis of ancient
          non-Western art (Diverse and Inclusive Approach to History).
LAND ACKNOWLEDGEMENT: In this course we acknowledge that the land we meet
on belongs to the traditional territory of a number of indigenous peoples–– specifically
the Apache, the Alabama-Coushatta Tribe of Texas, the Kickapoo Tribe of Texas, the
Ysleta del Sur Pueblo, the Lipan Apache Tribe, the Texas Band of Yaqui Indians, and the
Coahuiltecan. Additionally, Texas is and has been home to the Caddo, Comanche,
Kiowa, Wichita, Chickasaw, and Waco nations. We honor and thank the indigenous
peoples connected to this territory where we gather, and give gratitude to this land on
which we meet. We work to decolonize our practices, and make our course an inclusive
space for all. We extend our respect for indigenous traditions, arts, and worldviews to
the people of the Andes and the non-Western artworks this course focuses on.
VISUAL & PERFORMING ARTS (Core Component 050):
This course may be used to fulfill the visual and performing arts component of the
university core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication
skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and social responsibility.
GLOBAL CULTURES FLAG:
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments
covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group,
past or present.
REQUIRED COURSE MATERIALS
There will be weekly readings that will provide historical background, concepts, and
vocabulary terms. You are expected to read the assigned pages before class meets,
which will supplement the material presented in class.


                                                                                         3
1.     Required Textbook: Stone, Rebecca R. 2012. Art of the Andes: from Chavín to
       Inca. Thames & Hudson, London. Please purchase the 2012 (third edition) from
       any bookseller (less tan $16).
2.     Required Online: CANVAS (https://utexas.instructure.com). Required
       readings will be available on our course website. The subject matter of these
       articles will be addressed in short writing assignments, group discussions in
       class, and may also appear in questions on the exams.
3.     Required Online: Email (checked daily) You are required and expected to
       read your email concerning this course (linked to your email address on file with
       your UTEID).
4.     Required Online: SQUARECAP (Unless you already have it, you will be
       required to purchase access to Squarecap online to track your attendance and
       your responses to daily questions in class (https://www.squarecap.com).
GRADED COURSE COMPONENTS: EXAMS AND PROJECTS
There will be weekly lab assignments and graded exercised throughout the semester
that lead up to your final graded digital research project. There are two exams, a
Midterm and a Final, but they are not cumulative. Additionally, you will be offered
extra credit opportunities at different times during the semester.
Formal Analysis Exercise/Blanton: we will visit a selection of objects in the Blanton
Museum of Art to learn about material culture, iconography, and how to ask questions
about artworks. Your notes will serve as a starting point for the final Digital Research
Project.
Exams: The exam formats will be discussed in detail in class, and will generally include
a map, multiple-choice, True/False, and Fill-In-The-Blanks questions. NO MAKE-UP
EXAMS will be provided except for documented emergencies.
AAHC Digital Research Project/Online Exhibit: you will focus throughout the semester
on research methods and tools of digital scholarship aimed at analyzing and presenting
two objects in the Art and Art History Collection. These assignments will be focused on
teamwork with assigned peer groups to produce rich description essays that will be
uploaded to our online exhibit platform and presented to the class and the public in the
final week of classes. There will be internal project deadlines throughout the semester.
Quiz (extra credit): The quiz will focus on the geography, environments, ancient sites
locations, and chronology of the Andean region of Peru in South America.
Article Analysis/Film Response/Research Lecture (extra credit): there will be
occasional articles, documentaries, or research lectures to provide different ways to
present material beyond the textbook and class lectures. These opportunities will be
discussed in detail in class, and will all require some written work.


                                                                                          4
GRADING BREAKDOWN
Grade component                                    Due date                % of Final grade
Attendance and participation                       (throughout)                     15%
Blanton Exercise                                   (F Feb 21 and F Feb 28)          5%
Digital Research Project                           (throughout)                     50%
Exam 1 (Midterm)                                   (W March 25)                     15%
Exam 2 (Final)                                     (Date TBA week of May 11)        15%
Your final grade will be based on the +/- system according to the following scale:
A (93 and above); A- (90-92); B+ (87-89); B (84-86); B- (80-83); C+ (77-79); C (74-76);
C- (70-73); D+ (67-69); D (64-66); D- (60-63); F (59 and below)


                                                                                          5
                                    COURSE POLICIES
These are important course expectations and policies: please read!
Note: if you email to ask for information already contained in these pages, do not
expect a reply. If you email to request information that is best addressed in
conversation, please come to office hours (open-door, walk in, no appointments
necessary), or expect that you may be asked to come to my office in person.
CLASSROOM POLICY:
Please arrive on time, stay awake, be courteous to your instructors and peers, and
refrain from being disruptive. Being disruptive includes arriving late and making
people get up for your seat; clanking desks and noisily putting away your things before
the official end of class; engaging in computer activities other than note-taking, which
distract you and those seated behind you; taking out and looking at your phone.
Computers and tablets (not phones) are allowed in class for note-taking only. Phone
are allowed for answering Squarecap questions only. Please refrain from engaging in
other activities on your computer while note-taking, which means: do not check your
email, shop online, play games, do homework for other classes, update your social
media, etc. Multi-tasking is severely overrated.
Please turn off the ringer and stow away all cell phones as soon as you are done with
your Squarecap question. Do not park them on the desk, and do not surreptitiously
check them in your lap. Simply refrain from using them for the time that you are in
class. If you absolutely have to use your phone, step out of the room.
ATTENDANCE AND PARTICIPATION POLICY:
Class Attendance and Participation involves an oral component and a writing
component. It includes your attendance to lecture, alertness and responsiveness in class,
and points accumulated through the daily questions on Squarecap (drawn directly from
the readings due that day). Attendance and Participation constitutes 15% of your final
grade and comprises being in class, staying up-to-date on reading assignments, class
interactions, responses to films and news, and your general behavior and contribution
to a dynamic class environment and group-work environment in our DH labs. If you
attend but never contribute to discussion, get distracted, sleep, or check your phone,
you are not participating, so do not expect a perfect Attendance and Participation
grade.
Attendance is fundamental to your understanding of the course materials and your
ability to do well on exams. If you do not attend, you cannot participate. Attendance
will be recorded in class through the online platform Squarecap. Three absences in
class meetings will be excused, and will not affect your final grade: they are free passes.
Use these judiciously only when they are actually needed. Beyond your three free-pass
absences, missed classes will be excused only with notification from the Dean of
Students (see Student Emergency Services). Absences do not excuse work missed. You
are still responsible for due dates and for the material covered during the classes you


                                                                                           6
miss. Depending on the schedule, some work will not be able to be made up, especially
the DH lab workshops and discussions. For all missed classes, please find out what you
have missed from a peer and request that they share notes with you. Each unexcused
absence, for any reason*, beyond the four allowable absences detailed below will affect
your final grade.
Attendance will be taken at the beginning or end of class. If you are late to class or leave
early, it is your responsibility to sign the sheet acknowledging that you missed the
Squarecap check. Four missed Squarecap questions (late arrivals, leaving early,
forgetting, etc) will be marked as one absence. If you check in but need to leave early
for a legitimate reason, please let me know before the start of class.
* Four exceptions to the attendance policy are outlined here:
1. Religious holidays: A student who misses class or other required activities for the
observance of a religious holy day will not be penalized under Sections 51.911 and
51.925 of the Texas Education Code; however, the policy requires students to notify each
of their instructors in advance of the absence so that arrangements can be made. Please
notify your instructor 14 days in advance if you foresee that a religious holy day will
affect your ability to attend a class.
2. If you have already turned in your official Department of Intercollegiate Athletics
travel schedule, travel days are approved and do not take up your excused absences.
You are still responsible for any work missed or any assignments due. If travel days fall
on any quizzes or tests in the course calendar of this syllabus, please notify me in the
first two weeks of classes so arrangements can be made in advance.
3. If you have an illness, injury, personal or family emergency, your absence will be
excused only with notification from the Student Emergency Services in the Office of
the Dean of Students: familiarize yourself with their response to student needs and
absences from class: Student Emergency Services rules and contact information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/index.php
Class Absence Notification Request – read the link below carefully:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php
4. If you have accommodations from Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) that
include flexible attendance requests, please discuss the nature of your accommodations
with me in the first two weeks of classes, before you start accumulating absences. If
you have SSD accommodations requests, please schedule a meeting with me at the
beginning of the semester and make sure I receive your SSD letter.
COMMUNICATION POLICY:
Please feel free to communicate in person during office hours, no appointment
necessary. If you communicate via email, please remember that you might be asked to


                                                                                         7
come to office hours if the matter is too lengthy to discuss in an email. When you send
emails, please remember to communicate professionally and with courtesy. Identify
your course (ARH347K) in the subject line to avoid confusion with other courses, and
to avoid accidentally being filtered out to junk mail. Allow 48 hours to receive a
response. Learning how to communicate effectively is a skill that will serve you
throughout your adult life.
You are welcome to use Canvas to email, as messages are seamlessly integrated with
my inbox. However, you must either choose to push Canvas notifications to your email,
or make sure to check Canvas at least once daily. Check the email address you have
provided to UT Austin as your contact email. Not being aware of a message, messages
bounced because of “user unknown,” and a full inbox are not justifiable reason for
being uninformed.
USE OF CLASS MATERIAL:
The materials used in this class, including but not limited to tests, quizzes, homework
assignments, and class slides are copyright protected works. Only students enrolled in
a password-protected Canvas course are entitled to make use of the class materials for
the purposes of completing their own work. Any unauthorized copying and
distributing of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in
disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class
materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of
the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could
result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class
materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or
future students. You may share notes with other students currently enrolled in this class
provided that you do not charge for the service.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
The University’s Honor Code states the following: “As a student of The University of
Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
academic integrity.” A high standard of individual honor in scholastic work
undertaken at the University is expected of all students. At a minimum, you should
complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost
honesty, which requires you to:
    • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
    • complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or
        obtain assistance in preparing them;
    • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of
        your academic discipline; and
    • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or
        another student.


                                                                                           8
For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to
Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities. Familiarize
yourself with the Honor Code here:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY:
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines
academic dishonesty - basically, all conduct that violates this standard, including any act
designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
    • Cheating
    • Plagiarism
    • Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
    • Falsifying Academic Records
    • Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam,
        obtain an extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned
        financial benefit)
    • Multiple submissions (e.g., submitting essentially the same written assignment
        for two courses without authorization to do so)
    • Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic
        integrity
Please be aware that UT Austin policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the University.
In addition to violations such as cheating on a test: 1) Please be careful when writing not
to copy or paraphrase directly from the article without a reference, ex. (Smith, 22);
without a reference, such act can constitute plagiarism. 2) The assignments are not
collaborative; all your writing (exams, essays, assignments, discussion comments, etc.)
should reflect your ideas. If you have concerns over what constitutes scholastic honesty
in writing, please contact the Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:
Students with certified disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
in the course. For information on the University of Texas at Austin policy on and
support of students with disabilities, please call (512) 471-6259 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if
possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations promptly.


                                                                                           9
RESOURCES AND STUDENT SUPPORT SERVICES:
Assistance is available to you to help you succeed in your university career. Numerous
free an/or low cost support services include, but are not limited to, the following:
• The Undergraduate Writing Center at http://uwc.utexas.edu/ helps students with
    every phase of writing assignments for their courses.
•   The Sanger Learning Center at http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/ provides study
    skills, time-management and note-taking courses.
•   Student Emergency Services at
    http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/index.php provides services that
    include student absence notifications in case of documented medical (mental of
    physical health) issues, crime victimization, or family-related critical incidents and
    emergencies.
•   University Health Services at http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/ provides medical
    and health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-
    students who are officially enrolled in certain University programs.
•   The Counseling and Mental Health Center at http://cmhc.utexas.edu/ helps
    students with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of
    student life


                                                                                                10
Readings Schedule for Monday and Wednesdays content – to be completed BEFORE each
lecture class. For lab readings list please see DH Fridays schedule posted weekly on Canvas.
 Week 1 Introduction
 W Jan 22           Introduction to class topics – read Syllabus and Policies for Friday Jan 24
                    1. Introduction to Digital Humanities Fridays Lab (DH Friday).
 F Jan 24
                    DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
 ACK SHEET
                    2. Acknowledgement Sheet due
  Week 2 Time and Place - Introduction
  M Jan 27          1. AAHC reading on Canvas
  W Jan 29          1. Read Preface and Introduction chapter, pp. 6-8, and 9-19
  SQUARECAP         2. Sign up for Squarecap before class
                    DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
  F Jan 31
                    Ethical Debates in Cultural Institutions: Collection Custodianship
  Week 3 Time and Place – Chronology and Caral
  M Feb 3           Read Ch. 2, pp. 21-36
                    1. Review Ch. 2, pp. 21-36
  W Feb 5
                    2. Caral reading on Canvas
                    DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
  F Feb 7
                    Ethical Debates in Cultural Institutions: Collection Use
  Week 4 Preceramic and Initial Period – Cerro Sechín and Chavín de Huantar
  M Feb 10          Read Chapter 2, pp. 36-55
                    1. Review Chapter 2, pp. 36-55
  W Feb 12
                    2. Objects reading on Canvas
                    DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
  F Feb 14
                    Collection Life Project & Finding Secondary Sources


                                                                                  11
Week 5 Paracas, and Blanton Museum of Art
M Feb 17      Read Ch. 3, pp. 56-72, focus on Paracas textiles
W Feb 19      Review Ch. 3, pp. 56-72, focus on Paracas ceramics
F Feb 21      DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
BLANTON       Blanton Art Museum Visit (by group) & Research Day (other groups)
Week 6 Nasca, and Blanton Museum of Art
M Feb 24        Read Ch. 3, Nasca pp. 72-84
W Feb 26        Review Ch. 3, Nasca pp. 72-84
F Feb 28        DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
BLANTON         Blanton Art Museum Visit (by group) & Research Day (other groups)
Week 7 Nasca ceramics and Nasca Lines
M March 2       Read Ch. 3, Cahuachi and Nasca Lines, pp. 84-90
W March 4       Nasca Lines reading on Canvas
                DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
F March 6
                TimelineJS Tool Workshop
Week 8 Moche
M March 9       Read Ch. 4, Moche culture, architecture, burials, pp. 91-110
W March 11      Read Ch. 4, Moche ceramics, pp. 110-126
F March 13      DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
PROJECTS        Collection Life Project Presentations


                                                                           12
Week 9 Spring Break!
March 16-20    No class meetings – Spring Break
Week 10 Moche and Midterm Exam
M March 23     Review Ch. 4, all Moche, pp. 91-126
W March 25
               MIDTERM EXAM
EXAM
               DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
F March 27
               Introduction to Public Digital Humanities
Week 11 Tiwanaku and Wari
M March 30     Read Ch. 5, Tiwanaku, pp. 127-144
W April 1      Read Ch. 5, Wari, pp. 144-162
               DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
F April 3
               Building Digital Collections & Metadata Workshop Part 1
Week 12 Chimu
M April 6      Read Ch. 6, Chimu pp. 163-166 and 173-181
W April 8      Read Ch. 6, Chimu pp. 181-186
               DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
F April 10
               Metadata Workshop Part 2 & Ceramics Lab


                                                                               13
Week 13 Chimu and Lambayeque/Sicán
M April13       Review Ch. 6, all Chimu pp. 173-181
                1. Review Ch. 6, pp. 163-166
W April 15
                2. Read Ch. 6., Lambayeque pp. 166-173
                DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
F April 17
                In-Class Exhibition Work Day
Week 14 Lambayeque/Sicán and additional DH Lab time
M April 20     Review Ch. 6., Lambayeque pp. 166-173
W April 22     DH Lab – see Lab Readings Schedule
PCL LAB 4      Theme Introduction Writing Note! Today PCL Lab 4, not DFA 2.204
               DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
F April 24
               In-Class Exhibition Finalization Work Day
Week 15 Inca
M April 27      Read Ch. 7, Inca culture and history pp. 194-202
W April 29      Read Ch. 7, Inca stonework pp. 202-217
                DH Friday - see Weekly Lab Readings & Assignments on Canvas
F May 1
                Omeka Exhibition Development
Week 16 Inca and Digital Research Project Presentations
M May 4
                Read Ch. 7, Machu Picchu and beyond pp. 217-242
EVALS
W May 6
                Public presentations of digital research projects
PROJECTS
F May 8         1. Presentations of digital research projects
PROJECTS        2. Final discussion and reflections
                         CONGRATULATIONS! YOU ARE DONE!
