                Introduction to Advertising/PR Research (309R): Spring 2020
                          Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Instructor
Matthew S. Eastin, PhD
Professor
Office: BCM #4.324
Office Hours: T | 10:30am to 11:30am, TH | 9am to 11am (or by appointment).
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
UT Email: matt.eastin@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants
Daniela De Luca
Office hours location: BCM # 4.382
Office Hours: T | 12:00-3:00. F | 1:00-3:30pm
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Buduo Wang
Office Hours location: BCM #4.382
Office Hours: M |10:00am to 1:30pm, W | Noon to 2:00
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Chung In Yun
Office hours location: BCM # 4.382
Office Hours: M | 1:30pm to 4:00pm, TH | 1:00pm-4:00pm
Class Email: introresearchadpr@gmail.com
Required Resources
Davis, J. J.(2012). Advertising Research: Theory and Practice, 2nd Ed. Saddle River, NJ:
        Prentice Hall.
Buy at the Coop or online, bound copy, eBook or value edition – wherever you can get it and in
whatever form you desire, just be sure to get the 2nd edition.
Technological Requirements
All students will be required to use SPSS for Assignments 1 and 2 this semester. You may access
SPSS in the following ways:
●   Campus Lab in MEZ 4.128 (5 copies)
●   Digital Media Labs on CMA 4th floor, CMA 4.138
●   You may purchase a 6-month or 1-year student license of IBM SPSS (Base Grad Pack) for a
    modest price. Visit the following: http://www.onthehub.com/spss/
● IBM SPSS free trial: https://www.ibm.com/analytics/us/en/technology/spss/spss-trials.html


Course Goals: Taught from a media and advertising perspective, this course will cover essential
statistical analyses needed for basic advertising research. Quantitatively, within the context of
advertising examples, this class will cover sampling, descriptive statistics, variable development
and measurement, probability, group comparisons, and relational and predictive testing. Again,
each of the topics will be advertising-based in example and context.
Online Lectures: All lectures will be posted to CANVAS. Students can view lectures at any
time prior to taking the exam. Lectures may be in video, audio or presentation format (although
most are video). Assignments will be covered in lecture and labs. Students can follow up with
the instructor or TA during their office hours. Due to the nature of this online class, all material
needed for exam 1 will be posted by January 21st 2020. Following exam 1, all material needed
for exam 2 will be posted. Following exam 2, all remaining materials will be posted.
Grading breakdown is as follows:
Individual Assignment (x3 – 10% per)                   =      30%
Flashcards (Exam 1 and 2) (5% per)                     =      10%
Exam 1                                                 =      15%
Exam 2                                                 =      20%
Exam 3 (cumulative)                                    =      25%
Total                                                        100%
Grade Breakdown
 93-100 = A      87-89 = B+        77-79 = C+         65-69 = D+
                                                                          59 and below = F
 90-92 = A -     83-86 = B         73-76 = C          60-64 = D
                 80-82 = B -       70-72 = C –
Individual Assignments: There will be three individual assignments. TWO of the assignments
will require you to analyze and write-up data using SPSS. Simply using SPSS output will not
be sufficient for assignment completion. More information/examples will be presented in class
on the date indicated on the course schedule below.
Exams: There will be three exams throughout the semester. Exam #3 will be cumulative so
make sure you go back and review early class content. Make-up exams will be given only in


instances of excused absences. Furthermore, you must notify me beforehand about an excused
absence for an exam. On the scheduled exam days, the exam will be available online from
5pm to 9pm. You can take the exam at any point during this time period. However, once you
start, you will need to finish the exam. All exams will be timed and will end at their designated
time allotment. Meaning, at 9pm the exam will close.
         Make-up Policy: Exams must be taken during the scheduled exam time. A make-up
         exam can only be taken if the student presents proof of a valid medical excuse or
         extenuating circumstance. Medical excuses and extenuating circumstances will be
         verified and judged as warranting a special case by the course instructor. ALL class
         assignments must be turned in by the posted day and time. No late work will be
         accepted.
         Reviewing Exams can be done with Dr. Eastin or any of the Teaching Assistants during
         office hours. However, grades can only be changed by Dr. Eastin.
Communicating with the Instructor: Contact me via e-mail (ONLY USE the email given
above: introresearchadpr@gmail.com) or in-person (office hours or by appointment). I check
this e-mail regularly and will do my best to respond as soon as I can; however, do not expect a
response immediately, during the weekend, or at midnight before the test—simply stated, plan
ahead and give me time to respond. For quickest response, please put "ADV 309R" in the subject
heading.
         Piazza: For most questions related to course material or class administration, please post
         your question to Piazza. This is the most efficient way for us to share knowledge among
         the entire learning community. Never doubt the value of your questions – if you are
         wondering about something, at least a few of your classmates are wondering the same
         thing!
         This semester, we will be using Piazza as a class-wide discussion forum. If you have
         questions or topics that you'd like to discuss with your classmates, this is the place to do
         it. The system is highly catered to getting you help fast and efficiently from classmates,
         TAs, and instructors. Rather than emailing questions to the teaching staff, we encourage
         you to post your questions on Piazza.
Grade Disputes
Students will have one week (7-days) to dispute exam, assignment and Flashcards scores.
Flagged Course: This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning
courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of
quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You
should, therefore, expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of
quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.


Academic Dishonesty: Any form of academic dishonesty, including plagiarism, manufacturing
quotes or sources, using another’s reporting, research or quotes without giving proper attribution,
will result in an automatic grade of “F” for your assignment, possibly the course and possibly
worse. If you’re ever unsure whether you’re crossing the line, ask – that’s what good
practitioners and good journalists do. Here’s the basic university policy on academic dishonesty:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow
students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050.
Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns.
  Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination,
       sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and
       stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to
       fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms.
       When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
            1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
            2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
            harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
            3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
       Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees”
       or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of
       Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report
       any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
       Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related
       incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
       with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
       university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting
       options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office
       at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report
such misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color,
religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic
information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can be reported to the
Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.


    •   Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
        The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of
        sexual misconduct and discrimination.
            o   File a report of discrimination via online form
            o   Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
    •   Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
        The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for
        enforcing federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities
        that receive federal financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex
        discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
    •   Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
        The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing
        federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the
        basis of a protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal
        Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
Special needs: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability
who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to
provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please see me at
the beginning of the semester if you have special needs or require alternative testing.
Tentative Nature of this Syllabus: This syllabus represents a contract in the works. Events that
transpire during the semester may, in rare circumstances, require me to modify the syllabus. I
will announce the modification in class and on the course Canvas. Meaning, the syllabus will
update weekly with new reading and any changes in topics. Ultimately, it is your responsibility
to keep up with any such modifications and be aware of current policies, deadlines, etc.


Course Schedule
 Timeline              Topic(s)      Reading(s)   Assignment   Description
                                                  Due Dates
                       Pre-Course    Chapter 1
 Week of January 21st  Activities    and 2
                       Introduction
                       Sampling/
 Week of January 27th  Introduction  Chapter 4
                       to SPSS
 Week of February 3rd  Measurement   Chapter 10
                                     Chapter 11
 Week of February 10th Descriptive   Chapter 15
                       Statistics
                                                  Flashcards
 February 14th                                    Due – 5pm
                                                  Canvas
                                                  Submission
 February 19th         Exam 1
                                                               Gary Wilcox,
 Week of February 24th Data          Chapter 14                Chein Yang,
                       Visualization                           Ted Talk
                       P-Value and
                       Chi-Square
 Week of March 2nd     T-test/       Chapter 16
                       Analysis of
                       Variance
                                                  Assignment 1
 March 11th                                       – 5pm
                                                  Canvas
                                                  Submission
 Week of March 16th    Spring Break  Spring Break Spring Break Spring Break
 Week of March 23rd    Correlation/
                       Regression


Week of March 30th Factorial    Chapter 16
                   Design
                   Exam Review             Flashcards
April 3rd          (offline) –             for Exam 2
                   Location TBD            Due – Canvas
                                           at 5pm.
April 8th          Exam 2
                                           Assignment 2
April 15th                                 – 5pm
                                           Canvas
                                           Submission
                   Segmentation Chapter 17
Week of April 20th              and 9
                   Biometric
                   Research
Week of April 27th Ad Metrics   TBA
                   Ad Metrics –
Week of May 4th    Interview
                   Digital
                   Metrics
                                           Assignment 3
Due May 8th                                – 5pm
                                           Canvas
                                           Submission
May 11th           Final Exam
                   Review
                   (offline)
May 13th           Exam 3
