                                                                                          Updated 8-25-19
                            Modern Japanese Literature in Translation (ANS 372; # 31730)
                                     Fall 2019, MW 1 – 2:30 p.m. in GAR 2.128
                           Professor Kirsten Cather, kcather@austin.utexas.edu, 471.0031
                            Cather Office Hours: MW, 11 a.m. – 12:30 p.m. in WCH 4.112
This course looks at literature written by key Japanese authors in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. We will
learn to read, think, discuss, and write about Japanese literature critically and analytically with attention to a work’s
content, style, and form. Equally importantly, we will think about our own individual tastes in literature - why we read
fiction and how. We'll also consider the socio-historical context of the production and reception of literature and
themes like the breakdown of tradition and the crisis of individualism; nostalgia and nationalism; war memory and
cultural amnesia; “women’s literature”; sexuality, gender, and power; and the dynamics of cross-cultural influence.
This is a small discussion-based class that requires the active and engaged participation of all class members to
ensure its success.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with
cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
from assignments covering the culture of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Required Texts/Readings:
1) The following books (** on schedule) are available for purchase at the Co-op. You are welcome to purchase
    them from used bookstores or on-line instead, but be sure to get the same version (cross-check the ISBN #) so
    that we can all refer to the same page numbers for class discussions and papers.
      **Sōseki, Natsume. Kokoro (Gateway Editions). ISBN: 978-089-526-7153 ($18.99); Trans. Edwin McClellan.
      **Ooka Shōhei, Fires on the Plains. ISBN: 978-080-481-3792 ($16.95)
      **Goossen, Theodore W., ed. The Oxford Book of Japanese Short Stories (Oxford UP). 9780199583195 ($19.95)
2) Additional required readings (marked with -- below) are available for purchase at Jenn’s Copy Shop NORTH
    branch (2518 Guadalupe St, 482-0779). They are unbound so you can bring only the readings you need on a
    weekly basis, but you may opt to have them bound into a single volume if you wish.
3) Worksheets and Guidelines on CANVAS under Assignments. *For all assignments, consult Guidelines for ANS
    372 Papers on CANVAS under Assignments. Supplementary readings occasionally posted on Canvas.
4) A pack of 3”X5” index cards to be used for in-class pop quizzes and assignments.
Grading Policy
Grades are assigned as follows: 93-100 = A; 90-92.9 = A-; 87-89.9 = B+; 83-86.9 = B; 80-82.9 = B-; 77-79.9 = C+;
   73-76.9 = C; 70-72.9 = C-; 67-69.9 = D+; 63-66.9 = D; 60-62.9 = D-; below 60 = F. As a rule, I do not grade on a
   curve or round up grades. If you receive an 89.7, you will receive a B+. One exception to this rule is that a grade
   that is very close to the next grade level, such as an 89.9 or 79.9, may be rounded up to the higher grade if the
   student has consistently attended class and participated fully in class discussions. Note the following UT grade
   standards: an “A” is earned for “excellent” work; “B” for “above average”; C for “average”; D for “pass”; and F for
   “failing.”
                                                                                                                          1


                                                                                           Updated 8-25-19
Grading & Assignments:
Pop Quizzes/In-class assignments = 20% TOTAL (2 lowest scores automatically dropped; no make-ups)
         Pop quizzes will be frequently given during class time to check if you’ve carefully completed the
         assigned readings and are regularly attending class. Use 3”X5” index cards for these. We will also
         do regular in-class individual and group work that will be collected at the end of class time.
Participation/Contribution = 10% TOTAL
         Based on both your participation (active engagement in all classes) and contribution (quality of
         your participation) rather than merely on attending classes. Graded on a scale ranging from A+ (full
         10%) to F (0%). Automatic deduction of 1% point per unexcused absence beyond one freebie.
Homework Assignments (6 total) = 35% TOTAL
         A variety of homework assignments, oral presentations, and writing exercises (due as indicated in
         schedule below) designed to help develop strong techniques of literary analysis, paper writing, and
         oral discussion skills. These are low stakes in terms of grades, but high stakes in terms of skill
         development. No lates accepted because we will regularly workshop these in class.
Analytical Paper (abstract/outline/1st draft, peer review=5%; 5-7 page revised/expanded essay=30%) = 35% TOTAL
         A formal analytical paper on two or more texts of your choice to be done in two stages: 1) an
         abstract, detailed outline, and 2-3 pg. partial draft that will be peer reviewed in-class (worth 5% of
         this assignment’s grade), and 2) a significantly revised and expanded 5-7 pg. polished final essay
         (worth 30%). Detailed instructions on CANVAS under Assignments.
Standards and Expectations:
Careful, thorough viewing/reading of the assigned texts by the date indicated on the schedule. This
  requires your active engagement with the text. Detailed note taking is essential as is bringing your
  notes and copies of readings to class since you will need to refer to them frequently for group and
  class discussion/activities.
Active and considerate participation in and contribution to class & group discussions. Common courtesy is
  expected. Aim neither to monopolize the class discussion nor to shrink into the background. Sleepers &
  disruptive students will be asked to leave. Remember you need to earn contribution points toward your
  grade and these are based on both your participation (active engagement in all classes) and contribution
  (quality/quantity of your participation).
Timely completion of assignments. No make-up quizzes or assignments will be given (except for legitimate
  reasons like religious holidays and job interviews, which require one week’s prior notice). Your two
  lowest scores will be automatically dropped for daily work. Use them wisely. If you encounter family or
  medical emergencies, please use the Student Emergency Services as your liaison to ask for
  accommodations.)
                                                                                                                2


                                                                                            Updated 8-25-19
Official Policies
Academic integrity: You are expected to adhere to university requirements on academic honesty and
   integrity. Behaviors, such as plagiarism, copying of another student’s work, or cheating on an exam, are
   serious offenses that will result in the grade of an “F” for the course and will be reported to the
   office of Student Judicial Services, where further disciplinary action may be taken. Please refer to the
   following website for information on how to avoid plagiarism in your work and/or discuss this with the
   instructor: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
University Electronic Notification Mail Policy: In this course, e-mail will be used as a means of
   communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class
   announcements and assignments. As per the University Electronic Notification Policy (please see
   http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html), it is your responsibility to update your email address
   and to check your e-mail regularly.
Accommodations for Students with Documented Disabilities: Students who require special
   accommodations need to get a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
   Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6529 voice or 471-4641 TTY). This letter
   should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of the semester so that appropriate
   accommodations can be made at that time. For more information, please see:
   http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/
Use of Canvas: Assignments and some of our readings will be made available on Canvas. You should
   print these out and bring with you to class. Please allow yourself enough time before an
   assignment is due. As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as
   unanticipated disruptions. Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS
   Help Desk at 475-9400 during business hours on weekdays.
Religious Holidays: If you will need to miss class or other assignments due to the observance of a
   religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the work you have missed provided you
   notify me at least one week prior to the absence.
Helpful resources on campus:
Counseling and Mental Health Center:
Business Hours: Monday thru Friday, 8:00am - 5:00pm
Appointment-Scheduling hours, Monday thru Friday, 8:00am-12:00pm & 1:00pm-4:00pm
Phone: (512) 471-3515 - Student Services Building 5th Floor - https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center Crisis Line: 512-471-CALL (2255)
Student Emergency Services:
Our office helps students and their families during difficult or emergency situations. Assistance includes outreach,
advocacy, intervention, support, and referrals to relevant campus and community resources. Please note, our office does
not provide counseling services. You can access services available through SES by completing an online form, calling
512-471-5017 (M-F 8a-4:30p), or stopping by SSB 4.400 (M-F 9a-4p) for a walk-in appointment.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 (24/7)
Are you worried about a student in your class, bothered that your roommate has been acting differently, or concerned
about the behavior of a co-worker? Do you have concerns but are not sure what to do? If so, contact the Behavior
Concerns Advice line at 512-232-5050 or submit your concerns using the online form.
Cases that present an immediate threat to self, others, or property should be considered an emergency and should be
directed to The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD) by calling 911.
                                                                                                                        3


                                                                                           Updated 8-25-19
Schedule (subject to change; updated version posted on CANVAS):
Readings to be completed by day they are listed on schedule. Bring heavily annotated readings with you to class.
   -- = in Course Reader / ** = in book you need to buy / ^^ = on Canvas or online
Note: All authors are listed with last name first following the Japanese practice. If an author uses his/her penname
   instead, that name is underlined and is the one you should use to refer to that author. Original publication dates
   are given in parenthesis.
Week One (Aug 28):
Wed:       Introductions & ^^“Beginning” in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
Week Two (Sept. 4):
Mon:         OFF for Labor Day
Wed:         --“The Dancing Girl” (“Maihime,” Mori Ōgai, 1890) [^^story also available up on Canvas under Files]
             HW #1: 500 words. Write up to 500 words about “The Dancing Girl. There are no other
                 requirements for this assignment other than those for all HW assignments: it must be
                 grammatical, typed, double-spaced, 1-inch margins all around, in a font comparable to
                 Times, and include just your name (and the date if you wish), and an apt, catchy, creative title
                 up top. You should cite the title of the work you are analyzing somewhere in your paragraph,
                 and the first time you do so, be sure to cite it correctly, using quotes for short stories, italics
                 for novels, etc. and noting the author and date as well, either in parentheses or in the body of
                 your text). If you choose to use a direct quote, cite the page number alone in parenthesis
                 after the quote. For this assignment, your grade will be wholly dependent on following these
                 formatting instructions. Submit via Canvas & bring hard copy to class. For all
                 assignments, follow Guidelines for ANS 372 Papers up on Canvas under Course Docs.
Week Three (Sept 9 & 11): His and Her Modern Literature, Modern Romance
Mon: ^^Choose to read one of the articles on Ōgai’s “The Dancing Girl” posted up on Canvas.
        Discussion Question (DQ). Come prepared to discuss the following in class with written up notes to
             support your points. Summarize the author’s main argument in 2-4 sentences. What are the key points
             of evidence that the author uses to make this argument? Do you agree or disagree with this basic
             argument and their approach to making that argument? Can you think of other points of evidence from
             the story that further support or contradict their argument? Finally, do you agree with their basic
             approach to literature? Why or why not?
Wed: **“Separate Ways” (“Wakare-Michi,” Higuchi Ichiyō, 1896)
        ^^“Point of View” and "Narrative Structure" in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
        HW#2: Breakdown narrative structure. There are many ways to divide up a story, but use the Lodge
            essays to help think about a way that you might divide this story “Separate Ways” into distinct sections.
            Consider who’s telling what from what point of view, where and when each section is set, etc. Mark up
            the story into distinct sections. For each section (aim for 3-5 sections total), come up with a bullet point
            description that encapsulates that section. On a separate piece of paper, list in a simple chart or bullet
            point form how and why you broke up the story section-by-section with page #s. Now briefly (in a few
            sentences) explain why you think this organization is used. What do you think the author is trying to
            accomplish by using this narrative structure? Submit via Canvas and bring hard copy to class.
                                                                                                                         4


                                                                                          Updated 8-25-19
Week Four (Sept. 16 & 18): Akutagawa
Mon: --“Hell Screen” (“Jigokuhen,” Akutagawa Ryūnosuke, 1918)
       ^^“The Unreliable Narrator” in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
       HW#3: Personal Response Essay. Write up your reactions to this story in a 2-page (maximum) personal
           response essay that answers this prompt: What did you think of the narrator as a narrator? What was
           the effect on you as a reader of having such an “unreliable narrator”? Be sure to use the Lodge essay
           on this concept. How and why did he instill your belief or disbelief? Consider not just the content, but
           also the style of his narration. For this and all papers, follow the Guidelines for ANS 372 Papers up on
           Canvas under Course Docs. Essay graded based on the clarity of your expression, depth of
           engagement, and strength of your argument/evidence. Submit via Canvas.
Wed: --“Han’s Crime” (“Han no hanzai,” Shiga Naoya, 1913)
       In-class Exercise: The Verdict with Evidence. Come prepared to deliver your own verdict for this
            case. Imagine you were the judge of this story. What would be your verdict? Cite directly from the story
            (note page #s in parentheses) to make your case persuasively enough that there can be no appeal. Be
            sure not to ignore evidence that seems to contradict your verdict, but to be ready to address it directly
            and explain how/why it does not constitute proof for the other side. Bring hard copy to class.
       **“Night Fires” (“Takibi,” Shiga Naoya, 1920)
       Discussion question (DQ): When you read this story, consider the following questions: Are you surprised
           that this is also written by Shiga, the author of “Han’s Crime”? Is anything thematically or stylistically
           similar between the two stories?
Week Five (Sept. 23 & 25): Sōseki
Mon: **Kokoro (Natsume Sōseki, 1914), Parts I & II.
Wed: **Kokoro, Part III.
       ^^“The Epistolary Novel” in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
Week Six (Sept. 30 & Oct. 2): Kawabata
Mon: Wrap-up discussion of Kokoro
Wed.: **“The Izu Dancer” (“Izu no odoriko,” Kawabata Yasunari, 1925)
       HW#4: Pick a quote. Review the Quotes worksheets carefully (on CANVAS under Assignments). Identify a
       quote (or two) from the Kawabata story that you could imagine using in a paragraph of a formal analytical
       paper. First transcribe the entire sentence (or sentences) in which the quote appears and cite it correctly.
       Next in a short paragraph tell me in informal language what this quote means and why you are using this
       quote: what does it help you prove/show? Then write up the section of the paragraph of your formal
       analytical essay in which you would use this quote to make that point by framing, integrating, analyzing,
       and elaborating on your quote. Cite it correctly. Be sure to trim the quote as necessary for maximum
       rhetorical force. Hand in a hard-copy in class and submit via Canvas.
Week Seven (Oct. 7 & 9): Modernists, Detectives, and Synesthetic Works
Mon: --"The Tell-Tale Heart” (Edgar Allen Poe, 1895)
       --“The Human Chair” (“Ningen isu,” Edogawa Ranpo, 1925)
Wed: **“Lemon” (“Remon,” Kajii Motojirō, 1925)
       --Selections from Palm-of-the-Hand Stories (Tenohira shōsetsu, Kawabata)
       HW for in-class pop quiz grade: Pick any one of the stories we have read thus far this semester that has
       struck you deeply. Try to convey it and your reactions to it (its tone, feel, texture, etc.) in a creative work
       that can be in any medium besides traditional essay prose writing. Use images, sounds, tastes, smells to
       capture the text of your choice – think creatively here and try to tie in something that you are passionate
       about (besides literature). Anything is fair game. Come to class ready to give a brief 2-minute presentation
       to the class on your creative counterpart to the literature we have been reading this semester. Submit your
       creative work on Canvas if that is feasible; if not, submit or present in class.
                                                                                                                       5


                                                                                        Updated 8-25-19
Week Eight (Oct. 14 & 16): War, Memory, and Nation
Mon.: **“Blind Chinese Soldiers” (“Mō Chūgoku hei,” Hirabayashi Taiko, 1946)
       --“Peonies” (“Botan,” Mishima Yukio, 1955)
Wed: --“Sheep” (“Ningen no hitsuji,” Ōe Kenzaburō, 1958)
       ^^Ōe Kenzaburō, “Japan, the Ambiguous, and Myself,” (“Aimai na Nihon no Watashi,” 1994) at
       http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1994/oe-lecture.html
       ^^In-class compare with Kawabata Yasunari, “Japan, the Beautiful, and Myself,” (“Utsukushii Nihon no
       watashi,” 1968) at https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1968/kawabata-speech.html
Week Nine (Oct. 21 & 23): (Note: light reading week so you can get started on longer novel for next week)
Mon: **“Merry Christmas” (“Merii Kurisumasu,” Dazai Osamu, 1946)
       ^^“Irony” in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
Wed: In-class clips of The Emperor’s Naked Army Marches On (Yukiyukite shingun, dir. HARA Kazuo, 1987)
Week Ten (Oct. 28 & 30): Guest Lecturer Michael Kuehl
Mon:   **Fires on the Plains (Nobi, Ōoka Shōhei, 1951), Chapters 1-25
Wed:   **Fires on the Plains ct’d, Chapters 26-end
Week Eleven (Nov. 4 & 6): Masochistic Mamas & Papas: “Men’s” and “Women’s” Literature
Mon:   --“A Portrait of Shunkin” (Shunkin-shō, Tanizaki Jun’ichirō, 1933) (Note this is a long short story.)
       Optional: See also **“Aguri” (“Aoi hana,” Tanizaki Jun’ichirō, 1922)
Wed:   **“Toddler-hunting” (“Yojigari,” Kōno Taeko, 1961)
Week Twelve (Nov. 11 & 13):
Mon:   --“Rabbits” (“Usagi,” Kanai Mieko, 1976)
       ^^See also Chapter 1: Down the Rabbit-Hole, Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland (Lewis Carroll, 1865) at:
           https://www.gutenberg.org/files/11/11-h/11-h.htm
Wed:   **“The Flower-Eating Crone” (“Hana-kui uba,” Enchi Fumiko, 1974)
       **“A Very Strange Enchanted Boy” (“Fushigi na shōnen,” Tsushima Yūko, 1985)
       **“Dreaming of Kimchee” (“Kimuchee no yume,” Yoshimoto Banana, 1992)
Week Thirteen (Nov. 18 & 20): Pomo Lit & Magical Realism Across the Century
Mon:   --“The Magic Chalk” (“Mahō no chōku,” Abe Kōbō, 1950)
       --"Bokko-chan” (Hoshi Shin’ichi, 1963) and “He-y, Come on Ou-t” (“Oi, dete koi,” Hoshi, 1971)
       --“The Second Bakery Attack” (“Panya saishūgeki,” Murakami Haruki, 1985)
       ^^“Surrealism” in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
Wed:   --“Ten Nights of Dreams” (“Yume jūya,” Sōseki, 1908)
       **Optional: See “The Elephant Vanishes” (Zō ga shōmetsu suru, Murakami Haruki, 1987), “The Bet” (Kake,
           Abe Kōbō, 1960), “In the Forest, Under Cherries in Full Bloom,” Sakaguchi Ango, 1947).
Week Fourteen (Nov. 25); OFF Nov. 27-30 for Thanksgiving):
Mon:   OFF to allow time to develop your paper topic.
       HW#5: One Solid Point/One (Perfect) Paragraph. For your final paper, you will compare/contrast
       at least two different stories we have read this semester. For this assignment, pick at least one of these
       stories and write up a single body paragraph of this essay. Make sure you have one point in one paragraph
       with enough supporting evidence from the text(s) to support your point, correctly cited, etc. Consult Writing
       Worksheets for ANS 372 Papers. Submit on Canvas.
                                                                                                                     6


                                                                                         Updated 8-25-19
Week Fifteen (Dec. 2 & 4) Writing Workshops
Mon:    In-class Writing Workshop on Final Papers (participation required for full credit)
        Paper Abstract, Outline, and 2-3 page Draft due (worth 5% of your final paper grade; detailed
        instructions on CANVAS under assignments). Bring hard copy to class & submit via CANVAS.
Wed:    Individual appointments with professor available for sign-up via Canvas.
Fri:    Additional appointments with professor available
Week Sixteen (Dec. 9):
Mon:    ^^“The Title” in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
        ^^“Ending” in The Art of Fiction (David Lodge, 1992)
        HW#6: Endings. Read David Lodge’s chapters on “The Title” and “Ending” and consider the way one of
        our authors ended their stories. Write your own alternate ending to the story indicating where your ending
        starts (you can either continue from the original ending or pick another point of the story) and retitle it to
        capture your new ending. Be prepared to present your version and to explain what you were trying to do in
        rewriting the ending and retitling the story. Were you staying faithful to the author’s style or advancing your
        own? What kind of ending and title were you aiming for and why? (Be sure to use the Lodge essay to
        characterize your ending and title vs. the original author’s here rather than generalizable statements.) Hand
        in via CANVAS before class & bring hard copy to class. In-class participation required for full credit.
Friday, Dec. 13th at 9 a.m.: Final Analytical papers due (submit on Canvas) = 30%
                                                                                                                        7
