                                                                                                              1
                                                                                               Revised 5.27.20
                    CE 333T: Communication and Engineering
                         Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays – Asynchronous
                          Wednesdays, 10-11:30 – Synchronous, Zoom
                                     Prerequisites: RHE 306 or equivalent
                                      Professor: Madeleine Redlick, Ph.D.
                                                 (she, her, hers)
                                      Email: mredlick@austin.utexas.edu
                                                  Office hours:
                                          www.calendly.com/mredlick
 Teaching Assistant: Elizabeth Bradshaw                   Teaching Assistant: Tynan Holt
 (she, her, hers)                                         (she, her, hers)
 Email: elizabethbradshaw@utmail.utexas.edu               Email: tynanholt@utexas.edu
 Office hours: Wednesdays, 11:30 AM – 1:30 PM             Office hours: Tuesdays, 4 –6 PM
                   Office hours appointments must be made at least 24 hours in advance
What is this course all about?
The purpose of this course is to provide you with the written, oral, and interpersonal communication
skills that are key to success as a practicing engineer. You will learn concrete, evidence-based skills and
strategies to help you work collaboratively, think critically, and accelerate your career.
When do I need to “be in class?”
          For Summer 2020, this course is fully web-based. However, it has both synchronous and
asynchronous components. On Mondays, Tuesdays, and Thursdays you’ll view pre-recorded lecture
content featuring me (Dr. Redlick) and a variety of leading communication scholars from both the
Moody College of Communication here at UT, and beyond. There are short quizzes associated with each
asynchronous lecture on Canvas. Asynchronous course content will become available to you on a
staggered basis, with specific availabilities noted in the course schedule at the end of this syllabus.
          On Wednesdays, we’ll meet synchronously, using Zoom. We will meet in smaller sections, led
either by me or one of the TAs (more details on your sections later), where we’ll put what we’ve learned
to use in pairs and in small groups.
          You may be wondering why we don’t just release all of the content at once. Good question.
Research on online course effectiveness consistently demonstrates that students get much less out of
courses when they’re fully “self-paced” (take class whenever you want) and get much more out of
courses when they have some structure. The skills you’ll learn in this class are important, and you paid
to be here, so let’s be sure you get more rather than less.
But do I really need to “be there?”
Attendance is expected of you in this course, just as it will be in any job. As such, showing up for class is
not incentivized via points, but failure to come to class will result in the loss of points.
     ● Attendance will be taken every Wednesday.
     ● Students are permitted one unexcused absence from each Wednesday class. Think of this as a
          “freebie”—you don’t need to tell me or the TAs that you’ll be missing, just don’t show up!


                                                                                                             2
                                                                                               Revised 5.27.20
              o    However, do so at your own risk. Many of our assignments draw on the skills that we’ll
                   cover in our Wednesday classes. If you are going to miss a class, be sure you have a
                   buddy lined up that you can get notes from.
    ●    Each unexcused absence after the first results in a 5% reduction to your final grade.
    ●    If you know you are going to miss class on Wednesday, you must communicate this to either me
         or the TA who leads your Wednesday section 24 hours in advance. It is up to the discretion of
         the instructor whether your absence will count as excused or unexcused.
    ●    If you miss class due to extenuating personal circumstances, please reach out as soon as
         possible to discuss the reason why you missed class. Absences will not be eligible for
         consideration as “excused” if you reach out more than seven calendar days after the absence.
What exactly am I supposed to be getting out of this?
By the end of this course, you should be able to:
    ● Communicate effectively with a range of audiences (technical and non-technical, junior and
         senior, large and small) and in a range of formats (written, spoken, technologically-mediated).
    ● Work productively in a team-based setting.
    ● Evaluate and present data in a clear and compelling manner.
    ● Apply professional codes of ethics to make informed judgments about current global, economic,
         environmental, and social challenges facing the field of engineering.
What do I need to do?
         Another very good question. Well, you’ll notice that we have quite a few assignments in this
class. That might seem annoying, but there’s a good reason. Again, research on online instruction shows
that learning is best promoted through small and frequent assignments. So, even though it may not be
something that we like about the course, it is effective—sort of like going to the dentist. It isn’t most
people’s favorite activity, but it is important and good for your oral health.
         So, here’s a quick breakdown of the assignments:
           Homework assignments and quizzes             10%
           Career preparation (digital interviewing     10%
           and emails)
           Summary of ethical issue                     10%
           Initial project outline and proposal         10%
           Initial project pitch outline and recording  10%
           Project pitch self-review                    5%
           Team contact                                 5%
           Final team project report                    12.5%
           Final team project presentation              12.5%
           Group member evaluation                      5%
           Ethical application papers (2)               10%
           Total                                        100%
Much more thorough descriptions of each of these assignments are available on Canvas, and I will cover
my expectations for each of them well in advance of each due date.


                                                                                                              3
                                                                                                Revised 5.27.20
What do I need to have to complete these assignments?
      ●   You must have or have access to a laptop, desktop, or tablet with a reliable Internet connection
          that can stream video content.
                o If these requirements present an obstacle to your ability to participate in this course,
                    please visit this Texas One Stop resource to see what technology resources the
                    University may be able to provide to you.
      ●   It is essential that you check Canvas regularly (at least once per day) to receive information to
          help you successfully complete quizzes and assignments.
                o Failure to check Canvas will not be accepted as an excuse for any late or missing
                    assignments.
      ●   Instructors and students are both expected to do their best to respond to messages sent on
          Canvas or via email within one business day (M-F, 9 AM – 5 PM).
What happens if I turn something in late?
As a part of preparing you for standards of accountability that you will encounter in your professional
life, work that is turned in late will be subjected to an automatic evaluative penalty.
      ● Work that is turned in within 24 hours of a stated deadline is subject to an automatic 20%
          penalty.
      ● For each 24 hours that passes following that deadline, an additional 5% penalty is applied.
      ● Work turned in more than 5 calendar (not business) days after a given deadline will not be
          considered for credit.
With that said, if you experience a serious medical or personal emergency, accommodations may be
made at my discretion. Should you be involved in one of these situations during the semester, please
please contact me as soon as possible to explain the circumstances. You are more likely to receive an
accommodation if you communicate about your needs ahead of time, rather than after a deadline has
been missed.
Grading:
Final grades for this course will be determined using the following rules. Please note that grades ending
in .5 will be rounded up. That means that if you earn an 82.5%, you will have a final grade of a B.
  A = 93% and above                       B- = 80-82%                       D+ = 66-69%
  A- = 90-92%                             C+ = 76-79%                       D = 63-65%
  B+ = 86-89%                             C = 73-75%                        D- = 60-62%
  B = 83-85%                              C- = 70-72%                       F = 59% and below
The TAs and I are happy to assist you with written assignments during office hours, but there are no
“pre-reads” for written assignments.
What should I do if I don’t agree with a grade?
The first thing you should do is read this section extremely carefully. Students are granted the right to
appeal any grade in this class based on the following guidelines:
● All appeals on any assignment must be made no sooner than 24 hours after a grade is posted and
      no later than one week after a grade has been returned to you.


                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                        Revised 5.27.20
         o Your instructor will not respond to grade appeals made if they violate these timelines.
●    The first step of the appeal is for you to send a brief, but thorough explanation of why you feel the
     grade you have received should be changed 1. It is best to adopt a tone of curiosity (“Help me
     understand why…”) over one of opposition (“It isn’t fair…”) in these communications.
●    Once this appeal has been submitted, a written response will be given within five business days. A
     grade may or may not change. Students are welcomed to set up a one on one meeting to review this
     response, the assignment, and to strategize for future improvement.
An evaluation of the course and instructor will be conducted at the end of the semester using the
approved UT Course/Instructor evaluation forms.
Respect and civility:
         In this course, it is expected that you will hold yourself and your classmates to the values of
respect, diversity, curiosity, and inclusion when you speak and also when you listen. This policy applies
not only to making contributions in synchronous settings, but also in your written work. This also applies
to communication that you have with me or the TAs, and also to any communication you might have
with your classmates outside of Canvas (e.g., GroupMe, group chat, Slack). I reserve the right to remove
any student from any class activity at any time if I see that these standards are not being met.
Course Flags:
Ethics Flag: The course carries the Ethics flag. Ethics courses are designed to inspire critical thinking on
issues related to making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the
process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations.
Writing Flag: This course carries the Writing flag. Writing flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during
the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help
you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and
you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility,
established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Let me out! Course Drop Policy:
From the 1st through the 4th class day you can to execute a Q drop. Under Texas law, you are only
allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution.
Important Safety Information:
         If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
1
  Please do not reference the specific grade you received in this writing. Instructors cannot discuss specific grades
electronically without violating FERPA data security guidelines.


                                                                                                            5
                                                                                              Revised 5.27.20
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not
your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be
guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Standards of Conduct and Academic Integrity principles
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible.
I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for
Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.


                                                                                                           6
                                                                                             Revised 5.27.20
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support at the Counseling and Mental Health Center.
Religious Holy Days
Please notify me at least fourteen days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If you
must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment or a project in order to observe a religious holy
day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.


                                                                                             7
                                                                               Revised 5.27.20
                       Content
                       Available
Date  Day Meeting Type   (CT)                      Topics                      Assignment Due?
8-Jun M   Asynchronous     4-Jun Course introduction; Foundations
                                                                          Pre-semester and
                                 Professional communication norms;        pronouns survey due by 10
9-Jun T   Asynchronous     4-Jun Your professional reputation and EXPO    AM
  10-     Synchronous
  Jun W   (Lab)                  Elevator speeches and interviewing        Quizzes from 6/8 and 6/9
  11-                            Ethics in engineering; ethical           Email correspondence
  Jun Th  Asynchronous    10-Jun frameworks and theories                  DRAFT @ 10 AM
  15-                                                                     Virtual Interviewing due @
  Jun M   Asynchronous    10-Jun Giving voice to values                   10 AM
                                                                          Process Memos DRAFT due
  16-                            Audience analysis; Communicating         @ 10 AM; Application 1
  Jun T   Asynchronous    10-Jun strategically                            due @ 10 AM
                                                                          Email correspondence
                                                                          FINAL due @ 10 AM;
                                                                          Process Memos FINAL due
  17-     Synchronous                                                     @ 1 PM; Quizzes from
  Jun W   (Lab)                  Speaking to non-technical audiences      6/11-6/16
  18-                            Structure and organization; Outlining,
  Jun Th  Asynchronous    17-Jun thesis statements, and transitions
  22-                            Evidence and reasoning; Informing and    Mid semester feedback
  Jun M   Asynchronous    17-Jun Persuading                               survey due by 10 AM
  23-                                                                     Ethical Summary DRAFT
  Jun T   Asynchronous    17-Jun Communicating with clarity               due @ 10 AM
                                                                          Team contract due @ 10
  24-     Synchronous                                                     AM; Quizzes from 6/18-
  Jun W   (Lab)                  Peer Review                              6/23
  25-                                                                     Project outline and
  Jun Th  Asynchronous    24-Jun Visual aids; Evaluating data and sources proposal due @ 10 AM
  29-                            Virtual presentations; Q&A and           Ethical Summary FINAL due
  Jun M   Asynchronous    24-Jun counterarguments                         @ 10 AM
  30-
  Jun T   Asynchronous    24-Jun Save our slides


                                                                                           8
                                                                             Revised 5.27.20
          Synchronous
 1-Jul W  (Lab)              Confidence and delivery                    Quizzes from 6/25-6/30
                                                                       Project pitches, outlines,
                             Stereotypes and microaggressions;         and self-reviews due @ 10
 2-Jul Th Asynchronous 1-Jul Privilege                                 AM
                             Leadership and team roles; Running        Privilege statements and
 6-Jul M  Asynchronous 1-Jul effective meetings; Persuading            reflections due @ 10 AM
                             Listening; Giving and receiving feedback; Final topic selection due @
 7-Jul T  Asynchronous 1-Jul Conflict                                  10 AM
          Synchronous
 8-Jul W  (Lab)              Conflict Practicum                         Quizzes from 7/2-7/7
 9-Jul Th Asynchronous 8-Jul Managing your career; Course Wrap Up      Application 2 due @ 10 AM
                                                                       Final reports and
                                                                       presentations and group
                                                                       member evaluation due @
                                                                       5 PM; End of semester
11-Jul S  No Meeting                                                   survey due @ 5 PM
