                                   ADV345J Media Foundations
Section I [06495, 06500, 06505, 06510] & Section II [06515, 06520, 06525, 06530]
                                                 Spring 2020
Lisa Dobias, Associate Professor of Practice                BMC 4.360, Dobias@austin.utexas.edu
Section I, WAG 101 TTH 9:30 – 11:00                         Office Hours: TTH 11:00 -12:30
Section II, GEA 105 TTH 3:30 – 5:00                              & by appointment
Teaching Assistants                                         Undergraduate Learning Assistants
Zihan Yang – zhyang@utmail.utexas.edu                       Erica Campbell – ericakcampbell@utexas.edu
Emma Qiu – emmaqiu@utmail.utexas.edu                        Meg Dickson – megdickson@utexas.edu
Wan Wang – wangwan44@utexas.edu
TA & ULA office hours are posted in your lab syllabus.
                               Welcome to a Semester of Discovery!
Each semester provides new challenges, new experiments, and new learning for all of us. As you transition fully
into your upper-division education in your major, it is critical that we challenge you to really explore
who you are and how you think. Beyond delivering new course content, and developing new skill sets, this
course is designed to assist you in discovering what your post-graduation life might look like, and to start
bringing that future to life.
                Requirements for Our Not-so-Typical Introductory Course
Canvas: https://courses.utexas.edu
All materials will be posted here. A class Instagram will be established for additional timely updates and
shared content. To stay up to date, make sure you have all of your notifications for the course turned on. Also,
for ease all of our sections have been grouped together on Canvas under one lead unique. To be sure you have
your correct unique number for lab meeting times and other important items, please check your official course
schedule, not the unique number posted on Canvas.
Calculator: A basic function calculator is needed. Calculators with a memory key are recommended. Each
student is responsible for bringing their own calculator to exams.
Project Materials: You will be completing a major three-part team project in this class. You and your group
are together responsible for the costs associated with the producing, printing, binding and presenting of this
work.
Regular Lab Attendance and Participation: Once lab begins, you will be expected to attend regularly
participate and contribute. This will be a major grade component.
An Open Mind & A Good Attitude: Media is the hot spot of the communications industry today. As a core
required course, this course will be very applicable to your future career in communications, regardless of your
area of expertise.
                                                 Course Flags
Writing Flag: This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve
your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to
read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board.


Quantitative Reasoning Flag: This course also carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative
Reasoning courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of
quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world
problems.
                                                   Course Overview
In addition to carrying two flags, this is a not-so-typical course because this is a not-so-typical
time in our industry and in your career as a student. The fields of advertising and PR, particularly the
media side of things, are some of the most dynamic and rapidly transforming industries in existence. On every
front, change defines the reality of how consumers consume, participate in, contribute to, and control the media
landscape today. It is essential that all of our students, regardless of their future job title or description, have a
working knowledge of and appreciation for the world of media where our customers come into direct contact
with our brands. It is also critical for our students to understand that future professionals in advertising and PR,
they will have a place in shaping the course of the media industry unlike any generation before them. For this
reason, they must have a firm grasp on the foundations of media strategy plus a knack for experimentation in
an ambiguous and harsh environment. Finally, it is critical that our students fully understand all potential areas
for their future, including work within agencies, but also on the capacities of media providers and clients alike.
“Typical” simply just won’t cut it.
Our course is designed to provide you with a broad-based consumer-centric exposure to media. We will help
you create a solid foundation for thinking and doing that is transferable across both existing and emerging
contexts. Class lecture, practice work, outside activities, exams and projects will cover both a theoretical
exploration of media and practical application to be sure you are ready for not only your first job out of
college, but for the one you want 5…10…20 years from now.
All lecture notes, readings, videos, and other course materials will be uploaded to your class Canvas for your
review and use. Feel free to download and take notes directly on lecture slides. Note that a summary of the
daily notes is presented in most lectures in the “notes pages” section of the PowerPoint for each conversation.
The use of laptops is encouraged in class, but please refrain from extra-curricular online activities during lecture
as this is highly distracting to others around you.
Course Prerequisites: ADV 318J, STA 309 (or equivalent). Be sure you have received full credit for this
prerequisite, or else you may be dropped by the department on the 12th class day. If you have any questions,
please visit with your College of Communication Advisor as soon as possible.
                                                 Course Objectives
This course is more than learning about media. It is about becoming a fierce critical thinker who has
curiosity at your core. Building discovery and analytical problem solving into your DNA will make
you a stronger media/PR/creative/account/everything else professional. To get that process started,
by the end of this semester, you will:
–    become even smarter about how paid, earned and owned media environments work
–    experience a completely different side of the advertising and PR business
–    build a new paradigm and vocabulary so that you can talk more proficiently both now with your
     classmates and intern supervisors, and later with your future clients and colleagues
–    understand the ongoing theories and processes involved in developing robust consumer
     communities and relationships
–    better interpret data and other research findings, some of which will contradict
–    be able to identify and strategically evaluate various options
–    become more comfortable using both qualitative and quantitative support for your decisions
     and ideas
–    learn the basic tools and critical thought process involved in developing a communication
     platform, media strategy, and detailed plan of implementation
–    practice these basic tools and strategies
–    feel more prepared for a future that will most definitely require you to determine, measure,
     and meet quantifiable goals


–    have some fun!
                                                    Course Format
There are five distinct sections of this course as follows:
Part I: Navigating Today’s Media Environment
Part II: Finding Answers to Media Questions
Part III: Determining Your Media Vision & Accountability
Part IV: Making Your Vision a Reality
Part V: Selling In Your Ideas
These sections are detailed in an accompanying daily plan of attack also posted on Canvas for your
regular reference. In general, each of course sections will end with a culminating event – either an exam or project
presentation.
Successful media strategy development is a function of both art and science.
The Science of Media
• Exams: Three exams will cover materials presented in lectures, assigned readings, homework and any
guest lectures. Exams are primarily hands-on application in the form of calculation questions. Portions of the
exams will also combine short answer, true/false and multiple choice, etc. Course exams will be
administered in three evenings outside of our regularly scheduled class in a specially designated
room. If you have another documented UT conflict, or qualify for documented accommodations,
you are responsible for notifying your instructor in person by Friday, February 7 so that proper
arrangements may be made.
There will be no make-up exams given throughout the semester with the exception of students experiencing a
serious personal injury or illness that is documented by a recognized professional. Students who are affected in
this way must notify me within 24 hours of the exam and must provide the appropriate documentation upon their
return. Many issues will also need to go through the approval process via UT Student Services. Students with a
serious, on-going illness that impacts their ability to regularly participate in class or exams should consult with me
immediately regarding options to be considered.
All students should be aware of the following exam policies:
     • Make up exams are rare, only granted for those with valid excuses as just described.
     • Students must bring their UT student ID and their own calculators to the tests. Students
          cannot share calculators, and cell phones or other personal devices are not allowed as
          substitutes.
     • While taking exams, only exam papers, approved calculators, pencils and highlighters may
          be on a student’s desk.
     • Full scholastic honesty is expected. Any dishonest activities are strictly punished according to
          UT’s policy on scholastic dishonesty.
     • Exams will not be returned to students, but will be available for review during office hours.
     • Students will not be able to copy any materials off of exams while reviewing them.
     • Students entering the exam late may be denied the opportunity to take the exam.
     • Students will not be allowed to return to the exam after leaving the room.
• Final Exam: A comprehensive optional final will be delivered on the UT assigned final exam date, time
and place for this class as follows:
          Section I: Saturday, 5/16, 9:00 a.m. – 12:00 noon.
          Section II: Friday, 5/15, 9:00 a.m. – 12:00 noon.
          Please note, the university assigned final exam dates and times are subject to change by the university
administration. If you miss an exam during the regular semester, your final will replace that “0”. A higher grade
on the optional final can also be used to replace the lowest of the other three exams in the class.
• Practice Assignments: There will be optional practice assignments located on-line to help you study
throughout the semester. You will be able to check your work via on-line answer keys. Although practice


assignments in this course are optional, meaning there is no direct grade implications for completing them, they
are very highly recommended!
The Art of Media
• Strategic Communications Plan: This team project is designed to help you apply the concepts learned in
class and to provide you with the opportunity to create an inspired strategic plan. You will be required to devise
a complete plan for a real product or service. Details about the project will be provided on-line and discussed in
class when the time comes. Your plan will be broken into two distinct sections this semester. Both a printed copy
and .pdf file will be required by the due date and time to be considered “submitted”. No late work is
accepted! At the end of the project your agency will deliver a pitch of your plan to the class in 10-minute
presentation.
• Peer Evaluations: Your individual grade for each portion of the project is subject to adjustments
according to your average peer evaluation for that portion. Your individual portion and resulting final project
grade will be significantly lowered by poor peer evaluations. If your agency does not think you have put forth
the same amount of effort and the same quality of work as they have throughout the length of the project, your
peer evaluation will negatively influence your final grade.
Example: Your average peer evaluation [95%] x the total group project score = Individual score.
Please see your on-line project materials for helpful pointers on dividing up the project work and on working
with teams in general. Your on-line project materials will also include the actual peer evaluations that each of
you will complete, so you will know from the get-go the criteria used by your peers to evaluate you. This is
serious. If you have any problems with your group or a particular group member, you need to
address and resolve it immediately. If you don’t, the end result can be devastating.
Bringing it All Together
Beginning the third week of class we will meet during your regularly scheduled lab sections to review and
enhance course materials and provide you with a comprehensive look at the world of media well beyond the 40
acres. In addition to media theories and fundamentals, you will complete a series of online activities most weeks.
In addition, you will have two individual assignments designed to help you further advance in your individual
writing, presenting, and young professional thinking. These larger assignments will be detailed more in a lab
schedule which will be distributed the first week of lab.
Given the size of our class, it is required that you register for the lab section you regularly attend.
You must attend the section for which you are registered. Each student will receive one lab
absence which will apply as lab “sick days” or misses needed for other reasons, but there are no
additional make up labs. A detailed lab schedule will be distributed at the first lab session of the
semester.
                   Lab section meeting details are as follows:
                   Unique              Meeting Time                     Location
                   06495               M 11:00 – 12:00 p.m.             BMC 4.204
                   06500               M 1:00 – 2:00 p.m.               CMA 3.120
                   06505               W 1:00 – 2:00 p.m.               CMA 3.120
                   06510               M 12:00 – 1:00 p.m.              CMA 3.120
                   06515               W 2:00 – 3:00 p.m.               BMC 3.206
                   06520               W 12:00 – 1:00 p.m.              CMA 3.120
                   06525               T 5:00 – 6:00 p.m.               BMC 4.206
                   06530               W 5:00 – 6:00 p.m.               BMC 4.212
Making up lab attendance or swapping lab sections unofficially is not permitted. Attendance will be
taken in lab each week. You are expected to be present when role is taken and throughout the entire lab
session. If you are not then you will be marked as absent for grade purposes. Together, your attendance and
participation in lab, along-side of your scores on weekly activities and individual lab assignments will determine
your final lab grade.


   Finally, you are required to complete and submit the online Course Instructor Survey for your lab TA at the end
   of this semester. More details will be provided via our Canvas course site.
                                                      Grade Scale
                                Component                         Weighted Value
                                Exams                                      50%
                                Lab & Associated Activities                15%
                                Part I – Strategic Media Plan              15%
                                Part II – Strategic Media Plan    15%
                                Presentation                               5%
                                                                           100%
Grades in this course are not negotiable to give all students the same opportunities. There are no “angel
points” at the end of the semester to be fair to all students, and there are no guaranteed curves or grade
distributions. We are under the system of +/-. The following scale will be used to determine the general
breaks for final grades. Please note, in order for you to progress on to your next major course our
department requires you to make a C- or better in all major courses, including this one. If you are not an
Ad or PR major and are taking the course CR/NC, you must make at least the grade of 69.5% to earn credit
or a letter grade of CR.
                                    Weighted Score                Letter Grade
                                         92.5-100%                         A
                                         89.5-92.4                         A-
                                         86.5-89.4                         B+
                                         79.5-86.4                         B
                                         76.5-79.4                         C+
                                         72.5-76.4                         C
                                         69.5-72.4                         C-
                                ________________________A grade of C- or better is required to move on
                                         59.5-69.4                         D
                                         Below 59.4                        F
Extra credit opportunities may be offered on occasion throughout the semester. Extra credit could take the
form of additional individual activities or assignments, completion of practice work by example, attendance at
specific events, or may include the voluntary participation in research studies.
It is rare for a curve to be applied in this course. However, if there is one, it will not be determined until after
optional final exam grades are in and resulting total class scores are calculated.
                                     University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
                                      Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
To make sure we are all on the same page, the following details UT’s policy on academic integrity: “Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.”
What does this policy mean to you in this class? If you are caught cheating in any manner on lab write ups,
exams, or plagiarizing work in your project, you will be significantly reprimanded in a manner that correlates
with the severity of the problem. This can range from being required to repeat the course, to expulsion from
the University of Texas at Austin. Please take this as seriously as we do! Your thinking and writing must be


your own.
                               Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for
support.
For immediate support:
- Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
- Brief assessments and referral services
- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
                                  Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 [voice] or 471-6441
[TTY]. If this applies to you, please let me know by Friday, February 7 so that we can work together to best
meet your accommodations.
Please note if testing accommodations are part of your approved program as detailed in your UT
documentation, you will be responsible for personally scheduling all three of your exams with the Student
Services Office. Your exams will need to be scheduled for anytime that works for you on the next day
immediately following the regularly scheduled evening exam.
                                     Students with Other Conflicts
If you are experiencing any course conflicts with another official University of Texas at Austin event or
organization, or with recognized religious events or holidays, you should notify me immediately so that we can
prepare a workable solution. The official UT policy is that you must notify me at least 14 days prior to any
missed activities due to this type of conflict. Lack of planning on your part may result in our inability to work
with you.
                                                  Email Policy
Please check your email for important updates from me. However, e-mail should not be
used as a crutch or in place of meeting with us. Our entire team holds office hours
to answer specific questions about course materials or projects. Please utilize these hours
rather than writing an email novel. I will not use email as a means of communicating
about project work or practice assignments only because these topics are best discussed via conversations
before, during, or after class or during office hours due to their need for detail.
                                              Office Hours Policy
In order to see as many of you as possible, during peak periods in the semester, I may
ask you to use the sign-up sheet on my office door to secure a specific meeting time,
even during regularly scheduled office hours so that everyone’s time can be used efficiently.
Walk ups are always very welcome, but you may have to wait in line or be bumped if others have
scheduled times.
Also, during peak periods, office hour visits will be limited to 10 minutes if another student or
group is waiting. If my door is closed, it is your responsibility to knock and interrupt at your appointment time


to let me know you’re there. While waiting in the hall, please make yourself comfortable, but you are not
permitted to sit or place your personal items in the pathway out of courtesy for others and for safety
reasons. If we have a scheduled meeting, you should knock on my door to let me know you are ready.
                                      Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors,
call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                                                 Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and genderbased discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault,sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational in
stitutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discriminatio
n in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
      harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “
Mandatory Reporters,” whichmeans that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee andmust report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on- one.
Before talking with
me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether
they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies
without making an official report to theuniversity, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact
the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such
misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national
origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation,
gender identity, and gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me
and I will report it.
     •    Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
          The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual
          misconduct and discrimination.
               o    File a report of discrimination via online form
               o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
     •    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
          The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing
          federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal
          financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under
          Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.


      •    Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
           The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws
           that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected
           class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment
           Commission 800-669-4000.
                                        Instructor Closing Comments
Warning: This class will require that you think and take personal responsibility for your success!
Of course, with any new material, there is a component of memorization. However, in this course,
memorization will only get you so far. You must learn the material and be able to apply it in order
to succeed. In other words, you must think. After all, isn’t learning to think what college is about, particularly
now that you are officially upperclassmen in your majors?
Our whole team is dedicated to making sure you know how to use the materials in this course so that you can
walk out with more than you walked in with. This goes for each lecture, lab, and activity. Please let us know
how we can help make this happen for you. Don’t wait until it is too late. We will never waste your time, so
please fully partake of the learning in all that we do in here.
It is our job to make sure that you have all the information and guidance you need to learn a great
deal in this course. It is your job to see that you take full advantage of all resources and put forth the effort
needed to succeed.
                Welcome to Media Foundations. Let’s learn a ton together!
                                                  Here we go!!
