               Race, Rebellion and Revolution in the Caribbean
                                              Fall 2019
                    AFR 374E (30174) HIS 363K (38389) LAS 366 (38879)
Instructor: Dr. Nicole Burrowes
COURSE DESCRIPTION
From the Berbice Rebellion of 1763 led by enslaved Africans, to the fight led by the Saramaka
people for land rights in Suriname, the peoples of the Caribbean have challenged the status quo.
The Caribbean is also home to the Haitian, Cuban and Grenadian Revolutions. In other words,
the Caribbean can be conceptualized as a revolutionary space. In this course, students will
critically examine classic and recent works that represent these struggles. We will also engage
Caribbean thinkers who have wrestled with questions of race, gender, labor, culture, violence,
desire and memory to inform our understanding of these moments and movements. Our central
organizing question for the course is how has race been used as a mechanism of governance,
management and imperialism and how was it mobilized in movements?
This course is multimedia, interdisciplinary and organized from the vantage point of Black
Studies. In addition, one of the goals will be for students to learn the historian’s craft. Students
will engage with key themes in Caribbean history, historiography and primary sources, and
explicitly think about evidence, context, problem-spaces, representations, and change over time.
                                                                                                     1


LEARNING OUTCOMES
     •   Students will be able to deconstruct critical concepts related to this course including
         empire, colonialism, hegemony, race, racism, intersectionality, sovereignty and agency.
     •   Students will be able to explain the contexts and problem-spaces that gave rise to
         movements in various locales.
     •   Students will gain a deep understanding of the impact of race and power in the
         Caribbean.
     •   Students will strengthen their writing skills and ability to develop solid arguments.
     •   Students will effectively evaluate evidence and assess visual and written sources.
     •   Students will be able to improve their analytical abilities through various types of
         assignments, discussion, and classroom activities.
     •   Students will produce a solid research article.
REQUIRED TEXTS*
James, Marlon. The Book of Night Women. New York: Riverhead Books, 2009.
Palmié, Stephan, and Francisco A. Scarano. Editors. The Caribbean: A History of the Region and
     its Peoples. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2011.
**All additional readings will be posted on Canvas.
COURSE FLAGS
Writing (Wr) Flag:
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from your written work.
Global Cultures (GC) Flag:
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside of the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Independent Inquiry (II) Flag:
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you
in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the opportunity for
independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of
your own work.
EVALUATION
Research Article & Presentation: 40%
Participation and Attendance: 20%
Short Online Writing Assignments: 30%
Oral Presentations: 10%
                                                                                                          2


ASSIGNMENTS
Guidelines for all assignments will be posted on Canvas.
Final Research Article and Presentation (40%): Students will be expected to produce a well-
researched original 2,500-word (approximately 10 pages double-spaced) article based on the
themes of the course. Because this course has a writing flag, students will turn in multiple related
assignments and drafts in order to ensure a high-quality finished product. These assignments will
count toward the final grade for the project.
Deadlines:
Article proposal due:           Thursday, September 19th at 11:59pm on Canvas
Bibliography due:               Sunday, September 29th at 11:59pm on Canvas
Rough draft due:                Tuesday, October 15th at 11:59pm on Canvas
Polished draft due:             Sunday, November 3rd at 11:59pm on Canvas
Presentations:                  Presentations will take place during the last three class sessions.
                                Tuesday (11/26); Tuesday (12/3) and Thursday (12/5)
Final article due:              Monday, December 9th at 11:59pm on Canvas
Short online writing assignments (30%): Based on the readings, students will be expected to
post several well-written short online assignments on Canvas. These assignments are due the
night before class at 11:59 pm unless otherwise noted.
Oral Presentations (10%):
    • Each student will be expected to present a critical assessment of at least one reading
        during the course of the semester. (See guidelines below). You will have 5-6 minutes for
        your presentations. If you do not attend class on the day your presentation is due, you will
        receive a zero for this assignment.
    • Students will participate in a group presentation about a contemporary movement
        towards the end of the semester.
COURSE EXPECTATIONS
Students are expected to attend all classes, to come prepared, and to be on time. 20% of
your grade for this class depends on substantive participation and attendance. More than two
absences will negatively affect your grade. If you are late three times, it will be counted as an
absence. If for some reason, you will miss class or are running late, please let the professor and
the TA know in advance. If you want an absence to be excused, you should email both the
professor and TA in advance or with a medical note in the event of illness. Even if you do not
attend class, you are required to respond to online discussions.
Students are expected to: 1) complete all readings for each unit before the class meeting each
week; 2) post periodic short writing assignments in response to the readings online; 3) bring the
assigned texts to class for reference during discussions; 4) actively contribute substantively to the
class discussion; and 5) complete all assignments and projects on time.
                                                                                                    3


COURSE SCHEDULE
Note: Online reading responses are due on Canvas the night prior to class by 11:59pm unless
otherwise noted on the schedule below. On occasion, guiding questions will be posted 2-3 days
before the assignment is due. I reserve the right to change the syllabus based on class needs,
scheduling issues or other challenges. The updated version of the syllabus will always be on
Canvas.
Session 1: Thursday, 8/29/19          Course Overview
Session 2: Tuesday, 9/3/19            Why Caribbean History Matters
                                      Reading assignment due:
                                      Guerra, “Why Caribbean History Matters”
Session 3: Thursday, 9/5/19           Conquest and Indigenous Struggle
                                      Reading assignments due:
                                      1) Palmié, chapter 6
                                      2) Newton, “Returns to a Native Land”
Session 4: Tuesday, 9/10/19           The Haitian Revolution I
                                      *Film
                                      Reading assignments due:
                                      1) Palmié, Chapter 18.
                                      2) West, “Haiti, I’m Sorry”
                                      3) James, Book of Night Women, Chapter 1
Session 5: Thursday, 9/12/19          The Haitian Revolution II
                                      Reading assignments due:
                                      1) James, The Black Jacobins, excerpt
                                      2) Dayan, “A Women’s History of Haiti”
                 * Online reading response due Wednesday, 9/11/19 at 11:59pm.
Session 6: Tuesday, 9/17/19           Research 101 – Mini-session #1
                                      Reading assignment due:
                                      James, Book of Night Women, Chapters 2-6
Session 7: Thursday, 9/19/19          ***MEET AT BENSON LATIN AMERICAN
                                      COLLECTIONS***
                    *Assignment due Thursday, September 19th at 11:59pm –
   Research article proposal: topic, preliminary research questions, and paragraph description.
                                                                                                4


Session 8: Tuesday, 9/24/19         On Colonialism and the Question of Agency
                                    Reading assignments due:
                                    1) Maldonado-Torres, “Colonialism”
                                    2) Lee-Oliver, “Mapping Colonial Resistance”
                                    3) Césaire, Discourse on Colonialism, Excerpt.
                                    4) Johnson, “On Agency”
Session 9: Thursday, 9/26/19        Book of Night Women I
                                    Reading assignments due:
                                    1) James, Book of Night Women, Chapters 7-10
                                    2) Audre Lorde, “The Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as
                                        Power”
                   *Bibliography due Sunday, September 29th at 11:59pm.
Session 10: Tuesday, 10/1/19        Slave Rebellions in Cuba
                                    Reading assignment due:
                                    Finch, Rethinking Slave Rebellion in Cuba, Excerpt
Session 11: Thursday, 10/3/19       Research 101 – Mini-session #2
                                    Reading assignment due:
                                    James, Book of Night Women, Chapters 11-14
Session 12: Tuesday, 10/8/19        Race, War and Independence Struggles:
                                    The Dominican Republic
                                    *Film
                                    Reading assignment due:
                                    Eller, We Dream Together, Excerpt
Session 13: Thursday, 10/10/19      Book of Night Women II
                                    Reading assignment due:
                                    James, Book of Night Women, Chapters 15-17
Session 14: Tuesday, 10/15/19       Book of Night Women III
                                    Reading assignment due:
                                    James, Book of Night Women, Chapters 18-20
              *Rough draft of research article due Tuesday, 10/15/19 at 11:59pm.
                               No late papers will be accepted.
                                                                                           5


Session 15: Thursday 10/17/19    Research 101: Mini Session #3
Session 16: Tuesday, 10/22/19    Indian Indenture and Resistance:
                                 Reading assignments due:
                                 1) Palmié, Chapter 26
                                 2) Bahadur, Coolie Woman, Excerpt
Session 17: Thursday, 10/24/19   Book of Night Women – Complete book
                                 Reading assignment due:
                                 James, Book of Night Women, Chapters 21-31
               *Book review due Wednesday 10/23/19 at 11:59pm on Canvas.
Session 18: Tuesday, 10/29/19    1930s Labor Rebellions: Guyana
                                 Reading assignments due:
                                 1) Mangru, A History of East Indian Resistance, Excerpt
                                 2) Seecharan, Sweetening Bitter Sugar, Excerpt
Session 19: Thursday, 10/31/19   Research & Meetings Day
        *Sunday, November 3rd at 11:59pm – Research article, Polished Draft Due.
Session 20: Tuesday, 11/5/19     The Cuban Revolution
                                 Reading assignments due:
                                 1) Palmié, Chapter 34
                                 2) Reading TBD
Session 21: Thursday, 11/7/19    Research 101: Mini-session #4
                                 Workshopping arguments
Session 22: Tuesday, 11/12/19    Queer Activism in Trinidad
                                 Reading assignments due:
                                 1) Gill, “Erotic Islands,” excerpt
Session 23: Thursday, 11/14/19   Puerto Rico and the Question of Sovereignty
                                 Reading assignments due:
                                 1) Palmié, Chapter 36
                                 2) Fusté, “Unsettling Citizenship”
                                                                                         6


Session 24: Tuesday, 11/19/19        Contemporary Movements [Group presentations]
                                     Reading assignments due: TBD
Session 25: Thursday, 11/21/19       Contemporary Movements [Group presentations]
                                     Reading assignments due: TBD
Session 26: Tuesday, 11/26/19        Final Project Presentations
             ***Session 28: NO CLASS – THURSDAY 11/28/19 – HOLIDAY***
Session 27: Tuesday, 12/3/19         Final Project Presentations
Session 28: Thursday, 12/5/19        LAST DAY OF CLASS
                                     Final Project Presentations
                             FINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE DUE:
                              Monday, December 9TH at 11:59pm
                                *No late papers will be accepted
BASIC GUIDELINES FOR ORAL PRESENTATION ON THE READINGS:
Each presentation should be no more than 5-6 minutes. Practice and time yourself.
   1. Summarize main arguments. What is the main point the author is making? What is the
       overarching purpose of the piece? What kind of piece is it?
   2. Evaluate the evidence: What kinds of sources does the author draw upon? What historical
       record does the author make use of: Legal docs? Cultural works (e.g. films, music,
       novels)? Oral histories? Government records?
   3. Evaluate the arguments: What makes the argument “worth it?” What assumptions or
       “conventional wisdom” is the writer challenging? For whom is the author writing in
       defense of? Against? Are you convinced? Why or why not? Or are you ambivalent, and
       why?
   4. Give us some information about the author. Who is the author? What is the author’s
       relationship to the subject? What discipline or field is the author writing in?
   5. What are 1-2 questions that you would like the class to discuss?
                                                                                            7


COURSE READING LIST
Bahadur, Gaiutra. Coolie Woman: The Odyssey of Indenture. Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    2014.
Césaire, Aimé, and Robin D. G. Kelley. Discourse on Colonialism. New York: Monthly Review Press,
    2000.
Dayan, Joan. “Erzulie: A Women’s History of Haiti.” Research in African Literatures 25, no. 2 (Summer
    1994): 5-31.
Eller, Anne. We Dream Together: Dominican Independence, Haiti, and the Fight for Caribbean
    Freedom. Durham: Duke University Press, 2016.
Finch, Aisha. Rethinking Slave Rebellion in Cuba: La Escalera and the Insurgencies of 1841-1844.
    Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2015.
Fusté, José I. “Unsettling Citizenship/Circumventing Sovereignty: Reexamining the Quandaries of
    Contemporary Anticolonialism in the United States through Black Puerto Rican Antiracist Thought.”
    American Quarterly 66, no. 1 (March 2014): 161-169.
Gill, Lyndon K. Erotic Islands: Art and Activism in the Queer Caribbean. Durham: Duke University
      Press, 2018.
Guerra, Lilian. “Why Caribbean History Matters.” AHA Perspectives on History, March 2014.
    https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/march-2014/why-
    caribbean-history-matters
James, C. L. R. The Black Jacobins: Toussaint L'Ouverture and the San Domingo Revolution. New York:
    Vintage Books, 1963.
James, Marlon. Book of Night Women. New York: Riverhead Books, 2009.
Johnson, Walter. “On Agency.” Journal of Social History, 37 no. 1 (Autumn, 2003): 113-124.
Lee-Oliver, Leece M. “Mapping Colonial Resistance: Colonialism, ‘Anti-Indianism,’ and Contested
      Nationalism in the Americas.” In Critical Terms in Caribbean and Latin American Thought:
      Historical and Institutional Trajectories, edited by Yolanda Martínez-San Miguel, Ben Sifuentes-
      Jáuregui, and Marisa Belausteguigoitia, 79-86. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
Lorde, Audre. “The Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power.” In Caribbean Cultural Thought: From Plantation to
      Diaspora. Edited by Yanique Hume and Aaron Kamugisha, 421-424. Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers, 2013.
Maldonado-Torres, Nelson. “Colonialism, Neocolonialism, Internal Colonialism, the Post-colonial,
      Coloniality, and Decoloniality.” In Critical Terms in Caribbean and Latin American Thought:
      Historical and Institutional Trajectories, edited by Yolanda Martínez-San Miguel, Ben Sifuentes-
      Jáuregui, and Marisa Belausteguigoitia, 67-78. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
Mangru, Basdeo, A History of East Indian Resistance on the Guyana Sugar Estates, 1869-1948. New York:
    Mellon, 1996.
                                                                                                               8


Meeks, Brian. “The Rise and Fall of Caribbean Black Power.” In From Toussaint to Tupac: the Black
     International Since the Age of Revolution, 197-214. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
     2009.
Newton, Melanie. "Returns to a Native Land: Indigeneity and Decolonization in the Anglophone
      Caribbean." Small Axe, 17 no. 2 (July 2013): 108-122.
Palmié, Stephan, and Francisco A. Scarano. Editors. The Caribbean: A History of the Region and its
     Peoples. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2011.
Price, Richard. Rainforest Warriors: Human Rights on Trial. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
     Press, 2012.
Seecharan, Clem. Sweetening ‘Bitter Sugar’: Jock Campbell The Booker Reformer in British Guiana,
     1934-1966. Kingston: Ian Randle Publishers, 2005.
 West, Michael O., William G. Martin, and Fanon Che Wilkins. Editors. From Toussaint to Tupac: The
     Black International Since the Age of Revolution. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
     2009.
POLICIES AND RESOURCES
Policy on absences
More than two absences will negatively affect your grade. If you are late three times, it will be
counted as an absence. If for some reason, you will miss class or are running late, please let the
professor and the TA know. If you want an absence to be excused, you should email both the
professor and TA in advance or with a medical note in the event of illness. Even if you do not
attend class, you are required to respond to online discussions.
Readings and Electronic Device Policy
Please bring your readings to class, we will use them. Electronic devices will not be permitted in
class. Readings will be posted on Canvas at least one week prior to class.
Policy on late work
Assignments should be turned in on time. Points for late work will be deducted on a daily basis.
If the assignment specifies that no late papers will be accepted, that is the policy for that
assignment.
                                           University Policies
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
      • Please request a meeting with me during the first two weeks of the semester to discuss
                                                                                                          9


          any accommodations.
      •   Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
          accessible.
      •   Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination,
a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you will need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
      “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
      values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless
it is assigned as group work.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have
used in previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Integrity Policy which can be found at
the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
                                 University Resources for Students
This university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For
more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT
student, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to
                                                                                                  10


improve their writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness
and self-reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric,
consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance
their personal growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your
concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
          building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
          the first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
          not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
          Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
          Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
          procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                                                 11
