                               HDF 378L Theories of Child and Family Development
                                                    Unique #85760
                                             First Summer Session 2019
Class Meets: 1:00-2:30pm Monday through-Friday in GEA 100
  Instructor: Natalie Ammon, Ph.D.
  Office: TBA; RLM library                                        Office hours: Please email for an appointment
  Email: nammon@utexas.edu
  TA: Kathleen Holloway, B. A
  Office: SEA 2.322F                                              Office hours: TBA
  Email: kathleenholloway@utexas.edu
                                               Course Description
University Catalog Course Description:
Study and analysis of major theories in human and family development.
What will I learn?
Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
              •   Effective written communication
              •   Scientific literacy skills
              •   Critical thinking and analysis of prominent theories in the field
              •   Teamwork in reviewing and discerning relevant course content
Learning Outcomes
      1.  Students will be able to identify and better understand classical and current theories of human development.
      2.  Students will be able to compare and evaluate the utility of these theories.
      3.  Students will be able to apply theory to current social issues.
      4.  Students will be able to find appropriate scientific literature to support their ideas.
      5.  Students will be able to write a persuasive paper in a style common to the field.
How will I learn?
The course will consist of lectures, large group discussions, small group activities, in-class writing workshops, guest
lectures from UT Faculty and Staff, and seminars and workshops presented by personnel from the UT Writing Center
and UT Library.
Pre-requisites for the course:
Upper-division standing; Human Development and Family Sciences 313, 113L, and 315L with a grade of at least C- in
each; and three additional semester hours of upper-division coursework in human development and family sciences
with a grade of at least C- in each course.
                                                                 1


  How to succeed in this course:
  The instructor aims to create a warm learning environment, accurately present materials, and allow for student inquiry
  and discourse. Students who attend and actively engage in lecture, keep up with and understand readings, and apply
  themselves to all parts of the written assignments should be successful in course.
                                               Course Requirements
  Required Materials
  Laptop or notebook and a writing utensil.
  Required Devices
  Laptop as needed. Student must have regular access to the Canvas website.
  Classroom expectations
  Class attendance The expectation is that students attend each class for the entire duration. Students are allowed 2
  absences without penalty. A student with extenuating circumstances due to an emergency, a documented illness, or
  plans to observe a religious holy day should notify the instructor by email as soon as possible. Two points will be given
  for each full class attended for a possible total of 50 points.
  Class participation Strong participation includes being attentive to materials presented in class, keeping unrelated
  webpages and programs closed if using a laptop, keeping cell phones out of sight, and actively engaging in large group
  discussions, and small group activities. Two points will be given for participation during each class attended for a
  possible total of 50 points.
  Behavior expectations The expectation is that all forms of communication will be civil and that all members of this class
  are treated with dignity and respect.
   Assignments
   1. Comprehension Assignments (Learning outcome 1)
        There will be unscheduled comprehension assignments on lecture material and readings throughout each week.
        These may be completed in-class or online depending on the format. Each comprehension assignment will be worth
        2 points for a total of 20 points over the course of the semester.
   2. Writing Assignments (Learning outcome 2-5)
        The first writing assignment will be a Current Event Writing Assignment. The second writing assignment will be
        structured into 4 parts. Details for both assignments will be provided in class and will be posted on the Canvas
        website.
   Grading for this Course
   The following table represents how students will demonstrate learning and how the Instructor and TA will assess the
   degree to which students have done so.
     Assignments                                                     Points possible             Percent of Total Grade
     1. Attendance                                                   50                          20%
     2. Participation                                                50                          20%
     3. Comprehension Assignments (10 total)                         20                          8%
3. 4. Current Event Analysis                                         30                          12%
     4. Writing Assignment (in 4 parts)                              100                         40%
                                                                   2


 Course Outline
All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at the Instructor’s discretion and if circumstances require. It is the student’s
responsibility to note these changes when announced.
   Week
                             Class Topic                           Out of class activities                Assignments due
                Date   Day
                             Intro to course & Writing Center
   1      6/6          Th
                             Initial Feedback Questionnaire
          6/7          F     Contexts for Human Development
                             Technical difficulties & Overview of
   2      6/10         M     Current Event Analysis               Reading 1
                             Brainstorming activity - Topics
                                                                   Think of a possible Issues in
                             Continuation on Contexts for HD       Family & Child Development
          6/11         T     Review Issues in Family & Child       Topic for tomorrow; Work on
                             Development Written Assignment        finding a current events article for
                                                                   paper due next Monday
                             Carolyn Cunningham: Lit. Search
          6/12         W     for Issues in Family & Child          Bring laptop
                             Development Topic
                             Writing Center: Writing Process
          6/13         Th                                          Reading 2
                             Bowlby/Ainsworth
                                                                   Start to find 5-8 articles for lit.
          6/14         F     Continuation of Bowlby/Ainsworth
                                                                  review
                                                                   Bring laptop; Have access to
   3      6/17         M     Carolyn Cunningham: Lit. Review       research articles that you have        Current Events Paper
                                                                   found thus far
                                                                   Bring laptop; Create literature
          6/18         T     Literature review/develop outlines
                                                                   review & develop outlines
                                                                   Bring laptop & bring in either
                                                                   Current Events Paper or what you
          6/19         W     Writing Center: Sentence Clarity      have of Issues in Family and Child
                                                                   Development Paper for practice
                                                                   on sentence clarity.
          6/20         Th    Quimby: Freud                         Reading 3
          6/21         F     Kohlberg                              Reading 4                              Written Assignment Part 1
   4      6/24         M     Vygotsky/Bandura                      Reading 5
                                                                      3


  6/25 T  Bryan: Play Therapy           Reading 6
                                        Bring laptop & written
  6/26 W  Writing Center: Revising                                        Written Assignment Part 2
                                        assignment
  6/27 Th Montessori                    Reading 7
                                        Bring laptop & your written
  6/28 F  In-Class Writing Workshop
                                        assignment
5 7/1  M  Reggio Emilia                 Reading 8                         Written Assignment Part 3
  7/2  T  Emerging Adulthood            Reading 9
  7/3  W  Family Systems & Life Course  Reading 10
  7/4  Th HOLIDAY                                                         Written Assignment Part 4
          NO CLASS/Online Comprehension
  7/5  F
          Assignment (Readings 8-10)
          APA Style & In-Class Writing  Revise Papers based on feedback
6 7/8  M
          Workshop                      Bring laptop
  7/9  T  Social Exchange Theory        Reading 11
          Speranza: Conflict & Feminist
  7/10 W                                Reading 12
          Perspectives
          Course Wrap-up & summaries of Final papers submitted
                                                                          Final Writing Assignment
  7/11 Th Issues in Family & Child      electronically and a hard copy in
                                                                          (parts 1-4)
          Development Papers            person by the start of class.
                                           4


                                                          Policies
 Classroom Policies
 Grading Policies
All assignments must be submitted and all quizzes must be taken in order to pass this course. Students have 3 days after
an assignment has been returned or a quiz score has been posted on UT Canvas to inquire about a grade. Grades will be
rounded up at five tenths of a point or greater. For example, a final score of 82.7% would equate to a B instead of a B- in
this course. Check grades on the Canvas website frequently and alert the instructor and a TA immediately if there is an
discrepancy. Be diligent and work hard throughout the semester to avoid a disappointing grade.
          Grade             Cutoff
           A                93-100%
           A-               90-92%
           B+               87-89%
           B                83-86%
           B-               80-82%
           C+               77-79%
           C                73-76%
           C-               70-72%
           D+               67-69%
           D                63-66%
           D-               60-62%
           F                <60%
Late work
Any assignment submitted 30 minutes past the deadline will be considered late. Ten percent of the total points possible
on the assignment will be taken off of the final grade for every 24 hours past the deadline.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •   You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •   You have a right to respect.
     •   You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •   You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •   You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •   You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
     •   You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded
         or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
         and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
     • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
         energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
                                                                 5


    •    You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
         and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
     Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
     differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class
     rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you
     by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may
     make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
     University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
     integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own
     (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism
     and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
     understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the             University Honor Code which can be found at the
     following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
     which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
     are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
     Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
     there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
     possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are
     also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
     This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that
     make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
     me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
     committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs
     with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
     Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
     http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
     on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
     rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
                                                                  6


     we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
     improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
     workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
     in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
     (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
     If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
     Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
     isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
     The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
     512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
     alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
     exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
     given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
     Fire Prevention Services office.
 •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
     www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                               7
