                                     Department of Accounting
          ACC 380K.26 – Accounting and Control in Nonprofit Organizations
                                         (Government Accounting)
                                            Fall 2019 Syllabus
Instructor:       Gretchen Charrier
E-mail:           Gretchen.Charrier@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office:           GSB 5.126D
Office Hours:     M and W 11:30am – 12:30pm & T and TH 3:00pm – 3:30pm
Teaching Assistant:      Isabelle Reese
E-mail:                  isabellereese@utexas.edu
Office:                  CBA 4.304
Office Hours:            M and W 8:30am – 9:30am
Class time and location: Unique #02755 M&W 9:30am-10:45am CBA 4.326
What is this class about?
This course introduces the fundamentals of accounting for government and nonprofit organizations. It focuses on
the development and use of financial information and includes identifying and applying appropriate accounting and
reporting standards for governments and not-for-profit organizations. The course also emphasizes the issues related
to fund accounting including issues relating to long-term debt and fixed-asset accounting. Other topics include
budgeting, budgetary control and reporting, management control, financial reporting, program analysis,
measurement of output, reporting on performance, full-accrual and modified-accrual accounting, auditing, and
preparation of financial statements.
Required Textbook:
Government and Not-for-Profit Accounting: Concepts and Practices, 8th Edition (ISBN: 978-1-119-49581-9)
Granof, Khumawala, Calabrese, Smith
Available at the UT Coop or an affordable option to rent the textbook from the publisher (see link below).
https://www.wiley.com/en-
us/Government+and+Not+for+Profit+Accounting%3A+Concepts+and+Practices%2C+8th+Edition-p-
9781119495819
Other materials : City of Austin CAFR https://www.austintexas.gov/financeonline/afo_content.cfm?s=4&p=55
Course Routine
I will conduct the course by giving lectures, facilitating solutions to in-class exercises and conducting discussions in
a manner that encourages class participation by students, consistent with the objectives of the course and the time
available. Students are expected to review the chapter readings before topics are introduced in class. Students
are encouraged to ask questions and to request that particular points be explained in more detail if they remain
confused or uncertain about items discussed or if concepts remain unclear.


The instructor will post on Canvas the course syllabus, announcements, supplementary readings, old exams,
solutions to homework assignments and computer files. You will be held accountable for all materials posted on
Canvas. The computer files (mostly in Excel or Word format) are generally templates that will serve as the basis for
class discussion. You are strongly advised to check Canvas prior to each class meeting and to either print or
download to your computer the relevant templates. The assignment schedule (including dates of exams) is subject
to change during the semester. You will be held accountable for all changes that are announced in class or posted on
Canvas.
Academic Standards
A high academic level will be maintained with respect to (a) the quality of the course and (b) grading. Semester
grades will be determined using the following factors and relative weights:
                 Midterm 1                                                           30%
                 Midterm 2                                                           25%
                 Midterm 3                                                           25%
                 Graded homework                                                     10%
                 Instructor discretion (Quizzes & Participation)                     10%
                                                                                    100%
Final letter grades will be assigned according to the following criteria: A >93 A- 90-92.9 B+ 87-89.9 B 83-86.9 B-
80-82.9 C+ 77-79.9 C 73-76.9 C- 70-72.9, etc. Final grades will not be determined until the scores for all
assignments are averaged, as indicated above. Final course grades may reflect the application of a curve. The target
GPA for the course is approximately 3.4 – 3.6. All course grades are final, except in the instance of a recording error.
Exams/Quizzes:
There will be three 75 minute exams. In addition, there may be occasional short (5 minute), unannounced, quiz. A
grade of zero will be assigned for any quiz that is missed. However, in calculating final grades, the lowest quiz
grade will be dropped. The quizzes will cover the text material assigned for the day. Under no circumstances will a
student be permitted to take an exam before it is given to the class as a whole.
Homework
Homework is assigned from the textbook chapters we cover. Homework should be submitted electronically via
Canvas under Assignments. The homework consists of “Questions” to familiarize you with the content of the
chapter and aid in class discussion. Additionally, for most chapters, a “Continuing Problem” has been assigned.
This assignment requires that you review the City of Austin comprehensive annual financial report (CAFR). Your
responses to the questions should be brief (a sentence or two) plus the page or schedule relating to your response.
Each homework will be awarded either a 0 (not submitted or late), 1 (submitted on time, but not complete) or 2
(submitted on time and compete). The homework grade is the percent of all graded problems completed.
Instructor Discretion
Instructor discretion may include (but is not limited to) announced or unannounced quizzes (in or out of class),
quizzes on Canvas, participation, extra homework, or group projects. If I choose to make such assignments their
scores will be treated as part of the instructor discretion.
Class Participation: You are required to attend class and take an active part in class discussions. Do not hesitate
either to present your own views or to challenge comments of the instructor or your classmates. To encourage
students to be prepared for class I will assign specific class dates and/or topics for students where those assigned will
be “on call” to help lead the class discussion and answer questions in the class. This should not be inferred as those
students not “on call” should come to class unprepared. Each student should participate in the class discussion to
help the learning for all students.


Grading Questions or Appeals
Do not wait until the end of the semester to question or appeal grade components other than the final examination. If
you feel there exists a grading error on any of the grade components, or if you feel you need to bring to the attention
of our Teaching Assistant or me other facts or circumstances that might affect the grade for that item, you will have
ONE WEEK from the date the grade is posted on Canvas to take such action and have the matter resolved.
E-mail and Canvas
The use of email and Canvas are required for this course. I will frequently communicate with the class with
announcements and guidance and I will answer questions via email. I will use the email addresses on Canvas. They
are the email addresses that you have given the University for directory purposes. If you need to update your email
address with the University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal info/all my addresses, change your email
address. It is your responsibility to regularly check both your e-mail and the class website on Canvas.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must inform students in advance if
their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster: Web-based, password-protected class sites are available
for all accredited courses taught at The University. Class e-mail rosters are a component of the sites. Students who
do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the
Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html.
Use of Computers in the Classroom
The instructor permits students to use laptops or tablets in the classroom. Many of the files made available on
Canvas are designed so that students can insert journal entries, numeric values and notes in the course of the
classroom discussion. However, electronic devices are not to be used for other purposes, such as checking e-mail,
surfing the web or working on assignments for other courses.
Dropping the Course
Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who stops attending the class and
fails to officially drop will receive a grade of F. Consult the Academic Calendar on the Registrar’s website
(http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for specific deadlines.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.


Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both
students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the MPA Program’s Statement
on Scholastic Dishonesty at https://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-Codes-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have
agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will
be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, https://preparedness.utexas.edu/:
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first week of
         class.
     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
