                           ANT 388/BIO 384K - Applied Data Analysis
 Practical Data Science Tools, Programming, and Statistics for the Natural and Social Sciences
                       Tuesdays and Thursdays, 3:30 to 5:00 pm, SAC Room 5.112
Instructor:       Dr. Anthony Di Fiore
                  Department of Anthropology
                  SAC Room 4.100H
Contact:          anthony.difiore@austin.utexas.edu
                  512-232-2183
Office Hours:     Mondays 1:30 to 3:30 and by appointment
Websites:         Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/)
                  ADA 2020 (https://difiore.github.io/applied-data-analysis-s2020/)
Check Canvas regularly for announcements, updated class information, readings, and supplementary
materials
I. Course Description
This course provides an overview of methods and tools for
applied data analysis. It is geared toward research in
biological anthropology and evolutionary biology, but the
material covered is applicable to a wide range of natural,
social science, and humanities disciplines. Students will
receive practical, hands-on training in various data science
tools and workflows, including data acquisition and wrangling,
exploratory data analysis and visualization, statistical analysis
and interpretation, and literate programming and version
control.
Statistical topics to be covered include basic descriptive and
inferential statistics, hypothesis testing, regression, and
general linear modeling. Statistical inference will be
considered from both a frequentist and Bayesian perspective,
although neither of these approaches will be tackled at a
particularly advanced level. Additional methods and tools will
also be covered based on student interest (e.g., geospatial
                                                        –1–


data analysis, phylogenetic comparative methods, social network analysis, text corpus construction and
mining, population genetic analysis).
The course emphasizes the development of data science skills, focusing on the practical side of data
manipulation, analysis, and visualization. Students will learn to use the statistical programming language
R as well as other useful software tools (e.g., shell scripts, text editors, databases, query languages, and
version control systems).
II. Prerequisites
At least one semester of introductory statistics is recommended. Prior programming experience is not
expected, but would be helpful.
III. Suggested Texts
There are no required texts for this course, but we will be covering useful material from a number of the
following books, all of which are excellent resources for learning basic to intermediate level statistics
and R programming.
      • Davies, T.M. (2016). The Book of R: A First Course in Programming and Statistics. No Starch
         Press.
      • Crawley, M.J. (2014). Statistics: An Introduction Using R (Second Edition). John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
      • Irizarry, R.A. (2019). Introduction to Data Science. Lean Publishing.
      • Kabacoff, R.I. (2015). R in Action: Data Analysis and Graphics with R (Second Edition). Manning
         Publications Co.
      • Wickham, H. and Grolemund, G. (2017). R for Data Science. O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many other useful texts and links are noted on Resources page of the course website.
IV. Readings
Most of our readings for the semester are select chapters from the books listed above or on the
Resources page of the Canvas website. Versions of all REQUIRED readings will be posted as PDF files to
the Canvas site so that you can download them for printing and reading.
For those with further interest in a topic, I will also often post additional, OPTIONAL readings for some
weeks. Reading assignments and accompanying programming examples and exercises should be
completed before class. I strongly recommend that you carefully work through code examples included
in the readings as you prepare for class.
V. Learning Objectives
By the end of this course, you should:
      • be familiar with key concepts and methods in applied data science for acquiring and managing
         data, conducting exploratory data analyses, testing statistical hypotheses, building models to
         classify and make predictions about data, and evaluating model performance;
                                                        –2–


     •   have a facility with modern tools for data analysis, (e.g., the Unix command line, version control
         systems, the R programming environment, web APIs) and be able to apply “best practices” in
         data science;
     •   know how to interact with both local and remote data sources to store, query, process, and
         analyze data presented a variety of common formats (e.g., delimited text files, structured text
         files, various database systems);
     •   be comfortable writing simple computer programs/scripts for data management, statistical
         analysis, visualization, and more specialized applications;
     •   know how to design and implement reproducible data science workflows that take a project
         from data acquisition to analysis to presentation and be able to organize your work using a
         version control system;
     •   and be able to apply all of these tools to questions of interest in the natural and social sciences.
VI. Grading and Assessment
Course grades will be based on attendance and participation in class and on several types of
assignments as follows:
Regular attendance and participation in class – 20%
Your attendance and your participation in class constitute a combined 20% of your final grade. Simply
put, I expect you attend and contribute to this course. You should come to class with questions and
comments about the day’s materials and fully participate in class discussion and exercises. I will keep
track of attendance regularly, so absences will be noted and penalized.
Programming problem sets – 4 x 5% = 20%
Homework and programming assignments are due at the start of the class period following the one in
which they are assigned, unless otherwise noted. Depending on the assignment, you might be required
to work on your own or with a partner.
One individual data analysis replication assignment – 25%
This is an individual assignment in which, in consultation with the instructor, you will choose a published
paper and dataset from the primary literature, replicate the analyses presented in the paper, and
produce a short report on your process and success. The goals of this assignment are to give you hands-
on experience in accessing and analyzing data and in producing a reproducible data analysis workflow.
One group presentation and written R vignette and package – 25%
This is a group assignment in which, in consultation with the instructor, you will select a particular
statistical method you would like to explore further and prepare a presentation for the class as well as
an R “vignette” and package exemplifying and applying the method.
One individual data visualization assignment – 10%
Using data of your choosing, you will develop your own, creative data visualization to share with your
classmates and peers in a gallery posted online. This is your chance to be creative and mix science and
art! We will discuss this in more detail later in the course.
                                                       –3–


Extra credit
Finally, you (with a partner, if you want) can also earn up to 10% extra credit for developing a simple
interactive webpage using {shiny} that demonstrates a particular statistical procedure. Again, we will
discuss this in more detail later in the course.
Finally, I may occasionally give you "start of class" quizzes to gauge your understanding of material from
lecture, class, and the readings, but these do not impact your grade at all.
VII. Other Logistical Information
For this class, I will use Canvas – a Web-based course management system with password-protected
access at https://utexas.instructure.com/ – to distribute course materials, to communicate with you,
and to post assignments and grades. I may also ask you to use Canvas to submit some assignments.
Additionally, I will post information about resources and modules we will cover in the class on the
course website, hosted on GitHub: Applied Data Analysis 2020 (https://difiore.github.io/applied-data-
analysis-s2020/)
Behavioral Expectations
Attendance
Inasmuch as students have voluntarily sought admission to the University, I expect you to attend all class
meetings, including all lectures and all meetings of associated discussion sessions. Students may be
excused for documented medical or personal emergency and will receive reasonable accommodation
for the observance of religious holidays (see below). In these cases, they should contact me in advance
or, in cases of emergency, as soon as is practicable. Students are responsible for making up any material
or assignments they miss.
Classroom Decorum
Please remember that the classroom is a space for free and open inquiry and for the critical evaluation
of ideas, and it should be free of personal prejudice. Every student has the right to learn as well as the
responsibility not to deprive others of that right, and every student is accountable for his or her actions.
Students and instructors alike have an obligation to all members of the class to create an educational
atmosphere of mutual trust and respect in which differences of opinion can be subjected to deliberate
and reasonable examination without animus. During classroom and online discussions and interactions
with one another, please treat your fellow classmates with courtesy, civility and respect.
As a matter of courtesy to me and to your fellow students, I expect you arrive at class on time, prepared
and ready to participate. Please do not schedule other engagements during this class time.
Students are reminded that cell phone use is forbidden in class. Please shut off all cellular telephones
and pagers before class starts and refrain from checking messages and texts during class time. If this
becomes an issue, students violating this rule will be asked to leave the class. Students should also
refrain from eating in class. You are welcome to bring in water or another non-alcoholic beverage to
drink during class.
                                                       –4–


Except in cases of emergency, I expect you to remain in the classroom for the duration of the lecture or
section meeting. If you know that you will need to leave a particular class session early, please let me
know beforehand. If it is necessary to leave or enter a room once class has begun, please do so quietly
and with as little disruption as possible.
If you have trouble hearing or concentrating on the lecture or media presentation because of
distractions around you, quietly ask those responsible for the distraction to stop. If the distraction
continues, please let me know. Disruptive classroom behavior may be subject to disciplinary sanction.
Finally, please be aware that no audio or video recording of my lecture is permitted without prior,
written approval, and I do not give assignments for extra credit, so please be sure to pay close attention
to due dates of assignments.
Completion of Assignments
Students are expected to submit course work on time and to retain copies of their work until a final
grade has been received for the course. Instructors are not obliged to accept late work and may assign a
failing or reduced grade to such assignments.
Students who encounter sudden and incapacitating illness or other comparably grave circumstance
beyond their control that prevents them from completing an examination or assignment in a course
should see me immediately to discuss the situation. Under appropriate circumstances, the student may
be granted a temporary mark of Incomplete. To receive an Incomplete, students must have completed
all other requirements for the course, including satisfactory attendance, and there must be a strong
likelihood they will pass the course when all work is completed.
Religious Holy Days
By University of Texas at Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Student Feedback
During this course I will periodically be asking you to give me feedback on your learning in informal as
well as formal ways, including through anonymous surveys about how my teaching strategies are
influencing your learning. It is very important for me to know your reaction to the material we are
covering in class and on graded materials and assessments, so I encourage you to respond to these
surveys, ensuring that together we can create an effective environment for teaching and learning.
Important Policies
Late assignments
Assignments turned in late will be marked down 10% for each day or portion of a day that they are late.
                                                       –5–


Make-up assignments
Make-up assignments will not be permitted, except in the case of medical emergency (for which
documentation from your physician’s office within 2 days of the due date is required) or for observance
of religious holy days (in which case you must let me know two weeks in advance).
Review of grades
Please review all grades assignments immediately after they are returned. If you feel an error has been
made in how you were graded or if there is anything you do not understand about why you received a
particular grade, you must come to office hours or come see me in an individual appointment to bring
that to my attention within one week of the assignment being returned. Email is not an acceptable
venue for requesting a review of your grade.
VIII. Tentative Course Schedule
Below is a VERY TENTATIVE schedule of weekly topics, which represents my current plans and
objectives. As we go through the semester, those plans are LIKELY to change somewhat to enhance the
class learning opportunity. Such changes are not unusual and should be expected.
Changes, revisions, and updates to the course schedule will be posted in a timely fashion on the course
website and/or noted in class. PDF files of the readings for each class, apart from those from the primary
text, will also be posted on the course Canvas site, and you should check the course website and Canvas
sites regularly for announcements and to be prepared for class.
            Week       Topic
               1       An Introduction to R
               2       Data Science Preliminaries
               3       Statistics and Programming Fundamentals
               4       Inferential Statistics and Hypothesis Testing
               5       Reshaping, Graphing, and Plotting for Exploratory Data Analysis
               6       Simple Linear Regression and Analysis of Variance
               7       Multiple Regression and Generalized Linear Modeling
               8       Classification and Categorical Data Analysis
               9       Working with Geospatial Data
              10       Tree Building and Phylogenetic Data Analysis
              11       Scraping Data from the Web, Using APIs, Scraping Data from the Web, and
                       Working with Text
              12       Linking R to other Data Analysis Ecosystems (RMDBs, Python)
              13       Group Presentations and Vignettes
              14       Group Presentations and Vignettes
              15       Group Presentations and Vignettes
NOTE: Depending on interest, I may also run extra, optional “workshops” on other topics of possible
interest, e.g., connecting R to the Python computing language for data manipulation and analysis.
                                                       –6–


IX. Academic Integrity
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
As a student at The University of Texas, you are expected to maintain the highest integrity in your
academic work and to adhere to and abide by the University of Texas Honor Code all times. All work you
submit in this course for academic credit must be entirely your own work. You are not permitted to
collaborate with another student on a graded assignment without the express permission of the
instructor (e.g., for collaborative assignments).
You are of course encouraged to study with your fellow students and to discuss information and
concepts covered in class with one another. You are also able to give "consulting" help to or receive
"consulting" help from your classmates. However, this permissible cooperation should never involve one
student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by someone else, in hard copy or digital
form. Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student
who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment.
Penalty for violation of The University of Texas Honor Code and for all of the violations of academic
integrity discussed above can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
disciplinary action.
XI. Other University Notices and Policies
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements
Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the professor for this course is required to report for further
investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence,
and stalking committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also
requires reporting incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively
known as Title IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such
incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality,
please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and
Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these
services for any needed support and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
Use of Email for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of
this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564.
                                                      –7–


Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone)
or via the internet at http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd. Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
•    Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
     instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text
     conversion, etc.).
•    Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field
     trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given
     day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
•    Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone)
     or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
     http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone (e.g., a fellow student) who is acting differently, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior.
This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling
and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas
Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student
has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
•    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
     nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
•    If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
•    In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
•    Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
     Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                           –8–
