Course:        AD V370J /PR 367 — Integrated Com m unications Managem ent
Sem ester:     F all 2018
Meeting:       MW 5-6:30
L ecturer:     E ric Webber
               ericwebber@utexas.edu
               Alt. em ail: erictwebber@gm ail.com
               (c) 512 658 5255
               O ffice: B MC 4.358
               O ffice H ours: MW 3:30 – 4:30 TuThu 1:00 – 2:00 or whenever we can arrange it
TA:            J iahua (B ella) Yang
               jhyang@utexas.edu
               512 803 6812
Classroom :    B MC 3.206
About this class:
               One of the most important skills you can have as a professional, no matter what you do, is
               the ability to develop an informed point of view, and then articulate that POV persuasively in
               writing and in person. If we all do our jobs in this class, you will accomplish that, or at least
               get better at it.
               The communications industry is dynamic, challenging, fascinating, frustrating. It can be
               hard, but ultimately it’s very rewarding. I want this class to be the same. I’m still a working
               professional (I only teach part-time) with more than 30 years of advertising agency and PR
               experience, so much of what I teach comes from what’s actually happening in the marketing
               communications world.
Reading:       There is no textbook for this class. There will be plenty of reading, to be sure, but that will
               either be distributed in class, posted on Canvas or, more often, assigned in the form of
               Internet links. I also expect you to take the initiative to find relevant articles on your own.
How it happens:
               This course is one of UT’s Writing Flag courses, so writing will be important, but it won’t be
               the only thing we do.
               The heart of that writing will be an understanding and use of the case method. There’s
               nothing magic about that approach; it’s simply a very effective way to organize information,
               determine what’s important and what’s not and then get to your point clearly and succinctly.
               We will look at several advertising and public relations challenges similar to what you will
               encounter on the client and/or agency side of our business. We’ll talk about them in class,
               then you’ll go and solve them. Sometimes on your own, sometimes as part of a small team.
               Mostly that will be in writing, but you may also be called on to present your work to the class.
               The class will culminate with a group assignment – a written report and a presentation – that
               will put together the pieces we’ve covered in an integrated marketing plan. That’s how the
               class gets its name. This semester’s client is TrioBike. www.triobikeus.com. More on them in
               separate documents.
                                                         1


A few other things to know:
                  •    You are about to enter a world that is much more often a team sport than an individual effort. The
                       ability to effectively collaborate in groups, to marshal and exploit diverse points of view and
                       personalities, to be a good leader or follower as a situation demands are all crucial to your success
                       after graduation.
                  •    Don’t believe the cliché – curiosity didn’t kill the cat, it made the cat smarter. You’ve also chosen
                       a field where curiosity is a prized characteristic, so come to class prepared for discussion. Know
                       what’s going on in the communications world and have an opinion about it. Get comfortable with
                       challenging assumptions in a positive way and be ready to back up your
                       opinions/suggestions/beliefs. Always be prepared to respond to the simple question, “Why do you
                       recommend that?”
                  •    Readings are short and to the point. Just like our business. Class discussions require your own
                       opinion, bolstered by a command of the material assigned or the topic at hand. Add that to a
                       clear, concise, active presentation style and you’ll do well.
                  •    “Class participation” doesn’t just mean showing up and paying attention, although I appreciate
                       you doing both. I love comments, questions, opinions and any other participation from the class. I
                       always ask for it, and rarely get as much as I want. With few exceptions, there are no dumb or
                       wrong questions. And trust me. If you don’t ask questions, I will ask you. I take note, literally,
                       when people speak up. The more you do that, the better your grade. I may also throw out a topic in
                       class or via Canvas and give you a day or two to send me back your POV.
                  •    Finally, there are selfish objectives. I want each of you to eventually find jobs in the industry and
                       immediately start making an impact. Blow shit up. Make us better. That’s good for you, but it also
                       makes me look good. And UT as well. Everybody wins if you come out smarter than when you
                       came in.
Evaluation:       Individual and group written case briefs                               = 40%
                  Small group presentation                                               = 10%
                  Team Project: written analysis and presentation (50:50)                = 40%
                  Team peer evaluation                                                   =  5%
                  Class participation (see note above)                                   =  5%
                                     Total                                               = 100%
Some more important info:
1. I don’t grade on a curve. You get the grade you earn, and vice versa.
2. There is a certain degree of subjectivity in grading written assignments. What I’m looking for is not necessarily a
right or wrong answer, but rather a demonstration that you can determine what information is and isn’t important in
forming your recommendations, being able to back up those recommendations with facts and/or well thought out
opinions, and the ability to clearly and succinctly state those recommendations.
3. Language is a loose and fluid thing. Sometimes formality is important, and sometimes you can (and should) be
informal. But proper grammar, spelling, and punctuation are always important. At my firm, many managers and
directors eliminate job candidates who have even one typo in a resume or cover letter; that’s how important it is. I’m
not that severe, but I tend to be a harsh editor.
4. I don’t like to take attendance. You are paying to go to school, so ultimately, it’s your choice if you show up or not.
But because almost every assignment will be discussed extensively in class, excessive absences can affect your final
grade, maybe significantly. It’s the same in the working world. You can choose not to show up at work if you want to.
But do that too much and you’ll get fired. So here’s m y com prom ise: I’ll take roll five tim es during the course of the
sem ester, on random days. Miss three of those and you’ll drop a letter grade. Your class participation grade will likely
suffer too. O uch. I do understand that things com e up, people get sick. J ust let m e know. You’ll find m e to be very
understanding.
5. Just like in the business world, some assignments are made (and completed) in person, some are done
electronically. You will submit some assignments in class, and some will be done via email or Canvas. Back up all of
your work digitally. But it never hurts to have a hard copy too.
6. Make a habit of checking your email before class. If for any reason class has to be cancelled, I will send out an all-
class email no later than 30 minutes prior the start of class.
                                                                 2


7. It’s perfectly fine to seek outside advice, counsel or input. In fact, it’s encouraged. But the final output needs to be
your original work. Breaches of UT’s Standard of Academic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly. Don’t make me
go all Dean Wormer on you.
8. Get your work done on time. If there are extenuating circumstances, contact me as soon as possible to talk about it.
Never jeopardize your safety and health by driving recklessly or being on campus at an unsafe hour in an attempt to
meet a class deadline.
9. I expect to see some coffee, tea, Red Bull. Eat before you get here. And pick up after yourselves.
10. I promise not to take or make calls, texts or emails during class. I expect the same from you. Likewise, I want to be
accessible, but use discretion. Like you, I have a life away from the classroom. Well, maybe it’s not like yours, but you
get the point.
11. Numeric assignment scores are posted on Canvas. Final letter grades are recorded as A, B, C, D or F and available
at the Office of the Registrar's "See my grades" page located at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/grades/report.
12. Participation in UT-Austin’s Electronic Course Instructor Survey (eCIS) is required.
13. As in real life, things can and do change. The schedule is tentative and can change based on client and guest
availability, production schedules and unexpected opportunities. Students are responsible for changes to the course
Schedule as announced in class.
The legal stuff:
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. For more information, contact Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
with Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Mandatory Reading: All students agree to read then abide by the University of Texas at Austin’s Standard of Academic
Integrity and understand the nature of Academic Dishonesty as defined by UT-Austin at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php and http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a meeting, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Copyright Notice: All original materials presented in this class are protected by copyright. These materials may be used
only by University of Texas at Austin students officially registered for this semester’s class.
                                                               3
