                       Introduction to Graduate Biological Anthropology
                           Part I: Primate Morphology and Evolution
ANT 392L Unique # 31910 Fall 2018
Course website on Canvas: http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Instructor: Liza Shapiro
471-7533
liza.shapiro@austin.utexas.edu
        This course is Part 1 of a two semester core curriculum in biological anthropology. All
biological anthropology graduate students are required to take parts 1 and 2. Part 2 will be
offered in Spring 2019. Part 1 will consist of a combination of lectures, discussions and student
presentations, and will cover major topics in biological anthropology. Lab material will also be
incorporated into the course. Topics covered will include the history of the field of biological
anthropology, evolutionary theory, primate systematics, methods of phylogenetic reconstruction,
primate diversity and anatomical adaptations, and the human and nonhuman primate fossil
record. (Part 2 will emphasize primate social behavior and ecology, genetics, and human
biological variation). The goal of the course is to give you an overview of the field, while
allowing you to identify areas of research you might want to pursue at the master’s and doctoral
levels.
Course requirements and deadlines:
                                                              Due                    Grade %
Paper assignment 1                                            Sept 20                10%
Brief summary of intended term project topic                  Oct 11                 5%
Lab assignment on scaling                                     Oct 25                 15%
Paper assignment 2                                            Nov 8                  15%
Term project presentation                                     Dec 6                  15%
Term project paper                                            Dec 13                 15%
Leading class discussion                                                             15%
Participation in class discussion                                                    10%
Readings:
Textbooks:
Whitehead P, Sacco W, and Hochgraf S (2005) A Photographic Atlas for Physical Anthropology.
Morton Publishing Company.
Introduction to Physical Anthropology (2018) Jurmain, Kilgore, Trevathan, Ciochon, and
Bartelink. Cengage. 15th Edition.
Other required readings: Numerous articles are available online via the Canvas course website
http://canvas.utexas.edu/


Daily routine: Most weeks I will lecture on the assigned topic for the first half of the time
period. The remaining time will be used for class discussion on the assigned readings. Please
read all assigned readings before class meets each week, and be prepared to discuss them.
Leading class discussion: Each student will be required to lead one class discussion. This will
require you to be responsible for summarizing the essence of that day’s reading assignments, as
well as preparing leading questions to ask the class that will generate discussion. All students are
expected to participate in discussion, every day.
Short papers and lab assignments: Please see instructions below.
Term project presentation: Each student will be required to conduct a small research project
during the course of the semester and then present the results the last day of class in a 10-15
minute professional-style presentation. The goal of this assignment is to get your “feet wet” by
doing original research and learning how to present your data as you would at a national
conference (e.g. American Association of Physical Anthropologists). I will meet with each
student individually to help you figure out your research topic, and to help you identify the
resources you need to carry out your project. If you are unable to collect original data, as an
alternative you may compile data from the literature to analyze in a new way.
By Oct. 11 at the latest, each student must submit a brief description or outline of his or her
intended paper/project topic for approval.
Term project paper: You are also required to write a paper on your research project in journal
article style. This paper should be approximately 15 pages long, but no more than 20 (double
spaced, 12 pt font, one inch margins, excluding references and figures).


                    Introduction to Graduate Physical Anthropology
ANT 392L Unique # 31910 Fall 2018
Shapiro
                                          Schedule
 Aug 30  Organizational meeting
 Sept 6  Past, present and future of biological anthropology
 Sept 13 Evolutionary theory, adaptation, and natural selection
 Sept 20 Macroevolution, classification, and phylogenetic reconstruction (Paper 1 due today)
 Sept 27 Primate Taxonomy, systematics and diversity (Including in-class lab on primate anatomy)
 Oct 4   Primate anatomy and adaptations I: Body size, locomotion, and postcranial anatomy
 Oct 11  The primate fossil record I: Primate origins and early primates
         (term project topic description due today)
 Oct 18  Primate anatomy and adaptations II (Guest lecture: Carrie Veilleux)
 Oct 25  The primate fossil record II: Anthropoid evolution
         (Lab assignment on limb bone scaling due today)
 Nov 1   Early hominins and the evolution of bipedalism
 Nov 8    The evolution of Homo I (Paper 2 due today)
 Nov 15  The evolution of Homo II
 Nov 22  Thanksgiving
 Nov 29  Origin and dispersal of anatomically modern Homo sapiens
 Dec 6   Student project presentations (Written paper due Dec 13 AT NOON)


Paper 1 Assignment: Historical and current perspectives on biological anthropology
PAPER DUE SEPT 20
Read the papers assigned for Sept 6 and write a 5-10 page paper (double-spaced, 12 point font, 1
inch margins) addressing the following questions:
(You are welcome to read other relevant papers you may come across, but it is not required).
How has American biological anthropology changed in the last hundred years or so? Should it be
called physical or biological anthropology? Is biological anthropology a biological science or a
social science? Why is biological anthropology at UT housed in the College of Liberal Arts?
Should biological anthropology remain part of the “four-field approach to anthropology or
should it be a more separate, specialized discipline?
Paper 2 Assignment: Debates in Biological Anthropology
PAPER DUE Nov 8
Find relevant references, and then write a 5-10 page paper (double-spaced, 12 pt font, 1 inch
margins) addressing the following question. Possible topics are suggested below, but feel free to
choose any topic that has been the subject of debate in the physical anthropology literature.
What role do stubborn debates have in advancing our understanding of a topic?
Do they help or hinder progress? Do participants in these debates remain objective or do they
become too closely tied to their point of view?
(Be sure to summarize and contextualize the debate before addressing the question).
Suggested topics (There are many more – feel free to work on a topic of your choice! The
debates can be from any time period in the physical anthropology/evolutionary literature).
How much emphasis should we place on natural selection to explain variation in phenotypic
traits?
How does speciation occur?
What was the most critical selective factor in the origin of anatomical features that set primates
apart from other mammals?
Who/where were the earliest anthropoids, and what were their adaptations?
What was the locomotor behavior of Australopithecus afarensis?
What was the locomotor behavior of the common ancestor to chimpanzees and humans?


Where and when was the origin of anatomically modern Homo sapiens?
      Term project: presentation and paper (Presentation due Dec 6, Paper due Dec 13)
Term project presentation : Each student will be required to conduct a small research project
during the course of the semester and then present the results the last day of class in a 10-15
minute professional-style presentation (using Powerpoint). The goal of this assignment is to get
your “feet wet” by doing original research and learning how to present your data as you would at
a national conference (e.g. American Association of Physical Anthropologists). I will meet with
each student individually to help you figure out your research topic, and to help you identify the
resources you need to carry out your project. If you are unable to collect original data, as an
alternative you may compile data from the literature to analyze in a new way.
Term project paper: You are also required to write a paper on your research project in journal
article style. This paper should be approximately 15 pages long (double spaced, 12 point font),
but no more than 20. It should have the following sections: Introduction (background), Materials
and Methods, Results, Discussion, Conclusions.
Here is a guideline for how you will be graded on each component:
Presentation grade:
     Ability to keep presentation within 15 min. time limit (excluding technical difficulties)
     Organization of presentation
     Quality of visuals
     Clarity of expression
     Handle on material/ability to answer questions
     Content/effort put into research project
Written paper grade:
     Paper organization
     Writing clarity
     Originality of research
     Thoroughness of background (ability to put your work into the context of related research
         and discuss its significance)
     Explanation of methods
     Quality of analysis
     Use of appropriate references
     Working within the page limits


Note on UT policies:
Religious holy days. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be
given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Absence for military service. In accordance with section 51.9111 of the Texas Education Code,
a student is excused from attending classes or engaging in other required activities, including
exams, if he or she is called to active military service of a reasonably brief duration. [The
maximum time for which the student may be excused has been defined by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board as "no more than 25 percent of the total number of class meetings
or the contact hour equivalent (not including the final examination period) for the specific course
or courses in which the student is currently enrolled at the beginning of the period of active
military service.”] The student will be allowed a reasonable time after the absence to complete
assignments and take exams.
Students with disabilities: Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/), at ssd@austin.utexas.edu, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-
410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations. Please inform me as soon as possible if you need accommodations.
Honor Code: Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor
Code.:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from The
University. Scholastic dishonesty" includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair academic
advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor), or the attempt to
commit such an act.
For a tutorial and information on plagiarism, see
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Also, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php


Guns.
As of August 1, 2016, due to the passage of S.B. 11 (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu), licensed,
concealed handguns are now allowed in most campus buildings, including classrooms. If you
hold a license to carry a concealed weapon, it is your responsibility to know and follow the
Texas and University policies listed here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students. Visible
weapons or threatening behavior will be reported to the UT Police Department immediately.
The following statement serves as a reminder - I am required to notify you of this verbally, and I
will do so in class:
Based on my legal right to ban guns from my UT office, no guns are allowed in my office (SAC
5.128). Leaving a gun unattended (as it would be, if left outside my office) is against the law.
Please plan accordingly. YOU are always welcome in my office, just not your gun. Thank you.
Emergency evacuation: (Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ )
       Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
       Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
       Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
        Services office.
Other useful information:
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin The University of Texas has numerous resources
for students to provide assistance and support for your learning.
            o    Sanger Learning and Career Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
            o    University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
            o    Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
            o    Career Counseling: http://ugs.utexas.edu/vick/career
            o    Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/


Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
    If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
       Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
       behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
       Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
       Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
       5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
