                                                                                            1
Dr. Spellberg                                                        Fall 2019, W 3-6 pm,
Office:
Office Hours:
spellberg@austin.utexas.edu
Telephone: 512-475-7202
HISTORY OF ISLAM IN THE UNITED STATES, HIS 350R-22, ISL 372, RS 346,
AMS 346
Course Description
This course is intended to do three things: provide a brief introduction to Islam for those
unfamiliar with the religion and its early history; define the role of Islam and early
American views of Muslims in the founding history of this country; and introduce
students to major issues concerning contemporary American Muslims. The course
surveys the presence of Islam in the United States from the colonial era to the twenty-first
century through the use of historical documents and contemporary media, with a special
focus on the politics of religion and race.
The course is divided into three sections. The first explores the origins of Islam through
primary textual examples. The second section focuses on early American views of Islam
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, with an emphasis on the earliest Muslims in
the United States. The final section of the course analyzes the diversity of the
contemporary American Muslim population, together with the politics surrounding
notions of race, gender, immigration, and citizenship. Special emphasis placed on the
challenges faced by young American Muslims in the twenty-first century. The course
interrogates the question of whether one can be both American and Muslim in the 21st-
century U.S
Objectives and Academic Flags
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the
university core curriculum. The course carries 3 University-approved “Flags”: Cultural
Diversity (CD), Independent Inquiry (II), and Writing (WR). The aim of courses with a
CD flag is to “increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of American cultural
experience as it applies to marginalized communities, their history, beliefs, and
practices.” The course is designated also as a Writing Flag, which features assignments
designed to improve written communication. The Independent Inquiry Flag focuses on
communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal responsibility, and social
responsibility.
Required Readings
Moustafa Bayoumi, How Does It Feel To Be a Problem? Being Young and Arab in
America (2008). You will need a copy of this book for in-class work and an essay.
Jonathan Brown, Muhammad: A Very Short Introduction (2011) [posted on Canvas]
Edward E. Curtis, IV, Muslims in America: A Short History (2009)
Kambiz GhaneaBassiri, A History of Islam in America (2010)
Shabana Mir, Muslim American Women on Campus: Undergraduate Social Life and
Identity (2014). You will need a copy of this book for in-class work and an essay.


                                                                                          2
All other readings (including Brown book) posted on Canvas Website.
All books on sale at the University Co-op (cheaper online sellers), and all books on
reserve at PCL.
Grading/Requirements: Late Assignments Will Incur Grade Penalties
Journal Entries: 10%, assigned over the semester and due in class. No late work
accepted.
Attendance Required/Class participation -unexcused absences result in deduction of
points from the final grade.
18 September: Quiz 10%
25 September, Timeline of Islam in Early America, 5%, due in class
2 October: First Essay 20% due in class
6 November: Second Essay, 20 %, due in class
13 November: First draft of biography 5%, due in class; returned 20 November
20 November and 4 December, Oral presentations of biographies, 10%
4 December, final draft of biography 10% and final essay due in class, 10%
        *For this class, you must buy a notebook of lined paper 8 x 11 inches for taking
notes.
        No computers or electronic devices of any kind will be permitted in this class,
unless you are asked specifically to use them.
        Required Journal assignments to pass in in class should be typed in 12-point-
font and turned in when required as per the syllabus.
        *Students should also bring readings as assigned for discussion on
the day specified in the syllabus.
Final Grade Distribution (A 94-100), A-(90-93), B+ (87-89), B (83-86), B- (80-82),
C+ (77-79), C (73-76), C- (70-72), D+ (67-69), D (63-66), D- (60-62), F Below 60.
Grades not posted on Canvas.
        Religious observances are always understood as excused absences, but the
instructor must be informed 14 days prior, as per UT policy.
         Services for Students with Disabilities 471-6259
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ should be contacted along with the instructor
directly if special arrangements are necessary.
        The UT Honor Code is enforced. Do not plagiarize. Strict UT penalties apply for
academic dishonesty: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html
        If you become ill or stressed, consider 24/7 Nurse Advice: 512-475-6877; the
Health Center https://portal.uhs.utexas.edu/login_directory.aspx, or counseling available
24 hours: 512-471-2255.
        This course content may provoke heated disagreement. Students are
required to display respect for the views of their classmates during class
discussion. One of the aims of this course is to foster open, civil, and
scholarly exchange, despite differences. In other words, we will work on
skills that employ listening and foster the exchange of ideas, striving for
dialog in most instances, not debate.


                                                                                       3
I. ISLAM: ORIGINS
Week 1 August 28: Class Objectives/Assignments
Handout: “Comparison of dialogue and debate.” Professor’s expectations for students
and their responsiblities.
Week 2 September 4: Sources of the Faith: The Prophet and His Family
Readings
Handout: Verses of the Qur’an.
Canvas: Brown, Muhammad. (all).
Canvas: McAuliffe, “Fatima,” Spellberg, “‘A’isha,” and Stowasser, “Khadija.”
Canvas: Amartya Sen, “Civilizational Imprisonments,” and Williams, Word of Islam, 1-
35 (internal 13-39).
          *Journal Assignment #1 due in class: In two paragraphs, describe the main
argument of “Civilizational Imprisonments” and explain how it might apply to this
course. From the Williams reading, in one paragraph, describe the importance of prophets
in Islam. Select one quotation from Brown’s book and be prepared to explain why you
think it worthy of class discussion.
FILM
Week 3 September 11: Conquest and the People of the Book, Muslim Women in
History, Then and Now; 9/11 American Muslim Responses
Bring your computers to class
Readings/Books: Curtis, “Muslims after 9/11,” 97-118, pay attention to 117-118, “Fatwa
against Terrorism.” Xerox and bring to class.
GhaneaBassiri, 1-8.
Canvas: Stowasser, “Khadija,” and Khan, “Of Cyber Muslimahs: Wives of the Prophet
and Muslim Women in the Digital Age,” from Khan, Muhammad in the Digital Age
(2015), 108-128.
Canvas: Hadia Mubarak, “Crossroads,” 65-70; Naheed Hamid, “Hyphenated
Identity,”126-130; Zainab Alwan, “Shock and Awe,” 184-189, from Maria M. Ebrahimji
& Zahra T. Suratwala, I Speak for Myself: American Women on Being Muslim (2011).
         **Journal Assignment #2 due in class: Read about the Prophet’s wife Khadija
in Stowasser, then explain in a paragraph how she is depicted on the Web by the
anonymous “Cyber Muslimahs,” (female Muslims) featured in Khan’s article.
          Briefly (one paragraph each), describe how the essays by Mubarak, Hamid, and
Alwan (above on Canvas) offer insight into American Muslim reaction to the tragic
attacks of 9/11/2001.
         On your computers, in class, we will explore this Web Site, Women’s Islamic
Initiative in Spirituality and Equality: https://www.wisemuslimwomen.org/
           Look for mention of historical Muslim women (Khadija or ‘A’isha or Fatima) on
https://twitter.com/WISE_Leaders How are these historical figures described? Find and
compare the objectives of the group’s “Congressional Briefing.” Who was there? What
were the objectives? https://www.wisemuslimwomen.org/


                                                                                             4
Week 4 September 18: Muslim Views of Non-Muslims, the Crusades, and European
Depictions of Muslims
Quiz
Canvas: Usamah ibn Munqidh, “An Appreciation of the Frankish Character,”
excerpt from his autobiography, An Arab-Syrian Gentleman and Warrior in the Era of
the Crusades, trans. Hitti (1929).
Canvas: Williams, Word of Islam, marked for this date, pp. 36 to end.
Canvas: “Pact of Umar,” and “How the Jizya Is To Be Collected”
        ***Journal Assignment # 3 due in class: Explain in two paragraphs the
importance of the “Pact” and the “Jizya” as historical documents. What do they reveal
about Muslim interactions with non-Muslims? Then, from the perspective of the Muslim
author, describe who the “Franks” are and what he defines as “the Frankish Character.”
Two paragraphs.
Canvas: Images of the “Pope and Turk” and “Mahomet.” Prepare to discuss in class.
        In addition, in class we will consider other European visual depictions of Muslims
from the medieval and early modern era.
II. ISLAM IN FOUNDING AMERICAN HISTORY
Week 5 September 25: The Qur’an in America
Field Trip to the Harry Ransom Center at 3:30. We leave from class.
Timeline of Islam in early America due, along with Journal assignment
Canvas: Spellberg, “What Thomas Jefferson Learned from His Qur’an – and Didn’t,
[1765-1786],” 81-123, from Thomas Jefferson’s Qur’an: Islam and the Founders (2013).
        Read online, excerpts from the first English Qur’an of 1649, The Alcoran of
Mahomet: https://archive.org/stream/alcoranofmahomet00dury#page/n3/mode/2up Read
these sections: “The Translator to the Christian Reader,” “A Summary of the Religion of
the Turks,” (both before the Qur’an translation), and on p. 395, after the translation at the
very end of the text, “The Life and Death of Mahomet,” and “A Needful Caveat or
Admonition to the Reader.
        ****Journal Assignment #4 due in class. Based on Spellberg’s book, create a
typed timeline of 20 important events/documents/actions concerning Islam and Muslims
in the U.S. Of these, list and be prepared to defend what you consider to be the top 3
dates/events in the chapter. Second, from the online 1649 Qur’an translation, consider
what 3 factual errors exist in the presentation of the Prophet’s life and Islam. Why is
there a “caveat” needed by the translator for the reader? (Two paragraphs)
First Essay Assigned
Week 6 October 2: Early American Debates about a “Religious Test” in the Constitution
- and Muslims as Future Federal Office Holders, President Included
First Essay Due. Bring these documents on Canvas to class.
Canvas: Documents for essay: U.S. Constitution Article 6, clause 3; and
Elliot’s Debates, North Carolina state constitutional ratification convention. Reading
begins on Wednesday July 30, 1788, pp. 191-215.


                                                                                           5
Week 7 October 9: Islam, Race, and Slavery
Readings/Books: Curtis, ix-24; GhaneaBassiri, 9-94
BRING YOUR COMPUTR TO CLASS.
Canvas: “Slaves and Slavery,” [in Islam], Brockopp, Encyclopaedia of the Qur’an, vol.
5: 56-60; Benjamin Franklin, “Islamic Parody on Slavery,” (1790).
Canvas: “The Life of Omar ibn Said, Written by Himself (1831)” from The Life of Omar
ibn Said, trans. Alrryes (2011), roughly 18 pages.
        ***** Journal Assignment # 5 due in class: Write a brief life story, based on
Omar ibn Said’s autobiography. Explain why you think this account should be included
in an American history class, or not. Why do you think there are no biographies of
African Muslim slave women? Three paragraphs total.
        Analyze how Benjamin Franklin uses Islam to push for the abolition of slavery in
the U.S. in 1790. Provide in your journal examples of what Franklin correctly understood
about Islam and what, if anything, he got wrong. What is the difference, if any, between
slavery in the Islamic world (refer to Brockopp article above) and the U.S. in 1790?
        Omar ibn Said’s life and papers were put online at the Library of Congress
this year. They include other accounts by Muslim slaves:
https://www.loc.gov/item/prn-19-004/only-known-surviving-muslim-american-slave-
autobiography-goes-online-at-the-library-of-congress/2019-01-15/ The slave narratives
and writings are at: loc.gov/collections/omar-ibn-said-collection/about-this-collection/.
        We will attempt to find evidence for the lives of female Muslims enslaved in
North America through online database searches in class.
FILM
III. ISLAM IN CONTEMPORARY AMERICA
Week 8 October 16: Race, Religion, and Immigration to the U.S.
Readings: Curtis : “The First American Converts to Islam,” 25-46; “Twentieth-Century
Muslim Immigrants; From the Melting Pot to the Cold War,” 47-71. GhaneaBassiri, 95-
271.
CANVAS: Helen Samhan, “Not Quite White: Race Classification and the Arab-
American Experience,” Arabs in America: Building a New Future, ed. Michael Suleiman
(1999), 209-226.
CANVAS: “Eligibility of Arabs to Naturalization,” Immigration and Naturalization
Service (INS), Monthly, October 1943, pp. 12-16.
Online: Reports of the Immigration Commission (1911), Dictionary of Races or Peoples
(1911): https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=uc1.b3425502&view=1up&seq=17
        ******Journal Assignment #6 due in class: What is the Dictionary of Races or
Peoples? Who are its authors? Who paid for its creation? What is its aim? (The link will
take you to a table on p. 5 that classifies hierarchies of “races and peoples.”) What can be
learned about the number of racial systems extant for ordering people in the U.S. from
this chart? How might this aid in determining policies for U.S. immigration – in 1911?
Read the introduction through page 5. Answer the previous questions in two paragraphs.
        Then try typing in the search box the words: “Arab,” “Arabian,” “Moslem,” and
“Jew,” or “Hebrew.” How many references are there for each term – and which has the
most numerous descriptions? How are Arab/Arabian and Hebrew/Jew related, if at all? In


                                                                                         6
the Samhan article, why and when are Arabs [are all Arabs Muslim?] described as not
“white”?
        Read the Immigration and Naturalization Service statement of 1943 on
“Eligibility of Arabs to Naturalization.” XEROX and bring to class. Why are
Arabs/Muslims eligible for citizenship? In two paragraphs, what is the argument made by
the INS for their new policy of inclusion as future citizens?
Week 9 October 23: Anti-Mosque, Anti-Sharia Resistance to the Practice of Islam
Assignment of Second Essay.
BRING YOUR COMPUTER/Bring the Bayoumi book to class.
Reading: Curtis: 72-96; GhaneaBassiri, 272-326. Bayoumi, How Does It Feel to Be a
Problem? All.
Canvas: Marzouki, Mosque Controversies: Moral Offense and Religious Liberty,”69-
105, and “The Anti-Sharia Movment,” 106-137,” chapters from Islam, An American
Religion (2017), esp 120-123 on “Save our State [Oklahoma state constitutional
amendment banning “Sharia.”]..
Canvas: “Oklahoma Sharia Law Save our State Amendment_Federal Court Ruling
against the State of Oklahoma,”January 10, 2012.”
Be prepared to write a response to questions about individuals in Bayoumi’s book to be
discussed in groups.
Week 10 October 30: To Be Young and Muslim in 21st-Century America
BRING YOUR COMPUTER/Bayoumi book to class. Group work on this book
continues.
Biography essay assigned; individuals meet with Dr. Spellberg to discuss topics.
Readings: Curtis, “Chronology,” 119-122.
Group work on Bayoumi continues and reports by groups given.
        *******Journal assignment #7 due in class: Find short films by “Muslim
Youth Voices,” at link: https://worldchannel.org/show/muslim-youth-voices/
        Watch and write 2-3 sentences about your reaction/feeling/questions about the
following films: “Wings of Freedom”(5:20), by Jannah Sellers, Sumaya Mahmoud
(Fremont, CA); “Screened,” (2:36) by Iqbal Maxamed (Minneapolis); “BFF?” (1:41), by
Aisha Aden (Minneapolis); “Black Muslim Woman,” (1:48), by Mikel Aki’leh (New
York); “Fair and Lovely,” (2:53), Jensine Raihan (New York); “Identity Crisis,” (3:14),
Abdirahman Aden and Yousif Ibrahim (Portland, OR); “Graduation,” (2:43) by Mahya
Shakibnia-Shirazi (Portland,OR); “Comfort-Ability,” (6:05), by Primi Akhtar (New
York); “Long Live the Queen,” (3:39), by Aaishah Ale-rasool (Plano, Texas); “The
Apple,” (2:36), by Zara Shah (Plano, Texas); “Syrian Plight,” (3:43) by Dunya Khalil
(New York). Total/viewing listening c. 30 minutes.
    Once you’ve seen all of these, choose one additional film not on the list above. Why
do you think it’s worth sharing with the class – and explain why in a paragraph. What is
the benefit of these films to our class – and to our understanding of American Muslim
youth?


                                                                                          7
Week 11 November 6: What is Islamophobia? Incidents in the Nation and Texas
Second Essay Due
Readings; GhaneaBassiri, 327-381.
Canvas: Marzouki, “The Face of Anti-Muslim Populism,” 138-167.
Online: Leila Fadel, May 15, 2019, “American Muslims in Public Life Say They Face
Outsize Scrutiny,” “https://www.npr.org/2019/05/15/722158148/american-muslims-in-
public-life-say-they-face-outsized-scrutiny
https://diversityandciviclife.org/research/islamophobia-in-texas/ ; (access and read this
report); and this article: http://www.aljazeera.com/indepth/features/2016/08/texas-
muslims-threatened-increasing-islamophobia-160819195741303.html
        ********Journal Assignment #8 due in class.
        Define what “populism” is as an anti-Muslim political force, according to
Marzouki in one paragraph. Then, focus on GhaneaBassiri’s “Epilogue,” 379-381. Do
you agree with the author that “. . . Muslims in America occupy some sort of liminal
space as semi-civilized, not-quite-black, not-quite-white, not-quite-American, not-quite-
Muslim individuals”? (380). What does “liminal” mean, according to GhaneaBassiri?
Where does this concept come from? Do you agree with this conclusion to his study: “In
their history, American Muslims repeatedly, and under varying circumstances, have
related Islam and America to one another successfully. And they have done so because
both Islam and America (as a national identity) have been diverse and polysemous.
American Muslim experiences have spoken out of a poly-ethnic world in a polysemous
tongue, one which we have yet to comprehend.” (380-381) Respond in two paragraphs.
         Then, define “Islamophobia” in one paragraph, based on the online readings
above. Search the Web for one Texas incident in 2018-2019 which might be defined as
Islamophobic. It should be found in a reputable news source. Bring that example in to
share with the class.
Week 12 November 13: Muslim Life on Campus and Islam in Science Fiction, Fantasy,
and Comics
First draft of biography essay due
BRING YOUR COMPUTER AND THE MIR BOOK TO CLASS
Reading: Mir, Muslim Women on Campus: Undergraduate Social Life and Identity (all).
Canvas: “The Influence of Muslims and Islam in Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Comics,”
pp. 323-348. (Recommended, not required. Music fans may wish to explore the impact of
Islam on Hip Hop in America, for example in Su’ad Abdul Khabeer, Muslim Cool: Race,
Religion and Hip Hop in the United States (2016), a study based in Chicago, Illinois; or
Hisham Aidi, Rebel Music: Race, Empire and the New Muslim Youth Culture (2014).)
        *********Journal Assignment #9 due in class: Based on the
Hankins/Thornton article, which aspect of Muslim/Islamic influence in popular literature
surprised you the most? Two sentences. Is there such a thing as a female and Muslim
superhero in comics? Search the Web to find the answer and record your findings briefly.
        Second, from the Mir book, focus on one named interview subject and find out
what she says in each of the 3 core chapters: chapter 3 (alcohol); chapter 4 (dress);
chapter 5 (dating). Link up the quotations of this female figure in each of the three
sections. Be prepared to discuss variations of these women’s views among those
interviewed in the book in groups. (The list of those college women interviewed with


                                                                                       8
their names is in the Appendix 187-188.) Are they real names? What does the author say
about her methodology/choices of interviewees? What is “Orientalism”? What is
“stigma”? Why are these terms methodologically important to the author, Dr. Mir?
        In class group work on final essay, focused on Muslim American Women on
Campus.
        Finally, let’s not forget the American Muslim men. Explore this link:
https://www.patheos.com/blogs/loveinshallah/2014/01/23/what-do-you-think-of-when-
you-hear-the-words-muslim-man/
        Please comment on Mohammed Shamma’s description of growing up in Houston,
Texas, in 2 sentences… He’s written an article for this important collection about
American Muslim men, titled: Salaam, Love! American Muslim Men on Love, Sex &
Intimacy (2014). Read his 2014 interview, “Salaam, Mohammed Shamma!” here:
https://www.patheos.com/blogs/loveinshallah/2014/01/27/salaam-mohammed-shamma/
See his vimeo promo for this collection of essays here:
https://www.patheos.com/blogs/loveinshallah/2014/01/23/what-do-you-think-of-when-
you-hear-the-words-muslim-man/
FILM
Week 13 November 20: Student Presentations of Biographies
Drafts of biography essay returned to students with comments
Week 14 November 27 NO CLASS THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
Week 15: December 4: Last Class Day: Student Presentations of Biographies Continue
Final Biography Essay and Final Essay on “Muslim American Women on Campus”
due in class
