                                                 Course Syllabus
                                   Biology 326R– General Microbiology
                                                  Summer, 2019
Instructor: Dr. Peter King                              Classroom: 10-11:30a, GEA 105
Office: See below                                      email: Please use Canvas
Office Hours: Daily, 11:30a-12:30p, MBB 1.226
Teaching Assistant: Haibo Li                           email: haiboli@utexas.edu
Office Hour: Thursdays 4-5p, RLM 5.112
Introduction: Biology 326R gives an overview of the major areas of microbiological study, including cell structure
and function, genetics, host-microbe interactions, physiology, diversity, and virology.
Prerequisite: Credit with a grade of at least C- or registration for Biology 325 or 325H, and Chemistry 302 or 302H
with a grade of at least C-.
Optional Text: Prescott's Microbiology, 10th Edition, Joanne Willey, Linda Sherwood and Christopher J. Woolverton
Copyright: 2017 Garland Science. New York, NY. (ISBN-13: 978-1259281594; ISBN-10: 1259281590).
Grading:
Exams: There will be four lecture exams (100 points each). The last exam will take place on the last day of regular
class.
In-class questions: There will be two questions per day asked in class and answered by UT Instapoll. At the end of
the semester the % correct/total questions for each student will be applied to 25 points for a maximum of 25 points.
Other assignments: 2 small assignments will be assigned later in the course and will constitute a total of 20 points.
Exams              400
Questions           25
Assignments         20
Total              445
Final letter grades will be on assigned as follows:
         A=        100%-90%
         B=        89%-80%
         C=        79%-70%
         D=        69%-60%
         F=        <60%
Exam dates:
Exam 1 – Friday, June 14
Exam 2 – Friday, June 21
Exam 3 – Friday, June 28
Exam 4 – Friday, July 11


Course on CANVAS: A CANVAS web site with class announcements, lecture notes, handouts, and practice exams
can be found at: http://canvas.utexas.edu (your UT-EID is required). Canvas will be used to communicate with you
about important information related to the course. You are responsible for making sure you receive these notifications
and respond when needed. Instructions on how to best set up your notification preferences can be found at
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/studenttutorials.
Attendance: There is no formal attendance policy. Make-up exams will only be given if it is scheduled in advance
or in the case of emergency situations as determined by the lecturer .
Academic Honesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from The University. Since such dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of The University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced.
Recommendations Regarding Emergency Evacuation: from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,512-471-
5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
          - Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
            when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
          - Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
            the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
          - Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
            class.
          - In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
          - Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
            University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
          - Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
          - Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
            www.utexas.edu/emergency
Class Etiquette: Out of courtesy for the lecturer and fellow students, please come to class on time. Do not work on
material from other classes during class time, do not sleep, do not chat during lecture, and DO NOT let your devices
be a distraction for others.Use them appropriately. Please help maintain an environment of mutual respect in the
classroom.
Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of
Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY. Or at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/
Accommodations for Religious Holidays: As per University policy, accommodations will be made for religious
holidays. A student must make the instructor aware of a needed religious-related absence at least fourteen days prior
to the class absence or on the first class day for holidays that fall within the first two weeks of the semester.


Topics Covered: Note - Exam cut-offs are tentative and may change.
Exam 1: Introduction to Microbial Diversity
        History and Basic Methods
        Microbial Biochemistry
        Microbial Structure
Exam 2: Microbial Nutrition
        Growth and Control of Microbes
        Microbial Genetics
        Bacterial Gene Regulation
Exam 3: Microbial Mutations and Mutants
        Microbial DNA Repair
        Bacteriophages
        Animal Viruses
Exam 4: Medically-Important Bacteria
        Normal Microbial Flora
        Human Immunity
