RTF 344M VISUAL EFFECTS & MOTION GRAPHICS
Any part of this syllabus is subject to change without notice at the discretion of the
instructor.
Class Info: Online Asynchronous/Synchronous on demand
This is a ​production​ course designed to introduce you to the tools and techniques of ​motion
graphics​ and ​visual effects​.
There will be a variety of creative projects you can complete at your leisure. Your progression
through the course is gated through modules. You can unlock larger projects. You can unlock
synchronized events. The goal is to get to 100 points and there are 345 possible points!
Choose your own adventure.
Instructor​: Ben Bays
e-mail address: Canvas Inbox is most reliable, but benbays@utexas.edu if you need to reach
me through email.
TA: Tori McCarthy
Instructor Availability
    ●   Please direct any questions to me or to the TA via the Canvas Inbox. I only check email
        once a week.
    ●   Find my LIVE schedule on the ​Canvas Calendar​ for this course, drop in anytime via this
        ZOOM MEETING LINK
             ○  Ben Bays LIVE! ​ : ​https://utexas.zoom.us/j/6316255829 (Links to an external
                site.)


     ●    If you wish to chat outside posted hours, just let me know.
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
Software​:
I will allow any project to be completed in ​any software​ that is capable of doing what you need
it to do.
Adobe has extended an offer for ​free​ use of the Adobe Creative Suite to you on your personal
computer ​until July 6th​. The email address you provided to the University, the one attached to
your name in UT direct, is your account login. Instructions to install Adobe Creative Suite here:
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/comm/Adobe+-+Faculty+-+Student+User+Covid+-+19+license
(Links to an external site.)
After​ July 6, you must purchase the software, or have advanced to a point in the course where it
is no longer required. This course has been designed to mitigate this disruption, but thinking
long-term, you may want to consider the investment for the entire academic year if your area of
study is in digital media production.
Students can purchase the Adobe Creative Suite for use on their personal computers. ​ Adobe
offers student pricing. (Links to an external site.)​ They also offer a 7 day ​free trial (Links to an
external site.)​.
INDEPENDENT INQUIRY FLAG


This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your
major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the
independent investigation and presentation of your own work. What does this mean? It means I
will expect you to figure things out on your own.
COURSE EVALUATION:
You begin the course with a score of ZERO for every assignment. A PERFECT SCORE is 100
points.
ASSIGNMENTS are worth points. MANY (not all) assignments are worth 5 points. (20
assignments x 5 points = 100)
RUBRICS and assignment expectations are detailed on each assignment page.
SUBMIT an assignment for evaluation OR in its unfinished state for feedback.
You may REVISE and RESUBMIT an assignment without penalty. (as many times as you like)
There is only one DUE DATE. The final class day of the semester at 11:59 pm. No
submission/revisions accepted after this deadline.
Here is a letter grade to points table:
 Name:     Range:
 A         100 %       to 94.0%
 A-        < 94.0 %    to 90.0%
 B+        < 90.0 %    to 87.0%


  B        < 87.0 %    to 84.0%
  B-       < 84.0 %    to 80.0%
  C+       < 80.0 %    to 77.0%
  C        < 77.0 %    to 74.0%
  C-       < 74.0 %    to 70.0%
  D+       < 70.0 %    to 67.0%
  D        < 67.0 %    to 64.0%
  D-       < 64.0 %    to 61.0%
  F        < 61.0 %    to 0.0%
Checking your grade:
I keep a running tally of your grade as the semester progresses. You may ask me for a status
update at any time or check egradebook in the UT Canvas (​canvas.utexas.edu (Links to an
external site.)Links to an external site.​).
RTF Safety Policy
Special safety precautions for your crew, actors and others in the area are required if you are
undertaking any hazardous activities while filming, including but not limited to ANY driving or
horseback/livestock shots, shooting in or around water or heights, or if you are using stunts,
flames, pyrotechnics, squibs or simulated weapons. Please note that unlicensed handguns and
other real weapons are never permitted in RTF studios or on location shoots. In addition, you
must follow all federal, state and local laws and the rules of any venue or location at which you


are filming regarding hazardous activities, including University of Texas at Austin rules if filming
is done on campus.
Student filmmakers must submit a detailed safety plan to their course instructor and the RTF
Technical Facilities Manager if a script or project involves driving or horseback/livestock shots,
shooting in or around water or heights, stunts, flames, pyrotechnics, squibs, weapons or any
other hazardous activities (this requirement applies to all shoots, including documentary
projects, but please see the special guidelines for documentary driving shots below). It is the
responsibility of the student to hire experts in the field and budget at least $600/day for expert
consultation and on-set supervision if, in the judgment of the class instructor and the Technical
Facilities Manager, such expert consultation or supervision is necessary. In addition, any
utilization of pyrotechnics on the University of Texas at Austin campus requires prior review and
approval through the Fire Prevention Services office by the University Fire Marshal or their
designee.
Students should understand that driving while filming will be permitted only in strictly limited
circumstances, such as on a private road or drive. In most circumstances, students who wish to
undertake driving shots will be required to arrange for a police escort and a city permit.
Monitors inside the vehicle will NOT be allowed while filming in a vehicle. Filming from the back
of trucks is not considered safe and is not permitted under any circumstances.
Documentary filming of an interview while the interview subject is driving is only permitted if the
cameraperson is secured in a seat belt and is not directing the driver of the car in any way,
besides engaging in a conversation in which the driver/interviewee has been informed not to
look at the camera or the interviewer at all during the interview. In addition, any filming from a
vehicle, for drive-by B-roll, must be done by a cameraperson secured in a seat belt, where the
driver is not being directed in any way by the director, so that they are driving as they normally
would. As noted above, any documentary student planning on filming in any vehicle must
submit a safety plan to their course instructor and the RTF Technical Facilities Manager.
Students who fail to comply with this policy will receive a failing grade in this class and will be
barred from future access to RTF production and post-production equipment and facilities
If Police, Fire, or EMS are called to your shoot, or any injuries on your shoot require
medical attention, this must be reported to your instructor and the Assistant Director of
Production Services, (Keefe Boerner Keefe.Boerner@austin.utexas.edu), within 24 hours
of the incident. There is a form in checkout and on the RTF website that must be filled out
and returned within three business days.


Policy on Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the
Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct
(Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.​.
Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor |
512-471- 3515 |​cmhc.utexas.edu (Links to an external site.)
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 : 512.471.2255
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- |CMA 4.134 | 512-471- 7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
