                       RTF 370: Black Filmmakers After “Blaxploitation”
Instructor: Adrien Sebro, Ph.D.
Email: asebro@utexas.edu
Seminar Day and Time: MWF 1-1:50PM
Location: BMC 4.206
Office Hours: Wednesday 10AM-11AM in CMA 6.134
Teaching Assistant: Rob Sperry-Fromm
Email: rsperry@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesday 3:30-4:30 PM in CMA 6.156
Screenings: Wednesdays 7:30-10:30 PM
Course Description:
         May it be the Harlem Renaissance, The L.A. Rebellion, or Blaxploitation, there has
existed various U.S. arts movements with Black artists and Black culture at their center.
Blaxploitation is a term coined in the early 1970s to refer to Black action films that were aimed
at Black audiences. Featuring Black actors in lead roles and often having anti-establishment
plots, these films were frequently condemned for stereotypical characterizations and the
glorification of violence. The films, though receiving backlash for their stereotypical characters,
are among the first in which Black characters and communities are the heroes and subjects of
film and television, rather than sidekicks or villains or victims of brutality. The genre’s inception
coincides with the rethinking of race relations in the 1970s. Blaxploitation films were originally
aimed at an urban Black audience, but the genre’s audience appeal soon broadened across racial
and ethnic lines. Hollywood soon realized the potential profit of expanding the audiences of
Blaxploitation films across those racial lines. But what was to come after this movement? How
can we label contemporary Black filmmakers and their works of art? Presently, with the robust
number of Black filmmakers across Hollywood, what are the new ways in which Blackness is
framed across dominant Hollywood cinema, independent film, animation, television, and
experimental film?
         With this course we will use case studies of various contemporary Black filmmakers
(1980s-Present) while working to question and complicate the ways in which they deploy
images, understandings, and narratives of Blackness within American society. This course will
work to answer questions such as; How have the filmmakers of the Blaxploitation Era inspired
contemporary Black filmmakers? Have they? How have (or haven’t) contemporary Black
filmmakers worked to resist Hollywood conventions? How has politics continued to evolve the
ontological status of Blackness? How have technological advances changed the ways in which
Black filmmakers contend with production, distribution, and exhibition? How is Blackness
framed in these films? Through the myriad of Black filmmakers discussed, this course will build
an understanding of Black film as art, resistance or compliance, and a pedagogy that is
constantly evolving and taking new forms. As many of these Black filmmakers and their films
have not (or have yet to be) been discussed in scholarly works, the weekly readings will be a
mixture of scholarly published texts, journals, film reviews, newspaper articles, and trade press.


With that in mind, course discussion will rely heavily on these various readings in conversation
with the films themselves.
What Do I Need from You?
Your active participation is integral to the success of yourself and the seminar collective. What
will drive this course are the discussions that will take place in response to screenings and
readings. The readings for each week must be completed by the seminar section. It is important
that you come to class on time, prepared, and stay until class is over. Also, paying attention
during seminar and avoiding distracting behaviors like texting or doing other work in class will
offer you the ability to actively contribute and get the most from discussion. If you foresee
needing to miss class(es), then you’ll need to contact me via email.
This course will often discuss readings and view screenings that address gender, sexuality, race,
religion, socioeconomics, etc. This classroom will be a safe space for these conscious
discussions and opinions. Any prejudices, bigotry, homophobia, etc. will not be allowed. Every
student’s discussions and opinions can of course be challenged but must be done respectfully.
*All films and readings will be available via PDF on the course website*
Overall Class Grade Breakdown:
1.   Weekly Reading Responses 50% (each response is worth 5% (must do at least 10))
2.   Discussion Leader 5%
3.   Thesis Statement Submission 5%
4.   Attendance/Participation 5%
5.   Paper Presentation 10%
6.   Final Paper 25%
Weekly Reading Responses
To help drive seminar discussion and participation each student is required to submit at least a
paragraph in response to one or more of the week’s readings. Reading responses are due on the
class canvas page every Wednesday before class (must do AT LEAST 10 throughout the
semester).
Discussion Leads
Also, during Week 1 students will be able to choose the week that they will be responsible for
leading that week’s reading discussion (article-length readings only). They must lead the
discussion via short PowerPoint or other visual medium. Reading discussion leads will be held
on Fridays.


Thesis Statement Submission
By Monday of Week 12, each student is required to submit (via hard copy in class) a rough
thesis statement and bibliography for their final papers. These statements will help with the
direction, clarity, and organization for your final paper.
Attendance/Participation
Active participation in class discussion will be noted as well as attendance in class and for
screenings.
Paper Presentation
In Weeks 15 and 16 each student will conduct a power point presentation to the class on the
subjects that their final papers intend to cover. These presentations will aid in strengthening
presentation skills as well as mining through any questions or concerns that one may still have
while completing their final papers. Great work requires constructive peer feedback.
Final Paper
The seminar final paper is due via hard copy during Week 16. The final paper is to be 8-10
pages, double-spaced, Times New Roman 12-point font, and 1-inch margins.
Students have the choice of TWO options for the final paper:
1. Critically compare and contrast two Black films (one from a Blaxploitation Filmmaker and
     one contemporary) and the modes in which the characters, themes, and directors responded
     to their political moment. Textual analyses of films is encouraged.
2. Discuss popular themes, cultural impact, advertising/promotion, and critical reception of a
     single contemporary Black filmmaker and one of their films. Textual analysis of the film is
     strongly encouraged.
*If you are interested in writing a paper that doesn’t fall within these categories, we can discuss
this possibility in office hours.
Plagiarism
Plagiarism, or the manipulation of another’s work as your own of ANY kind is strictly prohibited
by myself and the University at large. If you are confused whether something you are writing
may be perceived as plagiarism, please do not hesitate to clear it with me first, before
submission. If a plagiarized paper is submitted, a student will automatically fail the course.
Academic Integrity. Each student is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the


University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore,
if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in a previous class), you
must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Name and Personal Pronoun Preferences. Class rosters are provided to me with your legal
name. I will honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on
the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of
this preference early in the semester.
Writing and Learning Support
Moody College Writing Support Program. <http://sites.utexas.edu/moodywriting/>, located in
BMC 3.322, offers individualized assistance to undergraduates in Moody College classes
seeking to improve their writing. They have specialists in RTF, among other communication
fields. You can book half-hour appointments on their website for assistance during all stages of
the writing process. Writing coaches also will take drop-ins if they are not working with
appointments.
The University Writing Center. <http://uwc.utexas.edu/>, at PCL 2.330, on the first floor of
the Learning Commons of the Perry Castañeda Library, offers individualized assistance to
students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students may come in
on a drop in or appointment basis.
Please inform me early in the semester if you have a learning difference or other issue that could
affect your performance in class or your work outside of class. I will work to accommodate you
and will maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. For more information on learning
accommodations, contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-
329- 3986 (video phone).
   University Resources for Self Care: Taking care of your general well-being is an
   important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
   unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
   For immediate support, visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F
   8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
       •   CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
       •   CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
               o M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if
                   she is unavailable)
       •   FREE Services at CMHC include:


                o  Brief assessments and referral services
                o  Mental health & wellness articles -cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
                o  MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
                o  Classes, workshops, & groups -cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies. Faculty members and
certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member
about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options
and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ Occupants of buildings on
The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
   Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of
   fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line):
   512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
   isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.


The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
   evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
   requires exiting and assembling outside.
    •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
        occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
        entering the building.
    •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
        during the first week of class.
    •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
        Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention Services office.
    •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
        procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism,
unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not
limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension
on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment
for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you
have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonest damages both
the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more
information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.


                                      Semester Schedule
*Each week represents what will be discussed on Monday-Friday unless otherwise noted*
Week 1: Blaxploitation (Wednesday)
Clips from: Sweet Sweetback's Baadasssss Song, Shaft, Cotton Comes to Harlem, Coffy
Course Introduction
Explanation of Syllabi
Course Goals and Expectations
Week 1: Blaxploitation (Friday)
Clips from: Super Fly, Blacula, Cleopatra Jones, Dolemite
Readings:
• Guerrero, Ed, “Chapter 3: The Rise and Fall of Blaxploitation” in Framing Blackness: The
  African American Image in Film. pp. 69-112.
• Cunningham, Mark D., “No Getting around the Black” Cinema Journal Vol. 53, No. 4
  (Summer 2014), pp. 140-146.
Week 2: Michael Schultz and Julie Dash
Screening: Cooley High
Clips from: Car Wash, Krush Groove, The Last Dragon-Schultz
             Four Women, Illusions, Daughters of the Dust-Dash
Readings:
    • Corson, K. “Our Man in Hollywood: Creativity and Compromise in the Films of Michael
        Schultz” in Trying to Get Over: African American Directors After Blaxploitation 1977-
        1986, 2016. Pg. 24-64.
    • Corson, K. “Outside of Society: Jamaa Fanaka, the L.A. Rebellion, and the complications
        of Independent Filmmaking” in Trying to Get Over: African American Directors After
        Blaxploitation 1977-1986, 2016. Pg. 112-140.
Week 3: Spike Lee
Screening: Clockers


Clips from: Do The Right Thing, Crooklyn, Clockers, Mo’Betta Blues, School Daze,
Bamboozled, Four Little Girls, Malcolm X, She’s Gotta Have It (Film and Netflix series),
BlacKKKlansman
Readings:
• Grant, William, “Reflecting the Times: Do the Right Thing Revisited” in ed. Mark A. Reid,
  Spike Lee’s Do the Right Thing, pp. 16-30.
• Johnson, Victoria E., “Polyphony and Cultural Expression: Interpreting Musical Traditions in
  Do the Right Thing” in ed. Mark A. Reid, Spike Lee’s Do the Right Thing, pp. 50-72.
• Mitchell, W. J. T., “The Violence of Public Art: Do The Right Thing” in ed. Mark A. Reid,
  Spike Lee’s Do the Right Thing, pp. 107-128.
• Everett, Anna, “‘Spike, Don’t Mess Malcolm Up’: Courting Controversy and Control in
  Malcolm X” in ed. Paula Masood, The Spike Lee Reader, pp. 91-114.
• Harris, Keith M.,“Clockers (Spike Lee, 1995): Adaptation in Black” in ed. Paula Masood, The
  Spike Lee Reader, pp. 128-141.
Optional:
• Lee, Spike. Spike Lee’s Gotta Have it: Inside Guerrilla Filmmaking
• Ed. Paula Masood, The Spike Lee Reader
• Bailey, Jason, “Second Glance: Spike Lee’s Powerful, Underrated Crime Drama Clockers”
  http://flavorwire.com/586303/second-glance-spike-lees-powerful-underrated-crime-drama-
  clockers
Week 4: Cheryl Dunye (Monday)
Clips from: Janine, Greetings from Africa, The Watermelon Woman
Readings:
• Richardson, Matt “Our Stories Have Never Been Told: Preliminary Thoughts on Black
  Lesbian Cultural Production as Historiography in The Watermelon Woman” in Black Camera
  (Spring 2011), pp. 100-113.
• Lebow, Alisa, “Lesbians Make Movies” Cinéaste Vol. 20, No. 2 (1993), pp. 18-23
• Sullivan, Laura L. “Chasing Fae: ‘The Watermelon Woman’ and Black Lesbian Possibility” in
  Callaloo Vol. 23, No. 1, Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, Transgender: Literature and Culture (Winter,
  2000), pp. 448-460.


Week 4: John Singleton (Wednesday and Friday)
Screening: Boyz n the Hood
Clips from: Higher Learning, Poetic Justice, Baby Boy
Readings:
• Nadell, James, “Boyz N The Hood: A Colonial Analysis” in Journal of Black Studies Vol. 25,
  No. 4 (Mar., 1995), pp. 447-464.
• Dyson, Michael Eric, “Between Apocalypse and Redemption: John Singleton's ‘Boyz N the
  Hood’” Cultural Critique No. 21 (Spring, 1992), pp. 121-141.
• Massood, Paula J., “Mapping the Hood: The Genealogy of City Space in ‘Boyz N the Hood’
  and ‘Menace II Society’” Cinema Journal Vol. 35, No. 2 (Winter, 1996), pp. 85-97.
Optional:
    • Natale, Richard, “Violence Erupts in Opening Weekend of ‘Higher Learning’” Los
        Angeles Times 01/20/1995.
    • Fox, David, “'Poetic’ Finds Justice at Box Office: Movies: The film takes largest share of
        weekend ticket sales, despite decision by one Cineplex theater not to run it” in Los
        Angeles Times 07/26/1993.
    • Giroux, Henry, A. “From ‘Manchild’ to ‘Baby Boy’: Race and the Politics of Self-Help”
        in JAC Vol. 22, No. 3 (Summer 2002), pp. 527-560.
    • Steptoe, Tyina, “‘JODY’S GOT YOUR GIRL AND GONE’: GENDER, FOLKLORE,
        AND THE BLACK WORKING CLASS” in The Journal of African American History
        Vol. 99, No. 3 (Summer 2014), pp. 251-274.
    • Guerrero, Ed, “Chapter 5: Black Film in the 1990s: The New Black Movie Boom and Its
        Portents” in Framing Blackness: The African American Image in Film. pp. 157-214.
Week 5: Isaac Julien
Screening: Looking for Langston
Clips from: Frantz Fanon: Black Skin, White Mask, The Attendant
Readings:
• Kahana, Jonathan, “Cinema and The Ethics of Listening: Isaac Julien's Frantz Fanon” in Film
  Quarterly Vol. 59, No. 2 (Winter 2005-06), pp. 19-31.
• Orgeron, Devin, “Re-Membering History in Isaac Julien's ‘The Attendant’” in Film Quarterly
  Vol. 53, No. 4 (Summer, 2000), pp. 32-40.


• Shin, Chi-Yun, “Reclaiming the Corporeal: The Black Male Body and the ‘Racial’ Mountain
  in ‘Looking for Langston’” in Paragraph Vol. 26, No. 1/2, MEN'S BODIES (March/July
  2003), pp. 201-212.
Week 6: Robert Townsend
Screening: Carmen a HipHopera
Clips from: Hollywood Shuffle, The Five Heartbeats (and “Making Of” documentary), Eddie
Murphy: RAW, The Meteor Man, The Parent ‘Hood
*Friday 2/28 Guest Lecturer, Daelena Tinnin, Ph.D. Student
Readings:
• Tia C. M. Tyree and Liezille J. Jacobs, “Can You Save Me?: Black Male Superheroes in
  Hollywood Film” Spectrum: A Journal on Black Men Vol. 3, No. 1 (Autumn 2014), pp. 1-24.
• Wartofsky, Alona, “MTV’s ‘Carmen’: No Way Bizet” in The Washington Post 05/05/2001.
• Reviewed Work: Hollywood Shuffle by Robert Townsend, Review by: Rob Edelman in
  Cinéaste Vol. 16, No. 1/2 (1987-88), pp. 71-72.
• Margolis, Harriet, “Stereotypical Strategies: Black Film Aesthetics, Spectator Positioning, and
  Self-Directed Stereotypes in ‘Hollywood Shuffle’ and ‘I'm Gonna Git You Sucka’” in Cinema
  Journal Vol. 38, No. 3 (Spring, 1999), pp. 50-66.
Week 7: Keenan Ivory Wayans
Screening: I'm Gonna Git You Sucka
Clips from: In Living Color, A Low Down Dirty Shame, Scary Movie
Readings:
• Cunningham, Phillip Lamarr, “The Limits of Neo-Blaxploitation: Considering David F.
  Walker's Nighthawk and Power Man and Iron Fist” in Fire!!! Vol. 4, No. 2, Paneling
  Blackness (2015), pp. 94-112.
• Peisner, David. “Part 2: Keenan Was Always the Pioneer” in Homey Don't Play That!: The
  Story of In Living Color and the Black Comedy Revolution
• Gray, Herman,“Spectacles, Sideshows, and Irreverence: In Living Color” in Watching Race:
  Television and the Struggle for “Blackness” pp.130-147.
• “A Low Down Dirty Shame” in Jet Magazine 11/14/1994 pp. 36-40.


• Greven, David, “Dude, Where’s My Gender? Contemporary Teen Comedies and New Forms
  of American Masculinity” in Cinéaste Vol. 27, No. 3 (SUMMER 2002), pp. 14-21
Week 8: Barry Jenkins
Screening: Medicine for Melancholy
Clips from: Moonlight, If Beale Street Could Talk
Readings:
• Gillespie, Michael Boyce, “Black Maybe: Medicine for Melancholy, Place, and Quiet
  Becoming in Film Blackness: American Cinema and the Idea of Black Film, pp. 119-156.
• Palvic, Ed, “Speechless in San Francisco” in Transition, No. 110, Fais Do-Do (2013), pp. 103-
  119.
• Allen, Reniqua, “From Love to Melancholy: The Evolution of the Black Bohemian Identity in
  Black Indie Love Films From Gen-X to Gen-Y” in Journal of Black Studies Vol. 44, No. 5
  (JULY 2013), pp. 508-528.
• Hamid, Rahul, “Review of ‘Moonlight’” in Cinéaste, Vol. 42, No.2 (Spring 2017), pp. 44-45.
• Kilday, Gregg, “How ‘Moonlight’ Became a ‘Personal Memoir’ for Director Barry Jenkins: ‘I
   Knew the Story Like the Back of My Hand’” in The Hollywood Reporter, 11/11/2016.
• Woubshet, Dagmawi, “How James Baldwin’s Writings About Love Evolved” in The Atlantic,
  01/09/2019.
• Dorman, John, “‘If Beale Street Could Talk’ Offers a Tour of a Lost New York” in The New
  York Times, 02/03/2019.
WEEK 9 SPRING BREAK
Week 10: Tyler Perry (Monday and Wednesday)
Screening: Diary of a Mad Black Woman
Clips from: Madea’s Family Reunion, Why Did I Get Married?, I Can Do Bad All By Myself
Readings:
• Alexander, Bryant Keith, “Bootlegging Tyler Perty/Tyler Perry as Bootlegger: A Critical
  Mediation on Madea’s Family Reunion” in eds, Jamel Santa Cruze Bell and Ronald L. Jackson
  II, Interpreting Tyler Perry: Perspectives on Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality, pp. 15-31.
• Dunn, Stephane, “Black Masculinity in Big Mama Disguise” in eds, Jamel Santa Cruze Bell
  and Ronald L. Jackson II, Interpreting Tyler Perry: Perspectives on Race, Class, Gender, and
  Sexuality, pp. 57-68.


• Balaji, Murali, “New Model of Cultural Production or a Re-Visioning of the Old” in eds, Jamel
  Santa Cruze Bell and Ronald L. Jackson II, Interpreting Tyler Perry: Perspectives on Race,
  Class, Gender, and Sexuality, pp. 81-97.
• Bishetta D. Merrit and Melbourne S. Cummings, “The African American Woman on Film:
  The Tyler Perry Image” in eds, Jamel Santa Cruze Bell and Ronald L. Jackson II, Interpreting
  Tyler Perry: Perspectives on Race, Class, Gender, and Sexuality, pp. 187-195.
• Brown White, Shauntae, “Let the Church Say, ‘Amen!’: Tyler Perry’s Treatment of the
  African American Church and Pastor in I Can Do Bad All by Myself” in eds, Jamel Santa
  Cruze Bell and Ronald L. Jackson II, Interpreting Tyler Perry: Perspectives on Race, Class,
  Gender, and Sexuality, pp. 141-151.
• Cherise A. Harris and Keisha Edwards Tassie. “The Cinematic Incarnation of Frazier's Black
  Bourgeoisie: Tyler Perry’s Black Middle-Class” in Journal of African American Studies Vol.
  16, No. 2 (June 2012), pp. 321-344.
Optional:
• Morris, Wesley, “The year of Tyler Perry. Seriously,” in Film Comment Vol. 47, No. 1
  (JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2011), pp. 59-61
Week 10: Peter Ramsey -Animation (Friday)
Clips from: Monsters vs. Aliens: Mutant Pumpkins from Outer Space, Rise of the Guardians,
Spider-Man: Into the Spider-Verse
Readings:
• Barker, Jennifer L., “Hollywood, Black Animation, and the Problem of Representation in
  ‘Little Ol’ Bosko’ and ‘The Princess and the Frog’” in Journal of African American Studies
  Vol. 14, No. 4, Special Issue: Animated Representations of Blackness (December 2010), pp.
  482-498.
• Riesman, Abraham, “Is Miles Morales Finally Getting His Due As Spider-Man?” in Vulture
  12/14/2018.
• White, Armond, “Into the Spider-Verse’s Tangled Web” in National Review 12/14/2018.
• Garcia-Navarro, Lulu, “Peter Ramsey Put The 1st Afro-Latino Spider-Man On Screen. It May
  Win Him An Oscar,” NPR, 02/24/2019.
Week 11: Dee Rees (Monday and Wednesday)
Screening: Mudbound or Pariah
Clips from: Pariah, Bessie


Readings:
• Archer, Ina, “Reviewed Work: Pariah by Dee Rees” in Film Comment Vol. 47, No. 6
  (NOVEMBER/DECEMBER 2011), pp. 70-71.
• Declue, Jennifer, “The Circuitous Route of Presenting Black Butch: The Travels of Dee Rees’s
  Pariah” in eds. Yvonne Welbon and Alexandra Juhasz. Sisters in the Life: A History of Out
  African American Lesbian Media-Making pp. 225-248.
• Kornhaber, Spencer, “Bessie: The Song of a Self-Made Woman” in The Atlantic, 05/16/2015.
• Thompson, Anne, “‘Mudbound’: Dee Rees, Faith, and the Long Path She Took to Make Her
  Epic Oscar Contender” in IndieWire 11/13/2017.
• Scott, A.O. “Review: ‘Mudbound’ Is a Racial Epic Tuned to Black Lives, and White Guilt”
  The New York Times, 11/16/2017.
Week 11: Friday
NO CLASS
Week 12: Jordan Peele (Monday and Wednesday)
THESIS STATEMENTS (HARD COPY) DUE IN CLASS
*After discussion of this week’s filmmaker, we will discuss proposed thesis statement ideas in
class, and as a collective, we will offer one another suggestions for the paper writing process*
Screening: Get Out
Clips from: Us
Readings:
• Means Coleman, Robin R., “Studying Black in Horror Films” in Horror Noire: Blacks in
  American Horror Films from the 1890s to Present, pp. 1-14
• Means Coleman, Robin R., “Catching Some Zzzzzs—Blackz and Horror in the Twenty-First
  Century” in Horror Noire: Blacks in American Horror Films from the 1890s to Present, pp.
  198-216.
• Erickson, Steve, “Reviewed Work: Get Out by Sean McKittrick, Jason Blum, Edward H.
  Hamm Jr., Jordan Peele” in Cinéaste Vol. 42, No. 3 (Summer 2017), pp. 51-53.
• Sims, David, “What Made That Hypnosis Scene in Get Out So Terrifying” in The Atlantic
  12/05/2017.
• Guerrasio, Jason, “Jordan Peele explains why his horror movie about racism is what we need
  in the Trump era” in Business Insider 02/22/2017.
• Romano, Aja, “From Key & Peele to Us: how Jordan Peele’s comedy evolved into
  groundbreaking horror” in Vox 03/25/2019.


Week 12: Gina Prince-Bythewood (Friday)
Clips from: Disappearing Acts, Love and Basketball, The Secret Life of Bees, Beyond the Lights
Readings:
• Alexander, George, “Gina Prince-Bythewood” in Why We Make Movies: Black Filmmakers
  Talk About the Magic of Cinema, pp. 381-396.
• Jet Magazine, “Disappearing Acts” 12/11/2000 pp. 58-62.
• Jet Magazine, “Love and Basketball” 05/08/2000 pp. 60-64.
• Brodnax, Shana, “Review: One Woman's Hoops & Dreams” in Black Camera Vol. 15, No. 2
  (Fall/Winter, 2000), p. 6.
• Larkin, Alile Sharon, “Cinematic Genocide” in Black Camera Vol. 18, No. 1 (Spring/Summer,
  2003), pp. 3-4, 15
• Scott, A.O., “A Golden Dollop of Motherly Comfort” The New York Times 10/16/2008.
• Hastie, Amelie, “The Vulnerable Spectator: On the Contagion of Vulnerability” in Film
  Quarterly Vol. 68, No. 4 (Summer 2015), pp. 63-69.
Week 13: Ava DuVernay
Screening: I Will Follow
Clips from: Middle of Nowhere, Selma, 13th, A Wrinkle in Time, When They See Us
Readings:
• Martin, Michael T. “Conversations with Ava DuVernay—“A Call to Action”: Organizing
  Principles of an Activist Cinematic Practice,” in Black Camera Vol. 6, No. 1 (Fall 2014), pp.
  57-91.
• Ava DuVernay and Bradford Young, “Black Lives, Silver Screen” in Aperture No. 223, Vision
  & Justice (Summer 2016), pp. 34-41.
• Obenson, Tambay A., “Before ‘Middle of Nowhere’ & ‘Selma,’ There Was ‘I Will Follow’ –
  Now Streaming on Netflix” on IndieWire 01/14/2015.
• Easton, Claire, “Ava DuVernay, Sundance Award-Winner for ‘Middle of Nowhere,’ On Why
  It’s Important That Stories About Black Women Be Told By Black Women” in IndieWire
  10/10/2012.
• Maule, Rosanna, “Ava Duvernay and the Digital Promotion of African American Cinema” in
  Digital Platforms and Feminist Film Discourse: Women’s Cinema 2.0, pp. 41-49.
• Boyd, Herb, “Reviewed Work: Selma by Christian Colson, Oprah Winfrey, Brad Pitt, Dede
  Gardner, Jeremy Kleiner, Ava DuVemay, Paul Webb” in Cinéaste Vol. 40, No. 3 (Summer
  2015), pp. 57-58.


• Combs, Rhea L., “Black Lives Matter, Then and Now” in The Public Historian Vol. 37, No. 3
  (August 2015), pp. 128-136.
• Juarez, Sara E., “The Power of the Documentary: Examining the Effectiveness of Ava
  DuVernay’s 13th” in Cinesthesia Vol. 8, Issue. 1 04/24/2018.
• McDonald, Soraya Nadia, “Ava DuVernay’s ‘13th’ proves black people are not crazy” in The
  Undefeated 10/7/2016.
• Ryzik, Melena, “Ava DuVernay’s Fiercely Feminine Vision for ‘A Wrinkle in Time’” in The
  New York Times 03/01/2018.
Week 14: Ryan Coogler
Screening: Black Panther
Clips from: Fruitvale Station, Creed, Black Panther
Readings:
• Davis, Angela Y., “Race and Criminalization” in The House That Race Built pp.264-279
• Smith, Mychal Denzel. “Rewriting Black Manhood: A Conversation With ‘Fruitvale Station’
  Director Ryan Coogler” in The Nation 07/18/2013.
• Zuckerman, Esther, “Ryan Coogler on Humanizing a Movement for ‘Fruitvale Station’” in The
  Atlantic 07/12/2013.
• Priyadarshi, Muhit, “Why Fruitvale Station — and not Black Panther — remains Ryan
  Coogler’s most important film?” in Medium 02/27/2018.
• Whipp, Glenn, “For Ryan Coogler, making 'Creed' was deeply personal” Los Angeles Times
  01/05/2016.
• Eells, Josh, “Ryan Coogler: Why I Needed to Make ‘Black Panther’” in Rolling Stone
  02/26/18.
• Toldson, Ivory A. “In Search of Wakanda: Lifting the Cloak of White Objectivity to Reveal a
  Powerful Black Nation Hidden in Plain Sight” The Journal of Negro Education Vol. 87, No. 1,
  Special Focus: Black Power, Politics, and the Black Press: Resiliency and Engaged Learning
  in Education (Winter 2018), pp. 1-3.
• Thompson, Anne, “Ryan Coogler Changed the Rules of Hollywood With ‘Black Panther’ —
  IndieWire Honors” in IndieWire 11/01/2018.
Week 15: Paper Presentations
Week 16: Paper Presentations (Monday and Wednesday)
Week 16: Final Paper Due (FRIDAY)


