                          SOC F317L: Introduction to Social Statistics
                                           Summer I, 2020
unique #: 82355
class meets: TTh 10:00am – 11:30am; Zoom
lab meets: W 2:30 – 3:45; Zoom
Instructor: Christina Nefeli Caramanis
Instructor office hours: Tuesday 9-10am or by appointment
Lab instructor:
Lab instructor office hours: Friday 10–11am or by appointment
Course Description
This course presents a general overview of the statistical methods used in the social sciences.
The course is designed to give you a conceptual and rational understanding of today’s most
commonly used (and useful) statistical methods.
The news is full of statistical claims: In October of 2016, I read in various news sources that
Hillary Clinton had an 89% chance of winning the November 2016 election. In the month of
March 2020, I read that the mortality rate for Covid-19 is anywhere from .01% to 10%.
Where do the numbers come from? Are they right? What can they tell us about the world?
These are the sorts of questions we will ask in Introduction to Social Statistics. Answering them
is going to involve doing some math. And while understanding the math behind the statistical
concepts we will study is very important, it is even more important that you leave the course
with a conceptual understanding of the most commonly used statistical methods.
Why is important to learn statistics? Here are a few reasons:
        • The increasing availability of all kinds of data gives us an unprecedented ability to
             understand how humans behave. Using numbers to describe the world can help us
             figure out what is true and important.
        • Statistics are often used to make false or misleading claims: it is important to be able
             to identify these and explain what the numbers can tell us, and what they cannot.
        • Statistical and analytic skills are marketable: in the government, non-profit, and
             private sectors, a solid foundation of quantitative and computing skills are often
             important assets.


Quantitative Reasoning Flag
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are
designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative
arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to
analyze real-world problems.
Course requirements & classroom policies
Required texts
    1. Moore & McCabe. Introduction to the Practice of Statistics, 5th Edition (buy it used –
        you don’t need a CD with it). This is the main textbook; we will cover (approximately)
        Chapters 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Unless otherwise noted, references to a book in the course
        grid refer to Moore & McCabe.
    2. Leon-Guerrero & Frankfort-Nachmias. Essentials of Social Statistics for a Diverse Society,
        1st edition (2011). This is supplementary textbook. Most readings and problems from
        this text will be optional. However, if a reading or problem does not say “optional” on
        the course grid then it is required. The chapters that are most relevant to our course
        material are 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 9. In the course grid, I refer to this book as “LF.”
    3. Students will use Microsoft Excel to prepare projects and assignments. See the “Guide
        to videos on Excel” under the “Pages” tab of Canvas for instructions to access videos
        that will help you learn Excel.
    4. I will use Canvas to post data and additional readings.
Course Outline
A day-by-day course plan grid is posted on Canvas. You should study the grid carefully, as it
contains a lesson outline for each class and lab, and mentions when assignments are due. It is,
of course, subject to small changes of schedule. The following concepts will be covered in the
course:
    thinking about data, univariate statistics (chpt 1 in McCabe & Moore)
    bivariate statistics (chpt 2 McCabe & Moore)
    introducing probability theory (chpt 4 in McCabe & Moore)
    statistical inference (parts of chpts 3, 5, 6, 7 in McCabe & Moore)
                                                        2


Online Lectures, Required Class Meetings, and Lab
Online Lectures: You will be required to watch 3 asynchronous class lectures per week. These
will typically be around 1.5 hours each. The course grid will indicate the day on which the
lecture should be watched in order to keep up with the class. Lectures that appear in brackets on
the grid indicate that they are based on material that will not be covered in the next synchronous
meeting, however I recommend you still watch them on the assigned day so you don’t become
overwhelmed by lectures you need to catch up on.
Required Class Meetings: We will meet for eleven 1.5-hour synchronous sessions on Tuesdays
and Thursdays to do hands-on exercises, review the homework and tests, and discuss the material
presented in the online lectures.
Lab Meetings: Lab meetings will be held on Wednesdays for 75 minutes. This will be a chance
for you to review materials and assignments with the lab instructor, with occasional in-class
exercises to help solidify certain concepts.
Prerequisites
There are no formal prerequisites for this course. However, if you are not proficient in algebra
you will struggle in this course. If the math reviewed on the first day of class is unfamiliar, I
suggest that you wait to take this course until after you have taken algebra or an equivalent
college level math class. I would be happy to put you in touch with an advisor who can help
find the right preparatory course for you.
Attendance
You are expected to attend every synchronous class and lab section and to arrive on time.
Attendance at each instance of class (11 in total) will count as 2 points. Lab will not count
towards your grade, however attendance will be taken, and if you attend ALL lab sessions, we
will add 2 points to your grade at the end of the semester. In addition, there are 2 extra points
built into the course total, so it is possible to miss a class session without an impact on your
grade. Each synchronous class and lab is important, so I would not recommend missing any if
you can avoid it! Class attendance therefore counts for 22 points, with 2 Extra Credit points
added to your grade for full Lab attendance. Students who come late (after attendance is
taken) will not receive credit for attending.
The Lab Instructor will take attendance after the first 10 minutes of class.
To make things as fair as possible, absences will only be excused due to documented medical or
bereavement issues, or, in accordance with UT policy, due to religious holy days for which you
let me and/or the lab instructor know at least 7 days in advance of the absence (see below). In
any case of an excused absence, you are expected to turn in any work due on the missed day(s)
within a reasonable period of time agreed upon in advance with the lab instructor.
                                                    3


Reading review questions
Doing the assigned reading from your textbook carefully before class will help you understand
the lecture better. In order to help you review each assigned reading before the lecture, I have
posted questions on Canvas for you to answer. Each set of 17 sets of reading review questions
is worth ½ point, for 8.5 points total. If you do not fill out the questions by 11:59pm on the
day they are due, you will get no credit for that reading review. In order to get credit for a given
set of reading review questions, you must attempt to answer every question. Here is a list of
the reading review questions in the order that they are due and how many points they are. Due
dates are also in the grid and on Canvas.
Reading Review questions on Canvas: Chapt 1 Intro & 1.1 (6/5); 1.2 (6/8); 1.3 (6/8); 2.1 & 2.2
(6/10); 2.3 (6/11); 2.4 & 2.5 (6/11); 4.1 & 4.2 (6/12); 4.3 & 4.4 (6/13); 3.1 & 3.3 (6/18); 3.4
(6/19); Chapt 5 Intro & 5.1 (6/24); 5.2 (6/25); 6.1 (6/26); 6.2 (6/29); 6.3 & 7.1 (7/1); 7.2 (7/1);
8.1 & 8.2 (7/3)
Assignments
There are 9 assignments for this course. Eight of the assignments will be sets of problems from
the Moore & McCabe and Leon-Geurrero & Frankfort-Nachmias books. The other final
assignment will help you practice what we have learned and practice writing about statistics.
Pay special attention to this Memo on Hypothesis Testing assignment as it builds skills that will
likely be useful in the workplace after you finish college. Assignments will count for 37 points
in total.
All assignments and their due dates are listed in the course grid. Assignments that are not sets
of book problems are posted under the “assignments” tab on Canvas. Assignments will mostly
be done outside of class, though we will sometimes begin an assignment in class or lab.
On the day an assignment is due, we will review it either in class or in lab. On the day an
assignment is due, you should upload scanned copies or pictures of your work to Canvas
BEFORE class, and keep your handwritten copy of the assignment to make corrections in
class/lab. Assignments done in Excel should contain computer print-outs of the relevant tables
or graphs. Please format them so they are legible. Writing for the Memo assignment should be
prepared using a computer. Although you are encouraged to work in groups, each student is
expected to turn in his/her own original work, written in her/his own hand, or computed on
her/his own computer.
We will review the answers to each assignment in class, often as “learning by teaching.” During
the review, I expect you to study your answers, and correct your own initially incorrect answers
using a different color pen. Again, you must turn in your assignments for grading before class
on the assigned day. Because we will be going over answers in class, assignments will not be
counted if turned in after the due date and time. Each problem set from the texts will be
worth 4 points each, and will be judged by the following metric:
                                                  4


     0 points – did not turn in the assignment on time; assignment is less than 1/4 complete
     1 point – at least 1/4 of problems attempted
     2 points – at least 1/2 of problems attempted
     3 points – at least 3/4 of problems attempted
     4 points – all problems attempted
You should keep all of your corrected assignments in a folder so that you may study from them.
Here is a list of the assignments in the order that they are due and how many points they are.
Some of the chapter assignments will be due and graded on different days, so please find the
due dates on the course grid and on Canvas.
     1.  Problems from chapter 1 (4pts)
     2.  Problems from chapter 2 (4pts)
     3.  Problems from chapter 4 (4pts)
     4.  Problems from chapter 3 (4pts)
     5.  Problems from chapter 5 (4pts)
     6.  Problems from chapter 6 (4pts)
     7.  Problems from chapter 7 (4pts)
     8.  Problems from chapter 8 (4pts)
     9.  Memo on hypothesis testing applied to an experiment in Kenya (5pts)
Except in cases where a student has an excused absence for the class period in which an assignment is
due, we will not accept any late assignments. If you have an excused absence, you and the lab
instructor should work together to identify a new due date for the assignment. You should turn
in a scanned copy of your assignment to the lab instructor.
Tests
There will be three tests in this course, each worth a different fraction of your final grade. The
tests are described below:
     1. Test 1: This test will cover concepts related to univariate and bivariate statistics. It will be given
         in-class (90 mins) on June 16th, and worth 13 points.
     2. Test 2: This test will cover probability theory and probability rules. It will be given for half of a
         class (45 mins) on June 23rd. It will be worth 5 points.
     3. Test 3: This test will cover the entire course and will be given during the summer I exam period.
         It will be worth 17 points.
My policy for excusing absences for tests is the same as for excusing absences for class. Please
let the lab instructor know as soon as possible if you believe you qualify for an excused absence
for a test so that we can schedule a make-up test for a date close to the test date.
                                                      5


Learning by teaching
Several times during the semester, each student will be expected to present solutions to
assignments and in-class exercises in front of the group. When it is your turn, you will share
your screen on Zoom, and take the class through the steps to solving your problem that you
previously uploaded to Zoom, and then talk through how you arrived at the answer. I
understand that this may be uncomfortable for some students, but I nevertheless would like
each person to take his or her turn. The lab instructor and I will do our best to make the
classroom a supportive and encouraging learning environment, especially on days when we do
learning by teaching, and we ask you to do the same. If there is a reason why it will be very
difficult for you to complete this requirement of the course, please speak with me as soon as
possible.
There are a few reasons why I make “learning by teaching” part of this course. First, in my
experience, there is no better way to master a concept than to teach it to another person.
Second, knowing that you may need to present solutions to others is often a strong incentive to
complete the assignment carefully. Third, there are often many correct ways to think about a
problem. It is often useful to learn about a strategy for solving a problem from someone other
than me. Finally, public speaking is an important skill in many jobs, and there are relatively few
opportunities to practice it.
Students will be expected to volunteer to solve problems during class. If you volunteer early,
you are more likely to get a question you know how to solve. If you volunteer later, you will
have more experience with what learning by teaching looks like. I will keep a list of who has
presented a problem. Students can volunteer to present again once every student has
presented the solution to a problem.
Learning by teaching will not be graded, but if you do not take your turn on a given pass
through the roster (either because you were absent or did not do the assignment) you will
forfeit ½ of your attendance points for that class period. You do not need to know how to solve
the whole problem in order to volunteer – you have the option of showing us how far you got
and then asking for your classmates’ and my support to finish the problem.
Total Course Points
The total number of points for the class is 102 points, but I will use 100 as the denominator.
There are no official number of classes you are allowed to miss (and I very much encourage you
to attend each and every class lab and session!) or homework grades you can drop, but you can
use the two extra points built into your grade towards extra credit, unexcused absences, or to
supplement low assignment scores.
                                                 6


Expectations
In the Class & Lab Sessions. You will be required to keep your camera on during all class and lab
sessions on Zoom. Please do not use your phones (to talk on or to read) or surf the web, check
your email, etc. on your computer during class. It is distracting for you, me, and potentially for
your fellow classmates. If the lab instructor or I see you using a phone or surfing the web, we
will remind you of this policy. If you absolutely need to look at your phone or email due to a
rare emergency, please let me and the lab instructor know in advance.
You should have the following items with you for each class or lab session:
    1.  A notebook or notebook paper and folder.
    2.  A pencil or pen for taking notes.
    3.  A blue (or different color) pen for correcting assignments.
    4.  A hand-held calculator that can add, subtract, multiply, divide, and do exponents. You can
        purchase an acceptable calculator for $10 or less nearly anywhere school supplies are sold. You
        may not use your phone as your calculator.
    5. Your textbook. You must have your textbook in order to follow along with examples in lecture
        and in order to participate in “learning by teaching.”
    6. Any assignment due that day.
Please ask questions by either unmuting yourself and asking a question, or using the raise your
hand option in Zoom and waiting to be called on if there is something that you do not
understand. Please be kind and respectful to your classmates and teachers at all times.
In the lab sessions. As in class, phones and laptops are not permitted in lab sessions. You
should use the computers in the lab to do in class work. You should bring everything you bring
to class to lab sessions as well.
Outside the classroom. I expect you to come to class prepared for the day’s activities. This
means you will have to read the course plan grid in advance and do the assigned reading or
homework. Reading ahead of each lecture will help you get the most out of each lecture.
Although it is not written in the course plan grid, I suggest that anyone who is struggling with
the material re-read the assigned textbook section after each lecture as well. You should spend
about 12-15 hours working on statistics every week outside of class, in addition to watching
the three lectures that will be available as indicated on the grid.
Communication with instructor. I strongly prefer that you visit my office hours (on Zoom) to
talk with me or ask questions rather than sending me an email. If you are not available to meet
on Tuesdays from 10-11am, please email me for another meeting time, and I will be happy to
arrange one. I will not respond to questions about a test after 5pm the night before the test.
Communication with lab instructor. You may email me at any time. However, I can only
promise that I will respond to emails Monday through Friday from 9 am until 6 pm. I will likely
                                                      7


be able to get back to you on weekends and evenings when I'm working, but if you need an
immediate response from me, the best bet is to catch me while I'm at work.
 Lab instructor’s office hours. I will hold office hours via Zoom. Please shoot me a quick email in
advance to let me know when you will be coming so I can plan accordingly. If you have an idea
of what you would like to go over, include that in the email so that I have a clearer idea of what
materials, if any, I can prepare to be of most help.
Grading philosophy & policy
Statistics is hard! Many people (myself included) need to take statistics several times before
they really understand the concepts in this course. Yet, the lessons of this course are very
important, both for people who want to be informed citizens and for those who additionally
want to go on to further study in the social sciences. So it is important to make a strong effort!
I will not curve the attendance, assignment, and in-class exercise grades. In the unlikely event
where test grades are very low among essentially all students, I will curve the portion of the
grade that comes from tests.
Without denying the potential negative consequences of a poor grade, I would ask that try not
to worry too much about your grade. See this class an opportunity to learn some very useful
material that you may not have the opportunity to learn again. I think it is one of the most
practical courses you will take in college.
There are 102 points in the class, but I will grade out of 100. I will use +/- grading and the
following grading scale:
100- 94: A                             83-80: B-                              69-67: D+
93-90: A-                              79-77: C+                              66-64: D
89-87: B+                              76-74: C                               63-60: D-
86-84: B                               73-70: C-                              59 and below: F
The lab instructor will post students’ cumulative points-to-date on Canvas after test #2 and
after the final exam. If you would like to know your points throughout the semester, we would
encourage you to keep track of how many points you have accumulated through attendance,
assignments, reading reviews, test scores, etc.
University policies
Q Drop Policy. If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop
before the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law,
you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                     8


Religious holy days. A student who misses an examination, work assignment, or other project due to
the observance of a religious holy day will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence, provided that he or she has properly notified each instructor. The
policy of the University of Texas at Austin is that the student must notify each instructor at least
fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates he or she will be absent to observe a religious holy
day. For religious holidays that fall within the first two weeks of the semester, the notice should be
given on the first day of the semester. The student may not be penalized for these excused absences
but the instructor may appropriately respond if the student fails to complete satisfactorily the missed
assignment or examination within a reasonable time after the excused absence.
Names and pronouns. Class rosters are provided to instructors with students’ legal names. Please let
me know if you would like me to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun; I would be
happy to do so. Please advise me of this early in the semester when I am learning names.
Student Accommodations. Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
    • Please request a meeting as soon as possible for us to discuss any accommodations
    • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
    • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Policy on Academic Integrity. Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas
Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.”
Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or
that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be
found at the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
University Resources for Students. The university has numerous resources for students to provide
assistance and support for your learning:
    • Sanger Learning and Career Center: www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
    • University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
    • ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
    • Counselling and Mental Health Center: http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
    • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
    • Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
                                                      9


     • Canvas: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
Mental health needs and concerns. If you have concerns about another student in the class or anyone
else you encounter at UT, please contact the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050. If
you are having a personal crisis, please contact the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) Crisis
Line at 512-471-CALL (2255).
Important Safety Information. If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students,
TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be
anonymous.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation are from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security (512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/):
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
       that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
       week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter
       a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
       Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
       found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Class web sites and student privacy. Web-based, password-protected class sites are associated with all
academic courses taught at The University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types
of information that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, electronic class rosters will be
a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class
rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1.
For information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/ferpa/ferpa.qs.faculty.htm.
Professor profile Christina N. Caramanis is an advanced Ph.D. candidate at the LBJ School of Public
Affairs and a Graduate Research Trainee at the Population Research Center (PRC) at UT. She holds a B.A.
in Sociology and Philosophy from Boston University and an M.A. in Developmental Psychology from
Columbia University. Christina’s research interests focus on the dynamic interplay between poverty –
both at the community and family levels – and the social, emotional, behavioral, cognitive and academic
development of children and youth. In an effort to inform policy in various community and family
settings, she is broadly interested in: (1) looking at the pathways through which antipoverty programs
and policies interact with system-wide patterns of behavior and overall child and family well-being, and
(2) using higher level statistical modeling and analysis to quantitatively address individual- and system-
level change in key family- and child-level processes.
                                                       10


Lab instructor profile Aida Villanueva is a PhD candidate in Sociology. Her research agenda is focused
on women's opportunities in the labor markets and the intergenerational transmission of gender
disadvantage.
                                                  11
