Course: ADV 378. 360-Video Production
 Time: Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30 – 11 am
 Location: BMC, Room 3.206
 Instructor: Octavio Kano-Galvan, Assistant Professor of the Practice
 Office: BMC, Room 4.308
 Office Hours: Tuesday and Thursday from 8:30 am to 9:30 pm and by appointment
 Email: Octavio.KanoGalvan@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description:
 360-video technology offers creative and interesting new ways to create immersive visual content. The
 goal of this class is to provide students the required skills to plan, capture, edit and produce 360-videos.
 What will I learn?
     • 360-video production planning
     • 360-camera functions and operations
     • Adobe Premier, After Effects and Photoshop 360-video editing
     • Media analysis
     • Filmmaking process and considerations
 Learning outcomes:
     1. Students will be able to visualize, plan, execute and produce 360-Video stories
     2. Students will gain the skills and abilities to operate a 360-Video camera
     3. Students will be able to proficiently use Adobe video editing software.
     4. Students will be able to form a production team with specific roles and responsibilities to
          produce a professional-quality 360-video.
 How will I learn?
       Students will work individually and in groups to write scripts, video-shoot, and edit their own
       projects. Sample student projects during the semester include commercials, short films, music
       video and/or news stories. Selected videos are Oculus screened during class throughout the
       semester to enhance the analysis and learning process. Students will work with the following
       software on desktop/laptop computers: Adobe Premiere, After Effects, Audition and Photoshop.
       Experimentation, exploration, and creativity are highly encouraged.
Course Materials
   •   Access to a 360-Video 4K camera. (School will provide the camera)
   •   Access to a computer/laptop that supports 4k video editing
   •   Access to VR Headsets 3D Virtual Reality Glasses with audio integrated (Oculus) provided by the
       school
   •   Mobile device that supports Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
   •   Full access to Adobe Creative Cloud https://moody.utexas.edu/technology/digital-media-
       production-labs
   •   128 GB Micro SD card


   •    Micro SD card reader
   •    UT Box account (You will need to use Box to submit your projects on Canvas)
   •    Canvas and Box apps
Course Outline (Units and Essential Questions):
Unit 1. Careers in 360-video production
   •    What are the available careers in 360-video production and what is involved with each?
   •    What are the differences between 360-video, virtual reality, and augmented reality?
   •    What are: Director, Videographer, Video Editor, Sound Engineer, Technical Director, Producer,
        Graphics Editor?
   •    How can I work with a team to develop an answer to a question or solution to a problem?
   •    How does an efficient 360 video production workflow looks like?
Unit 2. Equipment Orientation & Safety
   •    What are the classroom rules for 360-video production?
        What is the behavioral contract and how is it applied in 360-video production?
   •    What are the expectations regarding appropriate use of class equipment?
Unit 3. Basic 360-Video Camera Operation, Shot Composition and Pre-production and Post-
production Considerations.
   •    What are the basics of using a 360-video camera?
   •    What are the stitching principals of a 360 footage?
   •    What are the basic camera shots and angles along with framing heights?
   •    What is a video sequence? How are scenes incorporated into a video sequence?
   •    What is continuity in 360-video production?
   •    How is audio used on a 360-video production?
   •    What are the basic operational techniques you need to know to operate a 360-video camera?
   •    What are the proper lighting and audio considerations for 360-video?
Unit 4. Video and Sound Editing
   •    What are the basic project settings to begin editing in Adobe Premiere and After Effects?
   •    How is video imported into the program to begin editing?
   •    How is a simple edit accomplished in Premiere?
   •    How is a shot placed on a timeline in Premiere?
   •    What is the function of the toolbar in Premiere?
   •    How are transitions added to video clips in Premiere?
   •    How are titles formatted and entered in Premiere?
   •    What special effects are available for video in After Effects?
   •    How is audio edited in Premiere and Audition?
   •    What effects can be used to manipulate audio in Audition?
   •    How are videos exported from Premiere and After Effects to social media?


Unit 5. Story Visualization or Story Planning
    •    How do I give shape and form to my ideas?
    •    Script, where do I start?
    •    What is basic story structure and how does the beginning, middle and end of a story relate to
         video segments?
    •    What is the difference between a dramatic and factual story for video?
    •    What is a commercial, and how does it differ from a Public Service Announcement?
    •    What is a Focus Statement and how is it used to help create a story?
    •    What is a storyboard and how is it used to organize and plan a story?
6. Career Development
    •    How do I use technology as a tool? (Little planets, Bullet shoot, etc.)
    •    How do the skills and knowledge I am learning in this class gets applied within a job setting and
         employers will value?
Projects, Participation and Attendance
      1. Project 1: Record Five 360-Video unique locations with a subject on it, natural light, artificial
          light. Record audio for the five movies (30% of your grade)
      2. Project 2: Plan, produce, execute and edit a 360-video story (50% of your grade)
      3. Participation, design and invitation of the project 2 poster and invitation (10% of your grade)
      4. Attendance (10% of your grade)
Course Structure
  Think of this class as an agency/studio setting. You and your team will draft a script, brainstorm,
  critique, create and execute your projects. 360-video production employs constant communication
  throughout the process. You will use class meetings as an opportunity for refreshers and status
  meetings. Some days you will report your progress and then be given the next steps in the process.
  Often, however, you’ll use the time as a work session, in which you roll up your sleeves and get into the
  process. Given that we have only a limited time to create a movie for a “client”, your dedication is
  expected, as is your preparedness for each session. You must keep up with the pace. Attendance and
  participation at all class meetings are mandatory.
E-Mail Communication
  In addition to classroom instructions, we will communicate through Canvas announcements during the
  course of the semester. It’s your responsibility to routinely check your Canvas email on a daily basis. We
  will use this forum to share case details and research findings, content, and monitoring general project
  progress and logistics.
Computer and Cell Phone Use
  Collaborative learning is a key component of this class. You are strongly encouraged to bring your own
  laptop and mobile device to class. When class is in session, however, please accept the “class use only”
  rule regarding your computer and mobile device usage. Do NOT use your computer to study for other
  classes, surf the web, type emails, check social media, etc. Please mute your cell phone, music player,


 or other electronic communication devices in class.
Course Schedule
 The following schedule is tentative in the sense that if we hit on a topic that sparks a great deal of
 interest, we will stay with it longer than the schedule below would seem to allow. This means we all
 need to stay alert to changes in the schedule, project assignments, and so on. To ensure each class is
 successful, it is essential for you to attend class and to work on the assigned project prior to class.
 Changes to the schedule may be also made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
 responsibility to note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you
 receive the changes with as much advanced notice as possible).
 The syllabus is a living document and will need to maintain a degree of flexibility to adapt to changing
 circumstances.
           August 29                                           Introductions and class presentation
           September 3 and 5                                   Units: 1. Careers in 360-video production
                                                              and Unit 2. Equipment Orientation and Safety
           September 10 and 12                                Unit 3. Basic 360-Video Camera Operation,
                                                              Shot Composition and Production and Post-
                                                              production Considerations.
           September 17 and 19                                Project 1 begins
           September 24 and 26                                Unit 4. Video and Sound Editing. Project 1
                                                              continues
           October 1 and 3                                    Project 1 continues
           October 8 and 10                                   (Yom Kippur 9) Unit 4 continues Project 1
                                                              presentation and deadline
           October 15 and 17                                  Project 2 begins. Pre-production
           October 22 and 24                                  Unit 5. Video Production and Unit 6. Career
                                                              development
           October 29 and 31                                  Project 2: Production: project shooting and
                                                              audio recording
           November 5 and 7                                   Project 2: Postproduction: Video and audio
                                                              editing
           November 12 and 14                                 Project 2: Deadline, Critique and feedback
                                                              and private show for our group.


            November 19 and 21                                 Project 2. Movie poster and invitation
                                                               production for the public
            November 26 (27 – 29 Thanksgiving holiday          Poster and invitation distribution
            break)
            December 3 and 5                                   Project 2 public show
Policies:
Classroom Policies
  Statement on Learning Success
  Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
  differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let
  me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the
  requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available
  through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if
  you would like.
Grading Policies
  As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. If
  you miss a smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be
  impacted significantly. Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
    Grade            Cutoff           Points needed
    A                94%              940
    A-               90%              900
    B+               87%              870
    B                84%              840
    B-               80%              800
    C+               77%              770
    C                74%              740
    C-               70%              700
    D                65%              650
    F                <65%             <650
Absences
  If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with
  the necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with
  your team members; you are responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it
  to a class.
  Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or
  extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a


 religious holiday, please let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this
 absence, although you will still be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check
 with us for details or arrangements.
 If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-
 down and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were
 gone that raise questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email
 specific questions you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is
 not specific enough.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
   •  You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
   •  You have a right to respect.
   •  You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
   •  You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
   •  You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
   •  You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your
      learning environment.
   • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
      isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
 With these rights come responsibilities:
   • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the
      teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
   • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others.
   • Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
      and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
   • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is
      excluded.
   • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
      these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
 Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
 Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
 dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance,
 and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they
 have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center.
 (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor your
 request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the
 gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc.). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester
 so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
University Resources for Students
 Services for Students with Disabilities


    This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
    circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
    information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
    needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
    environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as
    possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
    documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students
    with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
    official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit:
    http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
    Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs
    and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals
    and cope with stress.
    All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
    resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask
    for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
    If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
    anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
    http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
  The Sanger Learning Center
    Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
    Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
    advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer
    academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
    information, please visit: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
  Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
  Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
  ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
  Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
  BeVocal
    BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power
    to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and
    reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
    campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
  Important Safety Information:
    If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
    Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t
    feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.


   The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
   and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
   buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
   assembling outside.
   •     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
   •     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
         week of class.
   •     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
         enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University
         of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
   •     Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
         found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
 Title IX Reporting
     Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
     harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
     funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
     environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
     community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
          become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
     “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
     Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that
     are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or
     staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
     employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official
     report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting
     options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
     titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
     The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
     and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
University Policies
 Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student
     of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
     academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas
     that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources.
     Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including


   failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
   University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
   http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
   If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
   drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only
   allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information,
   see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
