Syllabus: Spring 2019 - ENTREPRENEURIALISM IN
COMM ADV/ (05890) & PR/ (06390)
Day & Time: Mandatory meet-up dates below
                     January 31st
                     @10AM /+ check in
 Initial Meet-ups:
                     on March 14th @
                     10AM
 Final Pitch Day:    May 2nd @ 6PM
Classroom: BMC 5.102
TA’s:
    •   Kelli Cothran. Kelli.Cothran@uTexas.edu KMC4927
Professor: Mark Bunting, MarkB@SkyTV.net
Enrollment: Course is designed as an open elective for students from any college.
Facebook: UTAdTech https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech?ref=bookmarks (Links to
an external site.)Links to an external site.
The Course: This independent study course is designed to help would-be
entrepreneurs develop a pitch deck for presentation to angel (other) investors. Small
teams will be assembled (4 or 5 per group). After initial approval of a concept there
will be a mid-semester check-in culminating in a final presentation to a group of angel
investors at semesters end. The final product and presentation will be graded by the
Professor and panel and is the sole grade for the course.
This course requires a self-starter who is highly independent and works good with
teams. The professor will provide consultancy services throughout the process but will
be looking for the teams to do their own executive summary, initial financial
projections, etc. Ultimately the course is designed to allow student the opportunity to
build and practice a presentation in front of a group of real investors.
Grading Policy:
Final Pitch & Deck: 100% of Grade


The final presentation grade will be a score on the quality of the working pitch deck
combined with the team presentation (performance) score. Team members will also
score each other for their effort and contributions and this will be weighted in the
final grade.
 Course Procedures:
1. Canvas: (http://courses.utexas.edu (Links to an external site.)Links to an
    external site.): Canvas and classroom announcements will serve as communication
    vehicles for this course. Please check Canvas or the Facebook page below for
    PowerPoint slides for a class session, as well as for other session-related materials.
    In order to ensure that you receive all information sent out through Canvas, please
    update your email address on UTDirect (utdirect.utexas.edu (Links to an external
    site.)Links to an external site.).
2. Facebook: Please like the UT ADTECH Facebook Page: facebook.com/
    UtAdTech (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. This source will list
    additional information such as blog posts, articles and other content which may be
    relevant to in-class discussion. Video content from class lectures as well as
    PowerPoint slides will also be posted on this site.
3. In Class Conduct: Use of laptop computers, cell phones, mobile tablets and other
    electronic devices during class session is prohibited. NOISE DURING LECTURES AND
    SPEAKERS IS HIGHLY DISRUPTIVE. Quiet is required!
4. Academic Dishonesty: All students are expected to act within and uphold the
    UT Honor Code fully. You may access the General Information Catalog to review
    specific University policies on scholastic dishonesty or refer to the Student Judicial
    Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ (Links to an external
    site.)Links to an external site..
 A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/
ssd/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
