Course:          ADV370J/PR367
                 Integrated Brand Management
Semester:        Fall 2018
Room:            BMC 4.208
Texts:           All readings are found in the files section of Canvas in the weekly folders.
Professor:       Robert J Lewis                Office: Belo New Media Center (BMC) 4.380
                 Office Hours:                 Fri. 2 – 4pm
TA:              Rachel Seo Jeong Heo          heosj5@utexas.edu
Course Description
Overview:        This course requires you “to think about how you think about management” (William Ellet). As such, the
                 course is focused on the development of critical thinking skills and exercising of your ability to do five things:
                 1. assess problems, isolate key evidence, then rank-order salient issues in an argument,
                 2. think in a quantified and structured manner following a straightforward decision-making process,
                 3. make decisions using informed judgment and create action plans appropriate to the current situation,
                 4. write a terse, persuasive case analysis then
                 5. sell your solution to peers and others.
                 Management is a participation sport, so be ready to share your ideas with peers and have them scrutinized.
                 Don’t feel bad if your ideas are critiqued, as nobody has ever made it through this class without saying
                 something silly As you read the text, outside readings and cases, do one or more of the following nine things.
                 Create a written outline of the material, list unanswered questions, boil the reading down into 4 to 5 sentences
                 or phrases, then ask yourself, "How can I use this on a day-to-day basis?" Think of examples to illustrate and
                 support your analysis of the case. Find examples that contradict the prevailing position. Quantify your position.
                 Inspect extreme solutions first. Be prepared to respond to a very simple question at all times, “Why do you
                 recommend that?”
Objectives:      The course has two objectives.
                 1. Give you a structured, proven approach to decision-making that is a practical and useful method for
                 addressing a variety of communications management issues.
                 2. Present you with a wide range of interconnected advertising and public relations management situations
                 similar to what you will encounter on the client side and the agency side of our business.
Assumptions:     1. Participants in this class have successfully completed all prerequisite courses and have a solid foundation in
                 the fundamentals of marketing as well as the various advertising and public relations functional areas. Given the
                 wide range of academic experiences in prerequisite courses, students are required to quickly identify and
                 resolve any gross conflicts, fundamental inconsistencies or background voids. Because this course requires a
                 common advertising and public relations foundation, students are responsible for timely background leveling.
                 2. Advertising and public relations management teams form the basis for a portion of the course. The ability to
                 work effectively and efficiently within a small group is essential to successfully completing this course.
Strategy:        1. Utilize class discussions of the text narrative, cases, online and outside readings plus current events as
                 a common framework for the study of advertising and public relations management.
                                                                   1


                   2. Utilize individual case analyses and individual assignments to demonstrate your analytic problem solving
                   abilities and writing skills.
                   3. Utilize management exercises to closely approximate the work environment of a management position on the
                   client side or within an agency.
Tactics:           1. Measure professional conduct with a subjective evaluation of participation and preparedness.
                   The texts and readings are short and to the point. This reflects the nature of the course — the assembling and
                   integration of in-depth information and concepts presented in prerequisite courses. Class discussions require
                   you to have a practical command of the assigned material. That command, coupled with a clear, concise, active
                   presentation style (online, in this case) is required to score above average on this dimension.
                   Significant emphasis is placed on class participation, especially questions, comments and discussion among
                   your peers. You must strike a balance between passive, silent reading and dominating the discussion with ill
                   conceived or trivial remarks. Neither of these two extreme positions is acceptable. Neither earns you many
                   participation points. Come to the class website prepared; take a stand. A lively discussion among peers is the
                   objective. Air your ideas. Rebut others. Join the fray.
                   Thorough preparation and concise expression are prized. Quality outweighs quantity. Enthusiasm counts.
                   Contribute; don’t disrupt. Ask questions. With few exceptions, there are no dumb or wrong questions.
                   Throughout your academic career you’ve heard this phrase. But in ADV370/PR367, it is important to believe it.
                   This course is ripe with uncertainty, inadequate and incomplete information plus insufficient time to work the
                   problem. To refrain from asking questions limits your exposure to fresh insights from others. There are always
                   multiple right recommendations (and multiple wrong ones) in this class because managers work with
                   unknowns.
                   2. Measure individual participation with a structured peer evaluation system.
                   Learning to write peer evaluations is a key management skill. Early in your career you will be on the receiving
                   end of many such evaluations. Later, you will be required to assess the professional performance of
                   subordinates in measurable, precisely articulated, clear terms. You will begin your understanding of this
                   difficult management task by completing this required assignment.
                   3. Measure individual resourcefulness, organization, analytic and writing skills with individual projects.
                   4. Measure individual problem solving and writing skills with case brief assignments. The core of this course
                   revolves around case brief analyses. A premium is placed on the development of quantitative dimensions in
                   case solutions. In every case response you submit, you must have some amount of quantified information.
Evaluation:        Professional conduct
                              (includes nametag, attendance, engagement)             =         10%
                   Professional contact list                                         =          5%
                   Readings quizzes                                                  =         20%
                   Individual case briefs                                            =         40%
                   Friday group-debates participation                                =          5%
                   Final Project                                                     =         20%
                                       Total                                         =        100%
Deadlines & Standards:
1. All assignments are to be completed prior to stated weekly deadlines. See assignment sheets as well as course schedule
(spreadsheet file) in files section of Canvas for individual deadlines.
2. Treat everyone with respect. Maintain the utmost composure. Never interrupt someone even if their ideas infuriate you. Ad
hominem is not allowed during forum discussions.
                                                                      2


3. Everything produced for class assignments is to be your original work. Enlisting aid from anyone outside the class is
considered a breach of UT’s Standard of Academic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
4. It is advisable and acceptable to turn assignments in early.
5. Numeric assignment scores are posted on Blackboard. Final letter grades are recorded as A, B, C, D or F and available at the
Office of the Registrar's "See my grades" page located at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/grades/report.
Participation in UT-Austin’s Electronic Course Instructor Survey (eCIS) is required.
6. A significant amount of information related to the course will be distributed via the Canvas messaging system. Check your e-
mail every day before class.
7. Grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors can significantly reduce an assignment score.
8. University of Texas —
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Mandatory Reading: All students agree to read then abide by the University of Texas at Austin’s Standard of Academic Integrity
and understand the nature of Academic Dishonesty as defined by UT-Austin at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php and http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a meeting, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Copyright Notice: All original materials presented in this class are copyrighted.
                                                                   3
