The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | Department of AET
Fall 2019 - INTRO TO DRAWING Syllabus (20445)
Intro to Drawing/ From Traditional to Digital
Class Location and Time: DFA 4.112
TTH 03:30 p.m. - 05:00 p.m
Instructor: Yuliya Lanina
Email: yuliya.lanina@utexas.edu
Office Hour: Tuesday, 5-5:50 pm, DFA
TA: Logan Larsen ltlarsen@tx.rr.com
Description
The course is designed for students who wish to develop drawing skills and to experiment with
combining analog and digital techniques. You will learn a variety of drawing techniques,
including the basics of still-life drawing and life drawing, and explore the processes of
combining traditional and digital media to create a unique and personal artwork.
It is recommended that you have a basic knowledge of Adobe Photoshop before taking this
course.
Course Structure and Assignments
Drawing will take up most of our classroom time. The rest of it will be dedicated to lectures and
critiques. Your classroom works will be going into portfolios.
Your classroom portfolios will be evaluated four times during the semester and will be collected
at the same time.
You are required to keep a sketchbook for homework (separate from the drawing pads used in
class). After each class you will be asked to complete one or two homework drawing
assignments, spending no less than 20 minutes on each drawing.
The sketchbooks containing homework drawings will be collected each class at the beginning of
the class.
The last four weeks of the semester will be dedicated to the final assignment – an original
artwork utilizing analog and digital techniques. There is no final exam in this class. However,
during the last two weeks of classes, each student will present their final assignment to the class.
Grading
The final grade will be a culmination of your performance on individual projects, your
homeworks, participation in class critiques, evidence of effort and technical development, and
successful competition of your final assignment.
Your final grade is comprised of the following:
4 classroom portfolios: 25%
Homework Drawings: 30%


Midterm: 15%+5%
Final Assignment & Presentation: 20%+5%
Attendance
Each lecture will build on the previous one, so regular attendance is paramount.
Most of the classes will begin with instructions. Therefore, it is imperative that you show up on
time. Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class
without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy.
Three tardies equals an absence.
You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss
points for in-class assignments or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up.
However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.)
impacts your attendance, please inform us as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception
below for religious holidays.
Classroom Etiquette
Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and instructors:
1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the
beginning of class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as
possible.
2) Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the classroom. If you forget to do
so, and your phone rings, chirps, or vibrates loudly during class, turn it off immediately and
discreetly. We reserve the right to penalize repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s
assignment.
3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen
to loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom
during breaks.
4) Consider bringing earphones and/or earplugs to class for work sessions. If you like to listen to
music while you work, you are welcome to do so, so long as no one else can hear it.


COURSE POLICIES
Safety Training
In accordance with regulations from UT’s Department of Environmental Health and Safety, all
undergraduate students are required to receive training in order to use the equipment in the art
and design labs. First, students must successfully pass the online training for general machine
shop safety; upon successful completion of this module, students will then receive hands-on
training for specific equipment. Time will be allotted during the first week of classes to complete
the online portion.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (email) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
students. Students are expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that email be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
in his or her official email address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/
address_change.WBX).
Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable
excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full
inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the
University or instructor.
Use of Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the
instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic
dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things,
uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other
current or future students.
Religious Holidays
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior
to the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.


Calendar
Please note that this schedule is tentative and will change.
Any changes will be announced in class, via email or on Canvas.
I will be posting your homework on Canvas after each class.
You are responsible for keeping up with any changes in the syllabus.
                      When                      Topics
   Week 1             August 29                 Introduction
                                                •    The drawing process
                                                     Seeing vs knowing
                      September 3             Individualizing
   Week 2                                       Contour drawing
                      September 5
                                                Complex objects
                      September 10            Charles White (Blanton)
    Weeks 3         September 12              Tonal bar
                                              Giorgio Morandi (crosshatch stroke)
                                              Flowers
                      September 17
                      1st Portfolio Due         Postitive/Negative Space
                      (1 best drawing from
                      each class)
    Weeks 4           September 19              Sighting
                      September 24              Analyzing the light.
    Weeks 5           September 26             Effects of light quality on mood


         October 1                    From General to Specific
 Weeks 6 October 3
                                        Framing your subject
         2nd Portfolio Due
         October 8                      Perspective. The Illusion of Space and Depth on a Two-
                                        Dimensional Surface
 Weeks 7 October 10                    Perspective.Vanishing points.
                                       Landmarks (UT)
         October 15
                                      Reflective Surfaces
 Weeks 8 October 17
                                        Portraiture
         October 22                     Midterm/Exhibition 1
 Week 9  October 24 (instructor away)   Figure drawing. Proportions
         October 29                   Figure drawing. Drawing from life model
 Week 10 October 31                     Figure drawing. Drawing from life model
         November 5                     Figure drawing. Drawing from life model
Week 11  November 7                      Portraiture
         3rd Portfolio
         Due
         November 12                    Drawing and Imagination
         Visiting Artist (TBA)


   Week 12           November 14
                                              Wacom workshop with Neal
                     November 19              The Foundry Tour
   Week 13           November 21               Final Project
                     Visiting Artist (TBA)    Mixed Media
                     November 26              Final Project
                                              Mixed Media continues
                     November 28
                     Thanksgiving Holiday
   Week 14
                     Week 14
                                              Final Critique/ Exhibition 2
                     December 3
                     December 5
                                              Final Critique
Required Materials
No textbook is required for this course. You will, however, need to purchase a range of drawing
materials the cost of which will be comparable to buying a textbook.
The following materials are required for this course:
Paper:
• Pad of good drawing paper, 18” x 24” in size. Strathmore, Canson, or other drawing pads are
acceptable.
• One pad of newsprint, bogus rough, or craft paper, 18 x 24 minimum.
• One 9” x 12” sketchbook.


Mark-making and other supplies:
• One each of the following drawing pencils: 6b, 2b, Hb, 2H, 4H or One complete set of pencils
You can also buy one sketch set
• Pencil sharpener
• Compressed charcoal - 4b or 6b. Buy 2 sticks. Conte brand is by far the best
.
• Erasers: 1 Art Gum, 1 White Vinyl Pen Eraser, 1 Kneaded
• Drafting Tape or other low-adhesive tape.
• Box for supplies
• Drawing board with clips large enough to accommodate an 18” x 24” sheet of paper.
• Art Portfolio, 23” x 26” or similar size, large enough to accommodate your drawing pad
Good place to get art supplies is Jerrys Artarama, www.jerrysartarama.com
They are located at 6010 N Interstate Hwy 35, Austin, TX 78752.
