                                         Multicultural Israel
                                                 Spring 2020
                                                 Hybrid Version
                                          JS 365C, MES 341, ANT 322D
                                             39115 40285         31635
                                  Instructor: Dr. Amelia Rosenberg Weinreb
                                       amy.weinreb@austin.utexas.edu
                                     Office hours scheduled upon request
                                         Tue/Thu 12:30pm-2:00pm
                             Dates highlighted in Green = Meet in GDC 4.302
                     All other classes lives-treamed online in the Zoom meeting room:
                                         https://zoom.us/j/3202806665
                 Technical support for Zoom: Dr. Mattew Russell, Faculty Innovation Center
                         matthew.russell@austin.utexas.edu, SZB 405, 512-232-6053
1. COURSE DESCRIPTION
This multidisciplinary, two-way interactive seminar is designed to foster conversation, research and
creative projects about Israel’s multicultural population between upper-division students with interests
in Jewish Studies, Middle Eastern Studies and Anthropology. What makes this course unique is that
much of it is live-streamed from Israel using Zoom and/or video-recorded material using GoPro to
observe cultural interaction and capture conversation. This year, we will also enhance the absorption of
course texts and materials by teaming up with MA students in International Development at the Hebrew
University of Jerusalem who are either members of Israel’s multicultural populations, and/or studying
marginalized groups within Israel, to join us for discussion, interviews and exchange of ideas throughout
the semester. The aim of these exchanges is to bring Israel’s contemporary populations, and the people
who study them to Austin, through a new type of Global Classroom. The virtual component of the
course is supplemented with in-class meet-ups, during which I lead face-to-face seminars and
workshops.
The course content is based on the premise that Israel is not only a heterogeneous society, but also has
the highest proportion of migrants of any country in the world. The notion of absorption—the social and
economic integration of Jewish immigrants—has remained an explicit ideal since the founding of the
modern state of Israel in 1948. Yet, absorption is also an ideological tool that often runs counter to the
contemporary lived experience of citizenship, participation, nation building, minority rights, and the
conflicting interests of Israel’s multicultural publics today. Taking these tensions as a starting point, this
course explores the complex social fabric that comprises contemporary Israeli society, and that shapes
Israeli identity, practice and politics. We will focus on the lived experience of Israel’s increasingly diverse
population. This includes populations associated with the majority: veteran Ashkenazim and Mizrahim;
more recent Jewish immigrants from the former Soviet Union, Ethiopia, Latin America and France;
religious communities such Haredim and modern-Orthodox. It also includes ethnic and religious


minorities such as Palestinian citizens of Israel, Bedouins, Christians, Muslims, Druze, and Black
Hebrews, as well as laborers from all over the globe who migrate to Israel and refugees from Sudan and
Eritrea. How fluid are boundaries between these groups? How different are their interests, tastes,
desires and needs? How committed or hostile are various publics to a coherent nation-building project,
and to contemporary Zionism? To explore the breadth of multicultural Israel without sacrificing cultural
specificity and theoretical depth, the course is organized into three integrated units that cover: 1)
Israel’s contemporary social context; 2) Israel’s historical context; 3) ethnographic case studies of Israel-
specific multicultural issues and 4) Israel’s citizen-state relationships, identity and belonging, and, and
general contemporary multicultural theory.
Note: This course carries a Global Cultures flag: Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
2. HYBRID COURSE FORMAT
Online component: As a hybrid course, most of the course learning activity has been moved online,
making it possible to reduce the amount of time spent in the classroom, and instead live-streamed from
your device by logging into Zoom and using this link to join the class in my “Zoom meeting
room” https://zoom.us/j/3202806665 wherever you are comfortable, during the scheduled class time:
12:30pm-2:00pm. (Note that Jerusalem, where I am located during live streaming is 8 hours ahead of
Austin). Student leaders, designated in advance, provide discussion questions generated from the
readings and videos, and in coordination with team members from Israel.
Classroom Meet-ups: Traditional face-to-face instruction in this course is significantly reduced, but not
eliminated. The virtual component is supplemented with in-class meet-ups, highlighted in green on the
syllabus. Specifically, I will be present for the first week of the course, two weeks in the middle, and
during the final week in class to help students engage with, refine, and process the ideas learned online,
build community, and facilitate workshops for their group projects. Dr. Matt Russel of the Faculty
Innovation Center is available on campus throughout the semester to facilitate the course and assist
with any technical or logistical support.
3. COURSE READINGS, MATERIALS, AND IDEAL STREAMING ENVIRONMENT
Readings: All readings are provided online as a hyperlink in the syllabus and also appear under files in
Canvas.
Materials: a) I recommend a good pair of earbuds/headphones so you can hear and concentrate during
streaming if you are streaming on your own; b) Make sure your laptop or phone is fully charged, or in a
location where you can charge during online class time. You would not want to run out of battery in the
middle of a class!
Streaming Environment: a) Test out the quality and speed of your connection with Zoom in your
favorite location for streaming (e.g. dorm rooms do not always have the best receptivity/connections).
Dr. Russel or I am happy to test it out with you!); b) Make sure you are in an environment in which you
can comfortably speak out loud without feeling self-conscious, or bothering others; c) When you are
leading group discussion, I recommend sitting together with your group and Zoom from the same
computer; d) Our classroom will always be available for streaming on the big screen to participate in


class together, if that is your preferred Zooming environment. We will perform a test run the first week
of class so all students are familiar with how to get online, project, and adjust settings, etc.
3. COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of the course, students will have developed the analytic skills to:
a) Articulate central themes of multiculturalism specific to the Israeli social and historical context,
particularly in relation to the founding of the development of the modern state of Israel
b) Place course themes of citizenship, participation, nation building, minority rights in the framework of
anthropological and multicultural theory
c) Exhibit independent, critical, and synthetic thinking through writing, projects, an exam, and
active participation in both online and face-to-face components of the two-way interactive course
d) Converse, with historical and ethnographic sensitivity, about a variety of populations and socio-
cultural groups in Israel
e) Develop deeper familiarity with one such group living in Israel through extensive research, through
discussion with students at Hebrew University
f) Write an annotated bibliography of 20 sources independently
4. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
a) Attendance and Participation (15%): Regular attendance is not only the key to your own success as a
student in this course, but also for the quality of the course as a dynamic whole. Arriving late and leaving
early disrupts to both online and face-to-face meetings disturbs class flow, so make every effort to arrive
to class on time with your materials prepared.
b) Three, two-page typed reading responses (15%): These can be unfettered reflections, reactions,
critical commentaries, or overviews of the day’s assigned reading(s). These responses are informal, but
are required. They give students time to think through issues that interest them without the pressure of
a letter-grade evaluation, but will be marked with a √+, √, or √- based on their quality. Important Note:
You may choose what three readings you wish to respond to over the course of the semester. However,
to receive credit, reading response papers must be via email the by 11:59pm before we discuss your
selected reading, and cannot be made up at the end of the course. Please label each response by both
title of reading and number: response #1, response #2, response #3.
c) Annotated Bibliography Project (35%): Each student will select an Israeli population or sub-
population that they would like to study in greater depth throughout the course, and produce an
annotated bibliography of the most relevant existing scholarly literature and multimedia material on
that population (rubric posted on Canvas).
d) Final Test (35%): Cover core concepts, vocabulary, history, ethnographic examples, and theory in our
texts. Each test will include a short-essay question that will encourage you to develop an idea in writing.
The test will include the following question format and point values.
  15 multiple choice                2 points each = 30 points
  15 fill-in-the-blank              2 points each = 30 points


 5 short answer questions         4 points each = 25 points
 1 short essay                     1 essay      = 15 points
Note on test question content: One week prior to the test, I have students post two questions they
would like to see appear on the test on Canvas, and often draw up to 80% of test content from student
suggestions! These suggested questions also prove useful for students to study and prepare for test.
Extra Credit
Students may earn up to 3 points of extra credit per semester towards their final grade. Rolling extra
credit opportunities are announced during class.
 4. GRADING SCALE
 A 94-100% Excellent grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides relevant details and
 examples; draws clear and interesting connections, exceptionally original, coherent and well-
 organized; ideas clearly written/stated, outstanding classroom participation
 A- 90-93% Very good grasp of subject matter; explains concepts clearly; provides relevant details and
 examples; draws clear connections; ideas clearly written/stated
 B+ 85-89% Good grasp of some elements above, others need work
 B 83-84% Satisfactory grasp of some elements above
 B- 80-82% Uneven, spotty grasp of the elements above
 C+ 75-79 % Limited grasp of the above
 C 73-74% Poor grasp of the above
 C- 70-72% Very poor grasp of the above
 D 60-69% Little evidence of grasp of material, having done readings, attended class, or
 completed assignments


 F    0-59% No evidence of having done readings, attended class, or completed assignments
Plagiarism and copying: Although this course is designed for creative, individual work and synthesis of
ideas from various sources, any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be
the student's own work. Should copying occur from another student, both the student who copied work
and the student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a zero for the
assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and
University disciplinary action.
University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of plagiarizing:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/faculty/plagiarism/preventing.html
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Using office hours, getting help: I check email regularly, and will usually reply to emails quickly. Office
hours are by appointment. Zoom office hours tend to be quite convenient for students
5. UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. In this
course, that means we will all work to ensure that the discussion space is shared relatively equally
among the participants, and to maintain an atmosphere of respect for each other’s perspectives and
arguments, especially when there are strong disagreements.
Students with disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone). Please contact me as early in the semester as possible to let me know if you need anything to
participate fully.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, students are required to notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior
to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will certainly give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
VI. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class. Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.


  Date    Main Topics, text(s)                Readings to complete before class          Evaluation,
                                                                                         work to do
                                                                                          at home
                                                 UNIT 1
                         INTRODUCTION: CONTEMPORARY SOCIAL CONTEXT
                    What kinds of people live in Israel, and why do they live there?
              How do you we define National Culture, What is Israel’s National Culture?
               How is Contemporary Israeli Society Structured, and how is it changing?
                                      First round of Case Studies
 T 1/21 Introduction to this
        class and its structure;
        Prelude to the concept
        of “National Culture:”
        US national Culture
Th 1/23 Discussing Israeli       Rubin
        National Culture         pp. 121-150
                                 https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1270498/files?
        A brief overview of      preview=52088738
        Israel’s populations
        Rubin Chapter 4:         (Also posted under Canvas” Files”)
        Society
 T 1/28 Rubin, Chapter 4,        Rubin                                                  Contribute
        Society, cont’d          pp. 151-188                                            to
                                 https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1270498/files?  Discussion
                                 preview=52088753                                       Board
                                 https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1258367/files?  based on
                                 preview=50267592                                       prompt
                                 (Also posted under Canvas “Files”).
  Thu.  Zoom: Discuss some
  1/30  unanswered questions
        and other insights that
        arose from the
        discussion board on
        “Society.”


 Th 2/4 Zoom: Israel’s current    Picture of the Nation                                      Everyone:
        demographic profile:      2018, pp.13-21                                             come to the
        How is it changing?                                                                  Zoom
                                  Picture of the Nation 2019, pp.25-32                       meeting wit
        Guest Lecturer:                                                                      h 1-2
        Professor Alex Weinreb    Excerpts  published  by the Taub Center  for Social Policy questions
                                  in Israel                                                  that
                                                                                             emerged
                                  (Also posted under Canvas “Files).                         from the
                                                                                             readings.
                                                                                             Write them
                                                                                             down, and
                                                                                             see if they
                                                                                             are
                                                                                             addressed
                                                                                             during the
                                                                                             lecture.
 Th 2/6 Case Study A:             Read this: “The Politics of Defining Jews from Arab
                                  Countries.” Israel Studies 21, no. 2 (2016): 1–26.
*Stude Mizrahim                   https://muse.jhu.edu/article/613586.
   nt
 Group Mizrahi students from Watch this: “Arab-Jews/Mizrahim: why did your
    2    Hebrew University will parents move to Israel?
         be joining us on Zoom https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xlytnFAQfEo
         for the conversation
 T 2/11 Case Study B
                                  Lahav
*Stude   Feminism and
   nt    Religion:                pp. 50-70
 Group   “The Women of the
    3    Wall: A Metaphor for
         National and Religious
         Identity”
Th 2/13 Case Study C              Paz
*Stude   Refugees and Asylum pp. 1-21
   nt    Seekers:
 Group   “Ordered disorder:
    4    African asylum seekers
         in Israel and discursive
         challenges to an
         emerging refugee
         regime”


                                                 UNIT 2
                                          HISTORICAL CONTEXT
                                     (Classroom meet-up Intensive)
        What historical context do we need to be literate about contemporary Israeli society?
                             Why was the State of Israel founded and what
                                  implications does its foundation have?
                           How when and why did various populations arrive?
 T 2/18 Middle-of-term,
        “retreat” check-in and
        evaluation
        In class exercise on
        group boundaries,
        cultural boundary-
        crossing, and boundary-
        keeping. Start to create
        a population study
        guide
Th 2/20 Historical Atlas of the    Barnavi pp. 1-40                                      Keep a
         Jewish People                                                                   running list
                                                                                         of what you
                                                                                         consider
                                                                                         the most
                                                                                         important
                                                                                         historical
                                                                                         details
                                                                                         Play Jewish
                                                                                         History
                                                                                         Jeopardy
 T 2/25   Historical Atlas of the Barnavi pp. 40-80.
         Jewish People
Th 2/27 Israel is Real             Cohen
*Stude                              pp. 89-119
   nt
 Group                             Cohen
    5                              pp. 120-157


                                                UNIT 3
                                     POPULATION CASE STUDIES
          What ethnographic examples help us understand Israel’s multicultural challenges?
                How applicable are theories of multicultural to Israel’s national reality?
       What can multiculturalism tell us nation building in the case of Israel, and more generally?
  T 3/3  Meet with Groups to                                                                 Due:
         Finalize Population                                                                 Population
         Study Guide                                                                         study guide
 Th 3/5 Israeli elections
         Background reading       And national election updates as assigned, and as polls
*Stude and analysis               and results unfold: https://en.idi.org.il/israeli-
    nt                            elections-and-parties/
 Group
    6
T 3/12   Meet in PCL 2.370 at                                                                Due:
         12:30pm                                                                             Paragraph
         Library instruction day                                                             describing
         for annotated                                                                       the
         bibliographies                                                                      population
                                                                                             you are
                                                                                             interested
                                                                                             in for your
                                                                                             annotated
                                                                                             bibliograph
                                                                                             y, and why
                                                                                             they are
                                                                                             significant
 T 3/17 Spring Break
Th 3/19 Spring Break


 T 3/24 Case Study D                Benezer
Student Ethiopian Israelis         pp. 157-173
 Group “Israeli “Mixed
    7    Families” with
         Members of Ethiopian
         Origin: Encounters in
         the Public Space”
         Visit to an Ethiopian
         neighborhood in
         Jerusalem
Th 3/2   Case Study E              Israel’s Multicultural Challenge
    6                              pp. 180-199
Student  The IDF
 Group   “Service in the IDF and
    8    the Boundaries of
         Israel’s Jewish
         Collective
 T 3/31 CASE STUDY F: The          Shafir and Peled
Student Dynamics of Multiple        pp. 1-34
 Group Citizenship
    9
 Th 4/2   Case Study G             Sagi and Nachtomy
        “Constitutional            pp. 1-25
        Incrementalism”
         In Israel’s Multicultural
         Challenge
  T 4/7  Can Israel be both          Gavison
 Student Jewish and                  pp. 1-4
  Group  Democratic?
    10   Debates surrounding
         this question


 Th 4/9 Passover                 Kibbutzim Transforming,                                    Discussion
        self-paced assignment Updates on Kibbutz life in Jews in Israel                     Board
                                   pp. 151-173
 T 4/14 Passover, self-paced       Multicultural Film Festival
        assignment TBA
                                   Watch and discuss films we vote on
Th 4/16 Passover, self-paced     Israel/Palestine (Dowty: 2008)                            Dowty
        assignment TBA           The Jewish Story                                          pp. ix-44
                                 The Arab Story                                            pp. 45-68
                                 The first pass at peace                                   pp. 137-161
                                                 UNIT 4
                     CITIZEN-STATE RELATIONSHIPS, IDENTITY, AND BELONGING
           What does it mean to be an Israeli citizen, or excluded from Israeli citizenship?
        What is the relationship between citizenship, identity belonging and multiculturalism?
               How does do of citizen-state relationships shape the Arab-Israeli Conflict?
 T 4/21  The Jewish Holidays as                          pp. 234-267
               Platform for
              Multicultural
          Discourse of Identity                          pp. 287-305
         We Pay our Taxes and
           Serve in the Army
              (focus on the
         marginalization of the
           Israel Andalusian
                Orchestra)
Th 4/23


 T 4/28 Annotation check        Send in 1 sample annotation Post on
        point an workshop                                   discussion
                                                            board by
                                                            9pm: What
                                                            would you
                                                            like to see
                                                            on the test?
                                                            Submit 2
                                                            sample
                                                            questions
Th 4/30 Discussion board
        Test Study session
        Students meet as a
        group in the classroom
        for Test Prep
        Write any questions
        about the test for me
        to answer
  T 5/5                                                     Final Test
 Th 5/7 *Party: Israeli holiday                             Annotated
        food and drink *                                    bibliographi
         Course evaluation                                  es due.
                                              ***
