                                             ANT 305
                                    EXPRESSIVE CULTURE
                                           Spring 2019
Instructor: Vasilina A. Orlova, vasilina@utexas.edu
Office hours: 4:00-5:00 Tuesdays, SAC 5.114 or by appointment.
Teaching Assistants:
Danielle Good, dlgood@utexas.edu
Office hours: 1:00-2:00 PM, Tuesdays, SAC 5.114 or by appointment.
Alexander Menaker, amenaker@utexas.edu
Office hours: 10-11 AM, Fridays, SAC 5.114 or by appointment.
Lectures: Tuesdays, 2:00 PM-4:00 PM, UTC 4.110
Discussion Sections: Fridays,
31540, 9:00 a.m.-10:00 a.m. Room: GAR 0.120, TA: Danielle Good
31545, 10:00 a.m.-11:00 a.m. Room: SZB 284, TA: Danielle Good
31550, 11:00 a.m.-12:00 p.m. Room: RLP 0.106, TA: Alexander Menaker
31555, 12:00 p.m.-1:00 p.m. Room: SZB 286, TA: Alexander Menaker
                                           Course Description
        This is the course exploring multiplicities of cultures and cultures’ manifestations
(expressions) in the world. We will be going through several blocks of things wrestling with two
questions: What is culture? And: How does it express itself? On this journey, we will encounter
ourselves taking selfies, robotic toys and robots, disloyal subjects, “others” of all kinds. We will
dip into ethnographic practices of socio-cultural anthropology, into linguistics, media and
communication studies, philosophy, and see how differently the different mindsets construct and
order the world of the social. On the way of this exploration we will trace the adventures of the
notions of the “self,” “representation,” “progress,” “social media,” “modernity,” “power,”
“language,” and others.
        Structure of the Course
        The course has three subdivisions: (1) Contemporary Expressive Cultures in the Familiar
Worlds, (2) Broadening the Horizons, and (3) Multiplicity of Cultures and Ways to Approach
                                                                                                  1


Them. The first division is called to demonstrate to the students how issues of expressive culture
pertain to their daily life. The second division forces us to go beyond the familiarity and introduces
the figures of “strangeness,” “foreignness,” and “the other,” which helps us to make sense out of
others’ existence. The third division is designed to situate our inquiries in the historic context of
humans who have been developing and studying expressive cultures for centuries. We will look
into the methods that allow researchers to look at cultures.
        What This Course is Designed to Help You With
        We will perfect our skills of expressing complex thoughts in simple and clear manner,
leading a productive discussion, and communicate ourselves to others. Emphasis in this course
will be placed on the close readings of the texts and developing the ability to creatively engage
with concepts. The goal of this course is to situate an educated person in the position of knowledge
regarding the multiplicity of cultures existing in the world. As the result in this course, students
will:
        * acquire a critical view on the contemporary American cultures by gaining the ability to
place specific practices in wider contexts;
        * expand their understanding of the world and broaden the horizons of their comprehension
of the complexities of world’s culture;
        * better their public performance skills;
        * advance their communication skills;
        * advance their skills in expressing themselves in writing and oral presentation.
        The readings for this course are uploaded to Canvas for your convenience in the PDF
format. Ideally, students will print articles out, annotate articles in their time, and bring in class
their annotated versions.
        Requirements
        The commitment to work throughout the semester is required for the successful completion
of this course. The readings must be done attentively and on time. All readings are required,
excepted for the optional readings, which are not mandatory, but desirable. The students must take
notes during the lectures and fulfill the assignments to the best of their ability. Students are
responsible to show up and complete assignments on time. During discussion sections, students
will practice their public speaking skills, ability to ask questions and listen to answers, and
respectfully engage with those who have different perspectives.
                                                                                                     2


                  1)    Throughout the semester, students will complete three writing assignments.
                  2)    For the main project, student must write the final piece demonstrating the
          progress that they have made throughout the semester in their ability to use concepts
          we’ve covered.
                  3)    We will have pop quizzes throughout the semester. The purpose of the
          quizzes is to measure the students’ familiarity with the reading material and their
          attendance, hence there will be no retaking of missed quizzes.
       The readings, discussions, and writings are designed to develop critical thinking, ability of
close and critical reading, public performance, and the production of analytical text. Students are
encouraged to work in close contact with their Teaching Assistants and the Assistant Instructor to
resolve possible difficulties in learning in a timely and respectful manner.
       During discussion sections, students will have the opportunity to work in collaboration
with Teaching Assistants and each other to discuss the material covered during the lectures and
present in the readings. The discussion sections are for the students to speak, with Teaching
Assistant merely mediating the conversation.
       Grading layout
       30% two writings throughout the semester (15% each).
       20% active and engaged participation in discussion section.
       20% the final writing project.
       10% familiarity with the readings.
       10% attendance: being present on time and consistently throughout the semester.
       10% pop quizzes.
       Contemporary Expressive Cultures in the Familiar Worlds
       Week 1. January 22. Introduction. What is “Expressive Culture”?
       No readings assigned.
       Week 2. January 29. What Do We Do When We Take a Selfie? Humans’ Self-
Representation on Social Media and What to Make Out of It
                                                                                                   3


        Alice E. Marwick, “Instafame: Luxury Selfies in the Attention Economy.” Public Culture,
27:1, 2015.
        OPTIONAL: Theresa M. Senft, “Microcelebrity and the Branded Self.”
        Week 3. February 5. Cultures of the Future. Roboticized World That We Are About
to Inhabit (1)
        Alan Dorin, “Building Artificial Life for Play.” Artificial Life 10: 99–112, 2004.
        OPTIONAL: John Searle. “Minds, Brains, and Programs.” In The Behavioral and Brain
Sciences (1980) 3, 417-457
        Week 4. February 12. Cultures of the Future. Roboticized World That We Are About
to Inhabit (2)
        Matthias Scheutz and Thomas Arnold. “Are We Ready For Sex Robots?” Proceeding HRI
'16 The Eleventh ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human Robot Interaction, 351-358,
2016.
        OPTIONAL: Alan Turing. “Computing Machinery and Intelligence,” Mind, vol. 59
(1950).
        Week 5. February 19. Online Dating and Mating Strategies. Cheating and Loyalty in
the USA: Cultural Assumptions
        Melissa Greg, “Spouse-busting: Intimacy, adultery, and surveillance technology.”
Surveillance & Society 11(3): 301-310. 2013
        Esther Perel. “Why Happy People Cheat?” The Atlantic, October 2017
        Week 6. January 26. How the Ideas of Sex and Gender are Rooted in Culture
        Judith Butler. Gender Trouble. Part 1, “Subjects of Sex/Gender/Desire” (i-iii, up to
(including): “Gender: The Circular Ruins of Contemporary Debate”).
        OPTIONAL: Part 1 until the ending (iv-vi).
        Week 7. March 5. Performance of Queer Self
        Watching film in class, Paris is Burning
        No readings.
        The first writing assignment is due.
                                                                                              4


       Broadening the Horizons
       Week 8. March 12. How Gender is Read Differently in Cultures
       Don Kulick, Travesti: Sex, Gender, and Culture Among Brazilian Transgender Prostitutes.
Introduction and chapter 2.
       Week 9. March 19, Spring Break (18-24, Monday-Sunday)
       Week 10. March 26. What Does It Take to Understand the Other?
       Renato Rosaldo, “Grief and a Headhunter's Rage.” in Culture and Truth: The Remaking of
Social Analysis (Boston: Beacon Press; London: Taylor & Francis, 1993 [1989]).
       Week 11. April 2. Popular Culture: Looking Beyond Entertainment
       Clifford Geertz. “Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight.” Daedalus, Vol. 134, No.
4, 50 Years (Fall, 2005), pp. 56-86.
       Week 12. April 9.
       We’re watching film in class (To Be Announced).
       No readings.
       The second writing assignment is due.
       Multiplicity of Cultures and Ways to Approach Them
       Week 13. April 16. Perceptions of Culture
       Bronisław Malinowski. “Introduction: The Subject, Method, and Scope of This Inquiry.”
from Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of Native Enterprise and Adventure in the
Archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. Routledge, 1978.
       Week 14. April 23. Language and Culture. Does Language Shape the Way We
Perceive the World?
       Benjamin Lee Whorf, “The Relation of Habitual Thought and Behavior to Language” from
Language, Thought, and Reality: Selected Writings of Benjamin Lee Whorf, edited by Penny Lee,
MIT Press, 2012.
                                                                                             5


        Week 15. April 30. How to Relate What We Think We Understood About Culture?
        Clifford Geertz. Thick Description: Toward an Interpretive Theory of Culture.
        Final writing is due May 4th.
                                        Supplementary Statements
        Writing Assignments
        The writing assignments will be delivered to students in advance by the Assistant Instructor
during the lectures; the information of such assignments will be accessible through Canvas. There
will be no printed handouts for written assignments.
        Possible Alternatives
        Throughout the course of the semester, we may or may not hear lectures from our Teaching
Assistants. Should such one-time substitutions occur, there will be an announcement made to this
effect. The lectures by TAs are also mandatory for attendance, and the TAs may or may not assign
separate readings on the respective weeks. In the case they assign their own readings, the readings
demanded by the Assistant Instructor for this week will be not required.
        Documented Disability Statement
        Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities at
(512)471-6259       (voice)     or     (512)232-2937        (video)     or     via    the    website
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd
        Do not hesitate to contact the instructor or teaching assistants if you have any questions or
concerns regarding accessibility.
        Response Policy: The instructor aims to answer the emails within the 24-hour timeframe
of receiving the email. Emails sent after 10 PM will likely be answered the next day. The instructor
does not take it upon herself to answer emails during the weekends.
        Attention! Teaching Assistant have their own politics of answering your emails.
        Religious and Family Celebrations, Illnesses, Emergencies, and the Like: Should the
student miss a class, they must notify the instructor of their planned absence in advance, and not
                                                                                                    6


shorter than in two weeks, and of the unplanned absence at the earliest opportunity with an
appropriate documented excuse.
        On Favorable Environment: The University seeks to establish and maintain a favorable,
creative, and friendly environment, free of discrimination, humiliation, intimidation, and
harassment. The University is committed to the principles of free speech and free expression. In
the absence of any specific regulation it is safe to consider the Immanuel Kant’s categorical
imperative, which in its third redaction sounds thusly: “Every rational being must so act as if s/he
were through her/his maxim always a legislating member of the universal kingdom of ends.”
        Laptops in Class: During the lectures, the use of personal computers, phones, iPads, and
so on, by students, are strongly discouraged. During the discussion sections, since students are
working closely with the text, and have PDFs, it is understandable that students would not always
have an opportunity to print the articles, hence the use of computers is allowed. However, nothing
but the articles are to appear on your screens. No messaging (if there is an emergency, leave class),
no shopping, not even other university-related activities. If students are noticed to be breaching
this rule, they will be asked to leave the class, checked as absent, and marked lower on “active and
engaged participation in discussion sections,” which is 20% of the final grade.
        Tape Recording: According to the University’s policies, tape recorders are not to be used
by students unless you obtain a permission of the instructor. But if you feel like recording, ask,
and the permission is likely to be granted.
        On Academic Dishonesty: A student plagiarizing does not only fail to take advantage of
the learning environment that they have but infringe on others’ rights to receive the due
acknowledgement for their work. It is better to avoid plagiarism which should be distinguished
from the free use of ideas of others with proper acknowledgement. What is plagiarism and how to
avoid it: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
        Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is
acting aggressively or is extremely upset, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line. Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
        Mental Health Issues: If you are concerned about how you feel, if you struggle with
completion of everyday tasks, if you have insomnia, anxiety, stress issues, I would encourage you
to make use of the resources of the Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
        Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin: The University of Texas has numerous
resources to ensure that students are supported in their best intentions to take the best advantage
of their time in college.
                                                                                                   7


Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                                        8
