                                           HIS s315K, 82065
                                    The United States, 1492-1865
                                         MTWThF 1:00-2:30
                                             MEZ B0.306
John Lisle
Office: GAR 3.206
Office Hours: Thursday 11:00-1:00 and by appointment
Email: johnlisle7@gmail.com
Course Overview:
   • This course surveys four hundred years of American history, from the Age of Exploration
        to the Civil War. This course begins with a discussion of the motives for European
        exploration and colonization of North America. Next, it focuses on the nature of contact
        between European and indigenous societies. From there, it looks at the emergence of
        British North America and the causes and consequences of the American Revolution. It
        ends by discussing westward expansion and the Civil War. Themes of the course include
        American culture, the evolution of political thought, and slavery. This course offers an
        introduction to the discipline of history by addressing the questions: What does it mean to
        study history? How does one “think historically”?
Grading:
   • Exams (30% each): There will be three in-class exams including multiple choice and
        essay questions. They are not cumulative. Bring a pen or pencil. You do not need a
        Bluebook or Scantron. Exam 1 is July 24. Exam 2 is August 2. Exam 3 is August 16.
   • Quizzes (10%): There will be an undisclosed number of quizzes throughout the course.
        You must be present in class to take the quizzes and receive credit unless you have an
        excused absence.
   • A is 94-100%, A- is 90-93%, B+ is 87-89%, B is 84-86%, B- is 80-83%, C+ is 77-79%,
        C is 74-76%, C- is 70-73%, D+ is 67-69%, D is 64-66%, D- is 60-63%, F is 0-59%
Absences:
   • Attendance is not required, but you cannot expect to pass this course if you do not attend.
   • If a religious holiday or an emergency prevents you from taking an exam or quiz, contact
        me to schedule a make-up.
Readings:
   • Foner, Eric. Voices of Freedom: A Documentary History, vol. 1, 5th edition
   • Williams, Heather. American Slavery: A Very Short Introduction
Statement on Learning Success
   • Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because
        we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning
        or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies
        to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach
                                                   1


      out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I
      am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
University Resources for Students
   • Services for Students with Disabilities. This class respects and welcomes students of all
      backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
      environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to
      share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
      evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
      environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
      early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any
      student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
      contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644
      (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
      accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
   • Counseling and Mental Health Center. Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this
      semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and
      taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
   • All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are
      many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college
      experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is
      often helpful.
   • If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or
      feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
      http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html.
   • The Sanger Learning Center. Did you know that more than one-third of UT
      undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their
      academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
      classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
      coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
      information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614.
   • Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
   • Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
   • ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
   • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
   • If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors,
      call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be
      anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right—it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and
      share your concerns.
   • The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
      Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/.
   • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
      evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
      requires exiting and assembling outside.
                                                  2


    •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used to enter the building.
    •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class.
    •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
        re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
        The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Title IX Reporting
    • Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
        harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
        federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning
        and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
        misconduct occurs in our community, the university can: intervene to prevent harmful
        behavior from continuing or escalating, provide support and remedies to students and
        employees who have experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX
        investigation, investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
    • Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
        “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title
        IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any
        Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
        Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related
        incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
        with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
        email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and
        resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office: titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Academic Integrity
    • Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
        “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
        University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
        Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
        previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism
        and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
        responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code
        which can be found here: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
    • If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
        the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
        law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
        institution. See: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                   3


Weekly Schedule (subject to change at my discretion. Complete the day’s assigned reading
before class):
Week 1 (July 15-19)
   • M: Introduction to the Course; Studying History
   • T: The Americas Before European Contact
           o Smith, The Results of Colonization (Foner 1);
   • W: Exploration and Conquest
           o Las Casas on Spanish Treatment of the Indians (Foner 8); Williams 1-17
   • Th: New World Settlements
           o Exchange between John Smith and Powhatan (Foner 23); Sending Women to
               Virginia (Foner 26); The Trial of Anne Hutchinson (Foner 33); Olaudah Equiano
               on Slavery (Foner 65)
   • F: Forging an American Identity
           o An Apprentice’s Indentured Contract (Foner); Virginia Resolutions on the Stamp
               Act (Foner 86)
Week 2 (July 22-26)
   • M: Declaring Independence
           o Thomas Paine, Common Sense (Foner 96); Samuel Seabury’s Arguments Against
               Independence (Foner 103); Read the Declaration of Independence; Thomas
               Jefferson on Race and Slavery (Foner 134)
   • T: The American Revolution
           o Abigail and John Adams on Women in the American Revolution (Foner 106);
               Benjamin Rush, Liberating Indentured Servants (Foner 117)
   • W: Exam 1
   • Th: The Constitution
           o Read the Constitution
   • F: Hamiltonian vs. Jeffersonian America
           o Protest against the Alien and Sedition Acts (Foner 151); Williams 17-33
Week 3 (July 29-August 2)
   • M: The Lewis and Clark Expedition I
           o Tecumseh on Indians and Land (Foner 157)
   • T: The Lewis and Clark Expedition II
   • W: The War of 1812
           o Williams 33-51
   • Th: Jacksonian America
           o The Monroe Doctrine (Foner 187); Appeal of the Cherokee Nation (Foner 201);
               Texas Declaration of Independence (Foner 269)
   • F: Exam 2
Week 4 (August 5-9)
   • M: The Western Frontier
                                                4


          o Complaint of a Lowell Factory Worker (Foner 165); A Woman in the Westward
             Movement (Foner 171); John L. O’Sullivan, Manifest Destiny (Foner 253)
  •   T: The Gold Rush
          o A Protest against Anti-Chinese Prejudice (Foner 257); Williams 51-72
  •   W: Antebellum South
          o The Rise of the Cotton Kingdom (Foner 210); Slavery and the Bible (Foner 217);
             Letter by a Fugitive Slave (Foner 219); Solomon Northrup, The New Orleans
             Slave Market (Foner 221)
  •   Th: Abolitionism and Resistance
          o Frederick Douglas on the Desire for Freedom (Foner 207); Catharine Beecher on
             the Duty of American Females (Foner 240); Angelina Grimké on Women’s
             Rights (Foner 244)
  •   F: The Election of 1860
          o The Lincoln-Douglas Debates (Foner 272); Williams 72-86
Week 5 August (12-16)
  • M: Secession
          o South Carolina Ordinance of Secession (Foner 277); Alexander Stephens, The
             Cornerstone of Slavery (Foner 280)
  • T: The Civil War
          o Marcus Spiegel, Letter of a Civil War Soldier (Foner 284); Abraham Lincoln, The
             Gettysburg Address (Foner 290); Letter by the Mother of a Black Soldier (Foner
             295)
  • W: Aftermath
          o The Mississippi Black Code (Foner 310); Williams 86-119
  • Th: Lessons from the Past
  • F: Exam 3
                                              5
