                                      RADICAL
                LATINAS / LATINOS / LATINXS
                                 AMS 370 Unique #: 30610 /
                                  MAS 374 Unique #: 39665
                             Associate Professor Cary Cordova
                                           Fall 2019
The word “radical” encompasses a wide variety of meanings, including being
different, “other,” new, extreme, awesome, and even serving as a label for the
political Left. Radical can imply a “black sheep” waywardness, or an inability to
fit into standard operating procedure. This course will use the word “radical” to
examine the social positioning and history of Latinas/os/xs in the United States.
Which interpretation of radical are you encountering in history, and now? What
constitutes radical when people are fighting for education, work, human rights, or
to exist?
We will use this “radical” framework to analyze the histories of Latinas/os/xs
who have gone against mainstream expectations, or who have challenged or
critiqued the status quo in provocative and unexpected ways. The class will
examine a wide range of potentially “radical” actions and ideas, incorporating
activists, such as Emma Tenayuca, Luisa Moreno, and Lolita Lebron, social
movements, such as the United Farm Workers and the Young Lords, films, such
as Salt of the Earth and Palante, Siempre Palante!, and artists, such as Guillermo
Gomez-Peña and Ricardo Dominguez. In looking at what is considered extreme,
out of the ordinary, or unusual, the class is equally invested in what is
appropriate, ordinary, traditional, and everyday.
Course Objectives:
o Develop expertise and contextualize Latina/o/x histories and cultural production in relation
     to national and global histories
o Assess disparate accounts of historical events using primary and secondary sources and
     create evidence-based interpretation.
o Examine historical representations in museums, institutions, and the built environment and
     imagine creative approaches to understanding and teaching history
o Develop research skills using primary and secondary sources and historical archives
o Enhance critical analysis and writing skills


REQUIRED TEXTS:
BOOKS (available at the Co-op):
     ◼ David Dorado Romo, Ringside Seat To A Revolution: An Underground Cultural
         History of El Paso and Juarez: 1893-1923 (El Paso, TX: Cinco Puntos Press, 2005).
     ◼ Monica Muñoz Martinez, The Injustice Never Leaves You: Anti-Mexican Violence
         in Texas (Harvard University Press, 2018).
     ◼ COURSE READER: This class requires a course reader, which will be available for
         purchase at Jenn’s Copy and Binding AFTER LABOR DAY. You can call to make
         sure it is available: 512-482-0779. Jenn’s is located at 2518 Guadalupe (where
         Guadalupe intersects with Dean Keeton, approximately two blocks from our
         classroom).
         Please note: The first few articles will be posted on Canvas to ensure everyone
         has access to the initial readings: <https://utexas.instructure.com>.
         If you have trouble accessing the Canvas system, please contact the UT helpdesk
         (512-475-9400). In addition, one copy of the course reader will be placed ON
         RESERVE in the American Studies lounge outside our classroom to ensure
         everyone’s access.
GRADING:
  ◼ A “Psychogeography,” or Latina/o/x Landmarks Paper (4-5 pages) (20%).
  ◼ “Radical” History Paper (5-6 pages) (25%).
  ◼ Group Discussion Questions and In-Class Moderating (5%)
         o As part of a larger group (about 3 students), each student will have one
             opportunity over the course of the semester to lead class discussion.
  ◼ A “Radical” Final (TOTAL 30%):
     Given the subject of this class, you will be asked to devise your own final, subject to the
     professor’s approval. The final must reflect an effort to synthesize the course materials in
     a meaningful way. Guidelines will be established based on your proposal. If you are
     unable to come up with a viable “Radical” final, I will assign you a 10-12-page research
     paper. Your submission should be relatively equivalent in time and energy.
         o Research Proposal (5%)
         o Final Presentation (5%)
         o “Radical” Final (20%)
  ◼ Attendance & Participation: (20%)
         o Because class participation is considered an important part of this class,
             attendance will be noted each day.
             **Missing more than 3 classes is likely to negatively impact your grade.**


           o I ask for more than just attendance. You should make an effort to participate and
               show me that you have done the reading, or are actively engaged in the class. A
               variety of classroom exercises will ensure you are up-to-date with readings and
               contributing to class discussion. I appreciate engagement more than quantity of
               comments.
           o Tips for participation: As you read, think about what you might add to our
               discussion. What ideas are driving the reading? How is the argument supported?
               Consider not just your personal reaction, but the big picture questions and
               contradictions. Come to class with questions for discussion or with related ideas
               to make connections.
           o QUIZZES: I do occasional pop reading quizzes. They are not hard if you have
               done the reading. Come to class prepared. I do not give make-up quizzes. For
               quizzes, I grade using the following symbols: + (excellent); ✓+ (good); ✓
               (acceptable); ✓- (poor); — (failed). In establishing your final grade on the
               quizzes, I will take into account your overall performance in the class and your
               best quiz grades.
   ◼ EXTRA CREDIT
       o As the semester rolls along, there may be a few opportunities for extra credit. Extra
           credit opportunities often entail attending an event or talk related to our class and
           submitting a short paper (1-2 pages) on how the content of the event relates to the
           content of our class. If you have an idea for an extra credit assignment, you are
           welcome to discuss it with the professor.
       o So what is extra credit worth? Extra credit is given weight in the assessment of
           your participation grade. It is meant to help students that would like a little more
           recognition in this aspect of the grading process. It is in no way required, but it can
           help push students up a couple of points in their overall participation grade.
GRADING SCALE:
 100-93 = A               92-90 = A-                87-89 = B+               84-86 = B
 80-83 = B-               77-79 = C+                74-76 = C                70-73 = C-
 67-69 = D+               64-66 = D                 60-63 = D-               0-59 = F
POLICIES:
CLASSROOM CONDUCT:
◼ In order to build the best possible learning environment, please be respectful of the professor,
   the teaching assistants, and other students. Reading on your phone, texting, falling asleep,
   talking to friends, threatening language, aggressive behavior, and various other
   examples of disregarding the learning environment, are not acceptable conduct. Should
   you feel compelled to engage in these activities, you may be asked to leave the classroom.
◼ Please turn off and put away all the electronics – cell phones, tablets, and laptops.


    LAPTOP POLICY: WHY LAPTOPS ARE DISCOURAGED
1. Students perform better without them! Studies show that the act of physically writing
    notes helps students better retain information. While laptop writers can type more quickly,
    they risk becoming “transcription zombies,” while those who put pen to paper must actively
    edit and physically document information in a way that enhances memory. See here:
    http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/the-case-for-banning-laptops-in-the-classroom
2. While perhaps convenient for one student, laptops often serve as objects of distraction for
    every other nearby student.
3. Because we are all human and easily distracted by email, social media, and homework for
    other classes.
If you must use a laptop to take notes, please be aware that if you appear to be doing anything
    other than taking notes, you will lose the privilege of using your laptop for the rest of the
    semester. The loss of electronic privileges is FINAL.
ASSIGNMENTS AND LATE POLICY:
    ◼ Students are expected to do the required readings for each class in advance of attending
        class. Students also are encouraged to bring the course reader with them to class, in
        order to refer to the material when needed (or perhaps prepare for a pop quiz!).
    ◼ All assignments are due at the beginning of the scheduled class. All papers must be
        typed and proofread; careless editing will incur deductions.
    ◼ Extensions on graded assignments will be granted only in the case of a medical or family
        emergency, social trauma or disaster, or if you have official documented university
        business off campus. In most cases, you must notify me before the due date. Failure to
        do so will result in the automatic subtraction of a letter grade. Assignments turned in
        late without an allowable excuse will lose one letter grade for each day past the due
        date.
    ◼ You are responsible for the material missed in any class. I cannot respond to email
        requests to summarize material, but I can respond to such requests during office hours or
        by appointment. Alternatively, consult with the teaching assistants, or a fellow student.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY:
    ◼ Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated and ALL incidents of dishonesty will be
        reported to the Office of the Dean of Students and Student Judicial Services. Academic
        dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism (the unauthorized
        appropriation of another’s work – including from Websites – in one’s own written work
        offered for credit) and collusion (the unauthorized collaboration with another person in


    preparing college work offered for credit).
  ◼ PLAGIARISM: STUDENTS WHO COMMIT PLAGIARISM ARE SUBJECT TO
    IMMEDIATE FAILURE OF THE CLASS, IN ADDITION TO FACING THE
    POLICIES OF THE UNIVERSITY. Students should be aware that all required writing
    assignments may be submitted to a plagiarism-detection tool such as Turnitin.com as part
    of a larger effort to address plagiarism and improper citation. If you are unclear about
    what plagiarism is, I would encourage you to visit the following website:
    http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
ACCOMMODATION:
  ◼ Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability who requires
    academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at
    ssd@austin.utexas.edu, or 512-471-6259 (voice), or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone), as
    soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. The
    professor and student will use this letter as a guide for implementing any
    accommodations. Students who need assistance, but do not yet have an official letter of
    support, are still encouraged to alert the professor to ideal accommodations, so we can
    coordinate support in advance. Immediate concerns will be handled on a case by case
    basis, and official documentation will be required to ensure proper accommodations are
    made. See here for more info: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/using-
    accommodations/
  ◼ Emergencies: Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and
    believes this may affect their performance in the course is urged to contact the Dean of
    Students Emergency Services for support: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
    Furthermore, please notify the professor if you are comfortable in doing so. This will
    enable her to provide any resources that she may possess.
  ◼ Religious observances: Texas Education Code 51.911 states that a student shall be
    excused from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
    the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
    whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence
    and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
    student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
    students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so
    that arrangements can be made.
CAMPUS CARRY:
  ◼ According to Texas SB11, persons with a current legally valid Concealed Carry License
    may carry a legal handgun on public college campuses, as long as it remains concealed
    and on their person (private colleges can opt out of SB11). If anyone, including the
    professor, sees a handgun, however briefly, leave the vicinity and call 911 immediately.


   ◼ According to SB11, faculty members cannot ban the concealed carry of handguns in their
       classrooms, no matter how unsafe they or students may feel discussing complex issues
       with firearms present.
   ◼ Some exceptions to campus carry exist: For instance, faculty and staff can ban guns from
       their sole-occupant offices, but only if they give oral notice of this policy. Thus, in order
       to comply with this new policy, I will read the following aloud on the first day of class:
       “I prohibit the concealed carry of handguns in my office.”
Course Schedule:
Please Note:
   1.      This schedule is subject to change as needed.
   2.      Students should complete the readings for the day they are listed,
           so they are prepared for that day’s class.
WEEK ZERO
Thursday, August 29
   ◼ Introduction & Welcome
WEEK 1
Tuesday, September 3
                                  What’s Radical? Who’s Latino?
   ◼ Rules for Radicals
           o READ: Saul D. Alinsky, Preface and Chapter Two: Of Means and Ends,”
               Rules for Radicals: A Pragmatic Primer for Realistic Radicals (New York:
               Vintage, 1989 (1971)), xiii-xxvi and 24-47.
           o DUE: 1-page Alinsky Response Paper. Answer either of the following
               questions:
               1. What is, or is not, radical about Alinsky’s writing?
               2. How does Alinsky’s text from 1971 speak, or not speak to today’s political
               climate?
           o READ: Katie Mettler, “Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez says ‘call me a radical,’ a
               Loaded Word with a Long History,” Washington Post, January 8, 2019.
Thursday, September 5
   ◼ The Latino Imaginary
           o 1970: Ruben Salazar, “Who is a Chicano? And What Is It the Chicanos
               Want?” Los Angeles Times, February 6, 1970, B7.


          o 2003: Oscar Casares, “Crossing the Border Without Losing Your Past,” The
             New York Times, September 16, 2003.
          o 2007: Frances R. Aparicio, “(Re)constructing Latinidad: The Challenge of
             Latina/o Studies,” from A Companion To Latina/o Studies, eds., Juan Flores and
             Renato Rosaldo (Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, 2007), 39-48.
          o 2017: Rodríguez, Richard T. “X Marks the Spot.” Cultural Dynamics 29, no. 3
             (August 2017): 202–213.
WEEK 2
Tuesday, September 10
                                     Border Crossings
   ◼ The Border Is … The Radical Cartographies of Guillermo Gómez-Peña and
      Guillermo Verdecchia
          o READ: Guillermo Gómez-Peña, “The Free Trade Art Agreement / El Tratado
             de Libre Cultura,” New World Border: Prophecies, Poems & Loqueras for the
             End of the Century (San Francisco, CA: City Lights, 1996), 5-18.
          o READ: Markus Heide, “Learning from Las Vegas”: Border Aesthetics,
             Disturbance, and Electronic Disobediance: An Interview with Performance
             Artist Ricardo Dominguez,” Journal of Borderlands Studies, June 26, 2018, 1-9.
          o BROWSE: Guillermo Gómez-Peña, “Multiple Journeys: The Life and Work
             of Guillermo Gómez-Peña,” Conversations Across Borders: A Performance
             Artist Converses with Theorists, Curators, Activists and Fellow Artists, edited by
             Laura Levin (London: Seagull Books, 2011), 318-350.
                 ▪ Discuss: Which performance speaks to you and why?
Thursday, September 12
   ◼ Flipping The Gaze
          o READ: Coco Fusco, “The Other History of Intercultural Performance,”
             English is Broken Here: Notes on Cultural Fusion in the Americas (New York:
             The New Press, 1995), 37-63.
          o In-Class Film: Couple in the Cage
WEEK 3
Tuesday, September 17
   ◼ Representing El Paso
          o David Dorado Romo, Ringside Seat To A Revolution: An Underground Cultural
             History of El Paso and Juarez: 1893-1923 (El Paso, TX: Cinco Puntos Press,
             2005), 1-44; 64-66 (From “The Lynching of Antonio Rodriguez” up to paragraph
             starting with “Madero Changed his mind”).
          o ASSIGN: Psychogeography / Latina/o/x Landmarks Paper
          o ASSIGN: Group Discussion Questions & Moderation


Thursday, September 19
   ◼ The Bath Riots
          o READ: David Dorado Romo, “The Seeds of Anarchy: The Magonistas in El
             Paso,” and “The Bath Riots: Revolt of the Mexican Amazons at the Santa Fe
             Bridge,” Ringside Seat To A Revolution: An Underground Cultural History of El
             Paso and Juarez: 1893-1923 (El Paso, TX: Cinco Puntos Press, 2005), 52-60;
             197-244.
             DISCUSS: Research Strategies
WEEK 4
Tuesday, September 24
   ◼ The Power of State Violence and Vigilantism
          o READ: Monica Muñoz Martinez, “Introduction,” and “Divine Retribution,”
             The Injustice Never Leaves You: Anti-Mexican Violence in Texas (Harvard
             University Press, 2018), 1-29, 30-75.
Thursday, September 26
   ◼ Cultures of Violence
          o READ: Monica Muñoz Martinez, “Chapter Four: Cultures of Violence,” The
             Injustice Never Leaves You: Anti-Mexican Violence in Texas (Harvard
             University Press, 2018), 172-226.
          o BROWSE / SEARCH A TOPIC ON THE TEXAS ARCHIVAL
             RESOURCES ONLINE (TARO): https://legacy.lib.utexas.edu/taro/
                ▪ In class: Share an archival document, photograph, or other material from
                     the archive relating to our research on Latinas/os/xs
WEEK 5
Tuesday, October 1
   ◼ Reading Between the Lines: Archives, Documents, and Histories
          o READ: Monica Muñoz Martinez, “Chapter Five: Idols,” “Chapter Six:
             Reckoning with Violence,” and “Epilogue,” The Injustice Never Leaves You:
             Anti-Mexican Violence in Texas (Harvard University Press, 2018) 227-263; 264-
             292; 293-300.
             DUE: GROUP 1 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS & MODERATION
Thursday, October 3
   ◼ Well-Behaved Women Seldom Make History
          o READ: Theresa Ybanez, “Mujeres de San Antonio: Murals of Emma
             Tenayuca, Corazones de la Comunidad, and Rosita Fernandez,” Frontiers: A


             Journal of Women Studies, Vol. 24, No. 2/3, Gender on the Borderlands (2003),
             237-243.
         o READ: Gabriela González, “Carolina Munguía and Emma Tenayuca: The
             Politics of Benevolence and Radical Reform,” Frontiers: A Journal of Women
             Studies, Vol. 24, No. 2/3, Gender on the Borderlands (2003), 200-229.
         o DUE: GROUP 2 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS & MODERATION
WEEK 6
Tuesday, October 8
   ◼ How do you Remember the Alamo?
         o READ: Deborah Vargas, “Remember the Alamo, Remember Rosita
             Fernández,” Dissonant Divas in Chicana Music: The Limits of La Onda
             (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2012), 1-53.
         o READ: Laura Hernandez-Ehrisman, “Breakfast Taco Wars: Race, History,
             and Food in Austin and San Antonio,” The End of Austin, September 22, 2016,
             https://endofaustin.com/2016/09/22/breakfast-taco-wars-race-history-and-food-in-austin-
             and-san-antonio/
         o DUE: GROUP 3 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS & MODERATION
Thursday, October 10
   ◼ Salt of the Earth
         o In Class Film: Salt of the Earth (94 minutes)
         o DUE: Psychogeography / Latino Landmarks Paper
WEEK 7
Tuesday, October 15
   ◼ Radical Politics and the Cold War
         o Salt of the Earth Continued
         o Alicia Schmidt Camacho, “No Constitution for Us: Class Racism and Cold
             War Unionism,” Migrant Imaginaries: Latino Cultural Politics in the U.S.-
             Mexico Borderlands (New York: New York University Press, 2008), 112-151.
         o Stephen Pitti, “Chicano Cold Warriors: César Chávez, Mexican American
             Politics, and California Farmworkers,” In from the Cold: Latin America’s New
             Encounter with the Cold War, eds. Gilbert M. Joseph and Daniela Spenser
             (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2008), 273-307.
         o ASSIGN: “Radical” History Paper


Thursday, October 17
   ◼ La Huelga in Austin
         o READ: Mary Elizabeth Riley, Excerpts from “The Austin Chicano Huelga”
             (Master’s Thesis, University of Texas at Austin, 1996).
         o READ: Gloria Espitia, “Activism and the Brown Berets of Austin, Texas:
             1970s-1980s,” Terrazas Branch Library, October 1-31, 2013.
         o BROWSE: Andrés Tijerina, “Annotated Bibliography of Mexican American
             Civil Rights Holdings in the Travis County Archives,” (University of Texas at
             Austin, 2007).
         o BROWSE: PODER Records, An Inventory of the Collection,
             http://www.lib.utexas.edu/taro/aushc/00374/ahc-00374.html
         o BROWSE: Bracero History Archive, http://braceroarchive.org/
         o BROWSE: Onda Latina, http://www.laits.utexas.edu/onda_latina/
                 ▪ In Class: Share an archival document, photograph, or other material from
                     the archive relating to our research on Latinas/os/xs in AUSTIN.
WEEK 8
Tuesday, October 22
   ◼ Puerto Rican Politics on the Island and in the Diaspora
         o Pedro Albizu Campos, “Puerto Rican Nationalism,” Boricuas: Influential
             Puerto Rican Writings, An Anthology, ed., Roberto Santiago (NY: Ballantine
             Books, 1995), 27-28.
         o Luis Munoz Marin, “On Recent Disturbances in Puerto Rico,” Boricuas:
             Influential Puerto Rican Writings, An Anthology, ed., Roberto Santiago (NY:
             Ballantine Books, 1995), 29-30.
         o Esmeralda Santiago, “Island of Lost Causes,” Boricuas: Influential Puerto
             Rican Writings, An Anthology, ed., Roberto Santiago (NY: Ballantine Books,
             1995), 22-24.
         o Irene Vilar, Excerpt, The Ladies’ Gallery: A Memoir of Family Secrets (New
             York: Vintage Books, 1998), 85-97.
         o Iris Morales, “Palante, Siempre Palante! The Young Lords,” in The Puerto
             Rican Movement: Voices from the Diaspora, eds., Andrés Torres and José E.
             Velázquez (Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press, 1998), 210-227
Thursday, October 24
   ◼ Debt, Disasters, and Activism
         o READ: Marisol Lebrón, “Carpeteo Redux: Surveillance and Subversion
             against the Puerto Rican Student Movement,” Radical History Review,
             Volume 2017, Issue 128, May 1, 2017, 147-172.


          o READ: Frances Negrón-Muntaner, “Our Fellow Americans: Why Calling
             Puerto Ricans ‘Americans’ Will Not Save Them,” Dissent Magazine, January
             10, 2018, https://www.dissentmagazine.org/online_articles/our-fellow-americans-
             puerto-rico-hurricane-maria-colonialism-rhetoric
          o BROWSE: Puerto Rico Syllabus, https://puertoricosyllabus.com
          o DUE: GROUP 4 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS & MODERATION
WEEK 9
Tuesday, October 29
   ◼ Movimiento Exiles and Sexiles
          o READ: Jessi Gan, “‘Still at the Back of the Bus’: Sylvia Rivera’s Struggle,”
             Centro Journal, Volume XIX, No. 1, Spring 2007, 125-139.
          o READ: Lawrence La Fountain-Stokes, “Queer Diasporas, Boricua Lives: A
             Meditation on Sexile,” Review: Literature and the Arts of the Americas, Issue
             77, Vol. 41, No. 2, 2008, 294-301.
          o DUE: GROUP 5 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS & MODERATION
Thursday, October 31 – Happy Halloween!
   ◼ Dying to be Remembered on the eve of Día de los Muertos
          o READ: Horacio N. Roque Ramírez, “My Community, My History, My
             Practice,” Oral History Review 29/2 (Summer/Fall 2002), 87-91.
          o READ: Horacio N. Roque Ramírez, “Gay Latino Histories / Dying to Be
             Remembered: AIDS Obituaries, Public Memory, and the Queer Latino
             Archive,” in Beyond El Barrio: Everyday Life in Latina/o America, eds., Gina M.
             Pérez, Frank A. Guridy, and Adrian Burgos, Jr. (New York: New York University
             Press, 2010), 103-128.
          o READ: Julio Capo, “Teaching the Pulse Massacre,” Process: A Blog for
             American History, Organization of American Historians, June 29, 2016,
             http://www.processhistory.org/teaching-the-pulse-massacre/
          o BROWSE: #PulseOrlandoSyllabus, bit.ly/orlandosyllabus
WEEK 10
Tuesday, November 5
   ◼ “Arte Sin Fronteras: Prints from the Self Help Graphics Studio”
          o FIELD TRIP: To the Blanton Museum of Art to See the “Arte Sin
             Fronteras” exhibition
          o DUE: Radical History Paper
          o ASSIGN: Radical Final


Thursday, November 7
   ◼ Solidarity and Sanctuary
          o READ: Margaret Power and Julie A. Charlip, “Introduction: On Solidarity,”
            Latin American Perspectives, Issue 169, Vol. 36, No. 6 (November 2009), 3-9.
          o READ: Norma Stoltz Chinchilla, Nora Hamilton, and James Loucky, “The
            Sanctuary Movement and Central American Activism in Los Angeles,” Latin
            American Perspectives 2009 36: 101-126.
          o DUE: GROUP 6 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS & MODERATION
WEEK 11
Tuesday, November 12
   ◼ Asylum in Dentention
          o READ: Leisy Abrego, “On Silences: Salvadoran Refugees Then and Now,”
            Latino Studies, Vol. 15, Issue 1 (April 2017), 73-85.
          o READ: Elvia R. Arriola and Virginia M. Raymond, “Migrants Resist Systemic
            Discrimination and Dehumanization in Private, For-Profit Detention
            Centers,” Santa Clara Journal of International Law, Vol. 15, Issue 1 (2017), 1-42.
          o DUE: GROUP 7 DISCUSSION QUESTIONS & MODERATION
Thursday, November 14
          o DUE: Proposal for “Radical” Final
          o In-Class: “Radical” Final Workshop
WEEK 12
Tuesday, November 19
                                 Dreaming of an Education
   ◼ Precious Knowledge
          o READ: Gilda L. Ochoa, “Pump Up the Blowouts: Reflections on the 40th
            Anniversary of the Chicano/a School Blowouts,”
            http://zinnedproject.org/wp/wp-content/uploads/2009/11/03pump-up-the-
            blowouts.pdf
          o In-Class Film: Precious Knowledge
Thursday, November 21
   ◼ Still DREAMing
          o READ: Manuel Ramirez, “Still DREAMing,” ¡Presente!: Latin@ Immigrant
            Voices in the Struggle for Racial Justice, eds., Cristina Tzintzún, Carlos Pérez de
            Alejo, & Arnulfo Manríquez (Oakland, CA: AK Press, 2014), 137-146.


          o READ: Joaquina Weber-Shirk, “Deviant Citizenship: DREAMer Activism in
             the United States and Transnational Belonging,” Social Sciences, 2015, No. 4,
             582-597.
          o READ: Ina Batzke, “Concluding Remarks: Undocumented in Trump’s
             America,” Undocumented Migrants in the United States: Life Narratives and
             Self-Representations (London: Routledge, 2018), 187-196.
          o Review and Course Evaluations
WEEK 13
Tuesday, November 26
   ◼ STUDENT PRESENTATIONS & PEER FEEDBACK
Thursday, November 28
   ◼ THANKSGIVING
WEEK 13
Tuesday, December 3
   ◼ STUDENT PRESENTATIONS & PEER FEEDBACK
Thursday, December 5
   ◼ Last Class
   ◼ STUDENT PRESENTATIONS & PEER FEEDBACK
   ◼ DUE: “Radical” Finals
