Su20 - INTERMEDIATE FRENCH
I-WB (80010)
Edit
                                       Settings
       Click here or go to the Modules page to access course chapters.
     FR 412K
     Summer 2020
     Ryan Swankie, PhD
     swank1@utexas.edu
     I am available for online oﬃce hours by appointment Monday-Wednesday,
     10 am - 12 pm. I prefer to answer questions via email. But if you would like
     to talk more in depth about the course please give 12 hours advance
     notice when scheduling a meeting time. An oﬃce hour meeting will be done
     through Zoom. You may also reach me via Canvas email and I will respond
     to all non-emergency emails during oﬃce hours, if not before.


   notice when scheduling a meeting time. An oﬃce hour meeting will be done
   through Zoom. You may also reach me via Canvas email and I will respond
   to all non-emergency emails during oﬃce hours, if not before.
Assignment (Module)                       Due date/Time (always 9:59 am)
Semaine 1
Exploration du cours                      le jeudi 4 juin
Introduction                              le vendredi 5 juin
Mode, forme, et santé
Semaine 2
Révision                                  le lundi 8 juin
Chapitre 10 Leçon 1                       le mardi 9 juin
                                          le mercredi 10 juin
Chapitre10 Leçon 2
                                          le jeudi 11 juin
                                          le vendredi 12 juin
Chapitre 10 Leçon 3
Chapitre 10 Leçon 4
Semaine 3
Chapitre 10 Leçon 5                       le lundi 15 juin
Chapitre 10 Leçon 6                       le mardi 16 juin
Chapitre 10 Leçon 7                       le mercredi 17 juin
Chapitre 10 Leçon 8                       le jeudi 18 juin
Chapitre 10 Leçon 9 + Révision            le vendredi 19 juin
Semaine 4
Chapitre 10 Évaluations                   le lundi 22 juin
                                          le mardi 23 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 1
                                          le jeudi 25 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 2
                                          le vendredi 26 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 3
Les études


Chapitre 10 Leçon 9 + Révision       le vendredi 19 juin
Semaine 4
Chapitre 10 Évaluations              le lundi 22 juin
                                     le mardi 23 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 1
                                     le jeudi 25 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 2
                                     le vendredi 26 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 3
Les études
Semaine 5
Chapitre 11 Leçon 4                  le lundi 29 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 5                  le mardi 30 juin
Chapitre 11 Leçon 6                  le jeudi 2 juillet
la fête de l'Indépendance américaine le vendredi 3 juillet
Semaine 6
Chapitre 11 Leçon 7                  le lundi 6 juillet
Chapitre 11 Leçon 8                  le mardi 7 juillet
Chapitre 11 Leçon 9 + Révision       le jeudi 9 juillet
Chapitre 11 Évaluations              le vendredi 10 juillet
La maison
Semaine 7
Chapitre 12 Leçon 1                  le lundi 13 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 2                  le mardi 14 juillet
                                     le jeudi 16 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 3
                                     le vendredi 17 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 4
Semaine 8
Chapitre 12 Leçon 5                  le lundi 20 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 6                  le mardi 21 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 7                  le jeudi 23 juillet


Chapitre 12 Leçon 3
                               le vendredi 17 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 4
Semaine 8
Chapitre 12 Leçon 5            le lundi 20 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 6            le mardi 21 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 7            le jeudi 23 juillet
                               le vendredi 24 juillet
Chapitre 12 Leçon 8
L'amour et l'argent
Semaine 9
Chapitre 12 Leçon 9 + Révision le lundi 27 juillet
Chapitre 12 Évaluations        le mardi 28 juillet
Chapitre 13 Leçon 1            le jeudi 30 juillet
Chapitre 13 Leçon 2            le vendredi 31 juillet
Semaine 10
Chapitre 13 Leçon 3            le lundi 3 août
Chapitre 13 Leçon 4            le mardi 4 août
Chapitre 13 Leçon 5            le jeudi 6 août
Chapitre 13 Leçon 6            le vendredi 7 août
Semaine 11
Chapitre 13 Leçon 7            le lundi 10 août
Chapitre 13 Leçon 8            le mardi 11 août
Chapitre 13 Leçon 9            le jeudi 13 août
Révision
Chapitre 13 Évaluations        le vendredi 14 août


Semaine 11
Chapitre 13 Leçon 7     le lundi 10 août
Chapitre 13 Leçon 8     le mardi 11 août
Chapitre 13 Leçon 9     le jeudi 13 août
Révision
Chapitre 13 Évaluations le vendredi 14 août


  Bienvenue! Welcome to French 412K, the third semester online French course
  oﬀered by the University of Texas at Austin. In this online course, we will be using
  the first-year French curriculum of Français interactif, a beginning French program
  developed here at the University of Texas and redesigned for online delivery by
  Nancy Guilloteau and Karen Kelton with the support and assistance of expert
  technology staﬀ at the College of Liberal Arts Instructional Technology Services
  (LAITS), numerous graduate students and faculty from the Department of French
  and Italian, and the staﬀ of the Center for Open Educational Resources and
  Language Learning (COERLL) at UT Austin.
  Français interactif helps you explore French language and culture by following the
  lives of real UT students who participated in the UT Summer Program in Lyon,
  France. The UT students introduce you to their French host families, to their French
  university, and to their lives in France.
  In addition to following the exploits of these UT students, you also watch videos of
  native French speakers as well as scenes of day-to-day interactions (e.g., vendors
  in the market, waiters at a café, children getting ready to go to school, etc.) These
  video-based materials lend authenticity and immediacy to Français interactif.
  Authentic materials from a variety of other sources have also been incorporated into
  this online course.
  The goal of FR 412K is to help you continue to develop your listening, speaking,
  reading and writing skills in French. You also learn useful vocabulary, grammatical
  structures, and cultural information, all naturally embedded in the videos and online
  activities.
  In addition to working independently on the online activities, there are also
  synchronous (Conferences) and asynchronous (Discussions) interactions with
  classmates that you will be recording online as assignments (videos, conversations,
  surveys, etc.).
  This course follows the dates of the regular University of Texas semester, June 6 to
  August 16. You should anticipate an average of 8-12 hours of work per week,
  depending on the types and number of activities assigned.
  Prerequisite: Completion of FR 407 or equivalent with a final grade of C or higher
  (C- is not an acceptable grade to continue).
•      TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS:
         ◦ Reliable internet connection (wired connection is
              recommended for synchronous interactions and video


                 recordings)
           ◦ A computer with webcam, microphone and
                 headphones (do a sound check before submitting
                 your recorded activities)
           ◦ Canvas is designed to be compatible with Chrome, so
                 if you are using a web browser other than Chrome, you
                 might not have full functionality in Canvas. Bottom line,
                 use Chrome as your browser for Canvas whenever
                 feasible.
 •       RECOMMENDED RESOURCES:
           ◦ wordreference.com (Links to an external site.)
                  (free online dictionary)
           ◦ The Canvas by Instructure app, available for download
                 on Android and iOS devices
CANVAS ASSIGNMENTS
   Regular and persistent preparation, as well as active participation with partners
   online, are essential to your success in learning French. For this reason, be aware of
   the due dates indicated on the course syllabus. Once a due date and time passes
   (always 9:59 am), the online activities close down and you are no longer able to
   receive credit. I will not re-open assignments once they have been closed for any
   reason, so do not ask. No late submissions are allowed.
   The activities in Canvas will be opened up for you one week at a time. The
   following week's lessons will go live every Friday at 10 am. This allows you to work
   ahead of the syllabus by just a bit, if you so choose. However, the “Interaction”
   sections often require you to work with a partner, so you will have to carefully
   coordinate with a classmate to set up an online meeting time while the activities are
   still open. Also, while you are allowed to work ahead to a certain extent, you must
   work through the materials progressively as they appear. In other words, you
   cannot move on to Leçon 5 until you have completed Leçon 4, etc.
   It will likely take some time to become familiar with Canvas. On the majority of
   assignments, which are graded automatically, you will be given 2 opportunities to
   submit your answers. With each submission, you will be able to see your answers,
   and on the second (and final) submission that you are able to see the correct
   answers. Sometimes Canvas will show you exactly which items you have gotten
   wrong. Other times, depending on how the assignment has been designed, it will
   simply indicate how many items are wrong, but will not indicate which ones. When
   you submit paragraphs, audio and video recordings, and certain other types of
   open-ended responses, your instructor must grade these individually, so the
   feedback will not be instantaneous. You should expect to receive feedback up to
   48 hours after the due dates for regular assignments and after up to 72 hours
   after the due dates for longer assignments and assessments.


  submit your answers. With each submission, you will be able to see your answers,
  and on the second (and final) submission that you are able to see the correct
  answers. Sometimes Canvas will show you exactly which items you have gotten
  wrong. Other times, depending on how the assignment has been designed, it will
  simply indicate how many items are wrong, but will not indicate which ones. When
  you submit paragraphs, audio and video recordings, and certain other types of
  open-ended responses, your instructor must grade these individually, so the
  feedback will not be instantaneous. You should expect to receive feedback up to
  48 hours after the due dates for regular assignments and after up to 72 hours
  after the due dates for longer assignments and assessments.
  Policy on Professionalism in Online French Courses
  All students of online French courses are required to be fully clothed and to behave
  in a professional manner while completing online French course assignments that
  require participation in video recordings. Assignments of students who fail to
  comply with the dress policy or who do not respect expectations for professional
  behavior will not be graded and will be assigned an automatic score of zero.
  Multiple instances of non-compliance by a single student may result in additional
  penalties.
  If you ever have a problem with a Canvas assignment, such as an answer that you
  know is correct, and Canvas is showing that it is not, please email your instructor
  immediately so it can be fixed. For all technical issues, contact Canvas
  Support directly at 1-855-308-2494. They typically respond within 1-2 minutes and
  are available 24/7. For technical issues with your computer, such as not being able
  to view or complete a video or an assignment, you will need to seek technical
  support.
GRADING
 •     Every exercise you submit on Canvas factors into your final
       grade.
 •     There is an Évaluation at the end of each chapter which is
       a culminating assessment to test your ability to perform the
       chapter objectives. Each Évaluation has 4 sections: writing,
       listening, reading, and speaking. These Évaluations are
       timed, just as in our face to face classes.


  Structured Activities
  The two lowest grades in this category only will be dropped at end of
  semester.                                                                 20%
    •   Vocabulary and grammar activities (matching, fill in the blanks,
        internet activities, etc.)
  Open-Ended Activities
                                                                            15%
    •   Paragraphs, audio and video recordings, and exercises with more
        than one right answer
  Interactions
                                                                            15%
    •   Oral conversation or activity with another student, either
        synchronous (Conferences) or asynchronous (Discussions)
  Quizzes
    •   Quizzes are taken at the end of each lesson 1-8, but not 9, of each 20%
        chapter.
    •   These are timed.
  Pronunciation
    •   Pronunciation practice in lessons 1-8 of each chapter               5%
    •   Pronunciation quiz in lesson 9 of each chapter
  Texercises
  The two lowest grades in this category only will be dropped at end of
                                                                            5%
  semester.
    •   Tex's French Grammar exercises
  Évaluations
    •   Assessments taken at the end of each chapter
    •   Grade based on demonstration of proficiency of chapter              20%
        objectives (reading, writing, listening and speaking)
    •   These are timed assessments.
  TOTAL                                                                     100%
The Lower-Division Grading Scale for French is the following:


  97-93 A           89-87 B+      79-77 C+        69-67 D+
  92-90 A-          86-83 B       76-73 C         66-63 D
                    82-80 B-      72-70 C-        62-60 D-
                                                 Less than 60 F
You must receive a grade of a C or higher (73% or higher) in
order to continue on to FR 317C, the next UT French course in
the sequence (oﬀered face to face only at this point). A grade of
a C- is not suﬃcient to continue on to FR 317C. No extra
credit will be given under any circumstances.
COURSE SEQUENCING
Completion of either the face-to-face sequence (FR 601C and FR
611C) OR the online sequence (FR 406, FR 407, FR 412K)
constitutes completion of the College of Liberal Arts 12-hour
language requirement for French:
FR 406 + FR 407 + FR 412K = 12 hours
FR 601C + FR 611C = 12 hours
It is possible, although a bit cumbersome, to move from the
online curriculum to the face-to-face curriculum if you are a
current UT student:
   •   FR 406 + FR 407 (with final grades of C or higher) allows
       you to register for FR 611C (the second semester of the
       face-to-face curriculum).
It is also possible to move from the face-to-face sequence to the
online sequence:
   •   FR 601 (with a final grade of C or higher) allows you to
       register for FR 407 (the second semester of the online
       curriculum).
You must complete FR 407, or the equivalent, in order to be able


to enroll in FR 412K, which is the third and last course in the
online sequence.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
  Online French Program. For additional information about UT Austin's online
  French program or to find out which course to take next in the online sequence,
  contact Dr. Patricia Kyle, Director of Online Instruction, via email
  at patricia.kyle@austin.utexas.edu or by phone at 512 471 2200.
  Lower-Division French. For additional information on lower-division French
  courses FR 601C and FR 611C, please contact Nancy Guilloteau, Lower-Division
  French Coordinator, at nguilloteauut@gmail.com.
  Scholastic dishonesty:
   Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a zero. Scholastic
  dishonesty includes any kind of cheating. In language classes, this includes the use
  of online translators. Be aware that scholastic dishonesty can have far-reaching
  consequences, and can result in suspension or expulsion from the University. For
  more information, contact the Student Judicial Services at 471- 2841, or go
  to https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
   (Links to an external site.)
   (Links to an external site.)
  In order to receive full credit on assignments in FR 412K, you are expected to use
  only the vocabulary and structures that have been learned in this course to
  date, including FR 406 and FR 407. Producing perfect, native-like paragraphs and
  other works will not benefit your grade, but in fact, could result in a zero. Use of
  Google translate or other aids is considered scholastic dishonesty and will result in
  a zero and possible further action.
  Disabilities:
   The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
  accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
  contact the Oﬃce of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 or 471-4641, or go
  to https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
   (Links to an external site.)
  Students with disabilities must present documentation at the beginning of the
  semester from the SSD so that special provisions and accommodations may be
  considered. Please keep in mind that accommodations are not retroactive, so it
  is important to present proper documentation as soon as it is available.
  Code of conduct:
   The dean may initiate disciplinary proceedings under subchapter 11-300 against a
  student who conducts himself or herself in a manner that impedes, interferes with,
  or disrupts any University teaching, research, administrative, disciplinary, public
  service, learning, or other authorized activity. For more information and a complete


Students with disabilities must present documentation at the beginning of the
semester from the SSD so that special provisions and accommodations may be
considered. Please keep in mind that accommodations are not retroactive, so it
is important to present proper documentation as soon as it is available.
Code of conduct:
 The dean may initiate disciplinary proceedings under subchapter 11-300 against a
student who conducts himself or herself in a manner that impedes, interferes with,
or disrupts any University teaching, research, administrative, disciplinary, public
service, learning, or other authorized activity. For more information and a complete
list of Student Standards of Conduct, please consult http://registrar.utexas.edu/
catalogs/gi08-09/app/gi08.appc03.html#subchapter-11-300-initiation-of-
disciplinary-proceedings
 (Links to an external site.)
All students are expected to assist in maintaining an online environent that is
conducive to learning. Inappropriate behavior (making oﬀensive remarks,
harassment or bullying of the instructor or other students, etc.) will be addressed by
the instructor. Repeated inappropriate or disruptive behavior will be reported to
the Dean of Students and may quickly escalate into a judicial matter.
As your Instructor, I welcome you to FR 412K. We want to make your online
experience learning French the very best possible. Please be sure to keep in touch
so that I can respond to issues, questions, and concerns as quickly and eﬀectively
as possible.
As we say in French, bon courage et bonne chance!
