Professor Thompson
                                          Fall 2018
                          The Revolution Will Be Dramatized
                                      AFR 317F (29570)
Course Description
This course will examine expressions of black cultural and political resistance by
contemporary black artists. Although Gil Scott Heron famously crooned that “the
revolution will not be televised,” I contend that the revolution is not only televised but
dramatized and reimagined in African American cultural productions. This course will
specifically examine representations of black political protest and activism in film and
theatre from the late 20th century to the present. We will discuss how feature films,
documentaries and plays present two movements for racial and social justice: the Civil
Rights Movement and the Black Power Movement. We will read scholarship and history
to help us identify the strategies that cultural producers use to craft narratives about past
political activism. We will also consider the performative aspects of contemporary black
protest movements for social justice. In order to compare historical narratives with
creative ones, using secondary texts and archival materials, you will conduct research
about episodes such as the Montgomery Bus Boycott and 16th Street Baptist Church
Bombing, and figures such as Angela Davis and Bayard Rustin. You are encouraged to
also consider and harness the power of social media in your examination of
contemporary black political and cultural activism. The course will culminate in
presentations of final creative and/or scholarly projects crafted in response to current
black or other relevant movements for social justice.
Required Books
    1. Bruce J. Dierenfield, The Civil Rights Movement: Revised Edition (2008)
    2. Katori Hall, The Mountaintop (2011)
    3. Peniel Joseph, Waiting 'Til the Midnight Hour: A Narrative History of Black
        Power in America (2007)
    4. Dominique Morisseau, Sunset Baby (2013)
    5. Barbara Ransby, Making All Black Lives Matter: Reimagining Freedom in the 21st
        Century (2018)
    6. Anna Deveare Smith, Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992 (1993)
    7. Jeff Stetson, The Meeting (1990)
    8. Tracy Scott Wilson, The Good Negro (2009)
All books can be purchased at the University CO-OP. Assigned articles designated by an *
can be located on the course’s Canvas page.
Course Requirements
Participation
You are expected to complete all reading and watch films and videos before class and
participate fully in discussions and exercises (presentations, quizzes, and in-class group
projects). Take copious notes during screenings making sure to cover subjects such as
authorial intent, aesthetic strategies and narrative arc. Remember to bring assigned texts
to class because you may be called upon to read an excerpt, perform a scene or analyze a
passage. Each student is expected to speak during EVERY class. Many of the texts are


quite complicated so I strongly suggest that you also take reading notes since our
discussions rely on textual observations. Prompt and regular attendance is expected.
Tardiness is disrespectful to me and to your classmates. Please be advised that if you
miss multiple classes and/or are consistently late your grade will suffer.
Group Presentation
Pre-assigned groups of 4-5 students will research and present a critical and informative
introduction to and/or summary of an event, significant institution or figure that
inspired the assigned film or play. Groups must provide background information that
helps the class gain a broader understanding of the text. Your main job is to present the
facts as represented by reputable historical and scholarly sources. The presentation
groups can distribute a handout, craft poster boards, shoot a video, construct a
Wikipedia page and/or create a PowerPoint or Prezi. I suggest that you be as creative as
possible in order to effectively engage your audience. Groups must work together and
ensure that the workload is adequately divided among every student. The group must
submit any AV files by 9 am the morning of their presentation, and a typed outline (1-2
pages). Time limit: 5 minutes.
Midterm Exam
The take-home examination will consist of three questions; you are required to select one
of the three questions to answer. The exam will require you to craft a typed, 5-7 page
essay-length response to the question that critically engages with the key concepts, facts
and texts from the first half of the semester. The exam will be graded on the quality of
argument, sources, examples, and grammar. This is not a group project; students who
submit plagiarized or collaborative work will be penalized.
Black Art Matters Review
Each student must attend a black artistic performance, art exhibit, film, play or concert
and then write a 2-3 page review. The review should summarize or describe the art
object, discuss your sense of the artist’s aims, and provide a sustained analysis of the
ways that the piece engages with black politics or political movements. Submissions can
be submitted online throughout the semester but the final deadline for all reviews is
November 19 at 12 noon.
Final Project
Students will research and then craft a project that reflects on a contemporary protest
movement such as the #BlackLivesMatter. Your piece can be a statement about the
issues being raised by protestors but it must also reflect on how current black protests
use past movements. The project can be a creative or journalistic reflection such as
poetry, short film or video, performance, play, song, interview, documentary etc. Use
your imagination to document this moment in history: take a current event and retell it
using an art form, interview a member of the movement about their experiences (or even
those who oppose it). This is your opportunity to craft a narrative about and/or solidify
the historical record about a major social justice movement that is happening today. You
can work alone or in groups. Whether the final project is journalistic, documentary, or
fictional, it must include a written component of 7-10 pages that includes at least 10
scholarly sources from a variety of mediums (articles from academic or popular journals,
books, films) as well as any primary sources. The final product will be graded on both the
project and the written analytical narrative. Students will showcase their final project by
delivering a 3 minute presentation. You will receive instructions about submitting your
AV materials the night before your presentation.
                                                                                           2


Notice:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities at 512-471-6259, or the following link:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Final grades will be calculated as follows:
Midterm (take-home)            20%
Group Presentation             20%
Black Art Matters              20%
Final Project                  30%
Participation                  10%
Extra credit                   10% (applied toward lowest grade)
Course Schedule
Wednesday, August 29
Introduction
Friday, October 5
Midterm distributed
Friday, October 12
Due: Midterm
Friday, November 2
Due: Final Project Proposals (1 page)
Monday, November 19
Deadline: Reviews must be submitted online by noon
Friday, November 30
Presentations (A-F)
Monday, December 3
Presentations (G-K)
Due: Final project
Wednesday, December 5
Presentations (L-Q)
Friday, December 7
Presentations (R-Z)
Monday, December 10
Conclusion
                                                                                    3
