                                                  J310F Reporting Words
                                                         Summer 2020
June 4-July 9, Monday through Friday, 9:30 a.m.-12:20 p.m. online
Instructor: John Savage
Office hours: Monday through Friday 12:20-1:20 p.m. and by appointment
Cell and text: 512-299-6776
Preferred email: Johnmsavage1@yahoo.com
Twitter: @JohnSavageTX
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course teaches you how to report and write in the manner of a professional journalist — skills that can also help you
communicate effectively in a variety of professional settings. This course contains a substantial writing component.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of the course, J310F students will:
1. Recognize the difference between hard news and news features.
2. Produce newsworthy stories through original reporting and writing.
3. Evaluate the information gathered to choose what’s newsy, relevant and important.
4. Write clear, well organized, interesting news stories that adhere to AP style.
5. Adhere to ethical standards of journalism and understand laws pertinent to journalists.
6. Identify and find credible and diverse sources.
7. Verify information from the internet, documents and interviews.
8. Conduct meaningful interviews, including asking smart questions.
9. Analyze and explain data and statistics.
10. Incorporate current and historical events and information into reporting and writing for necessary context.
HOW TO SUCCEED IN J310
Read news. Reading news stories help you learn about reporting and writing. You learn how to structure stories,
including which types of leads to use, how to use quotes and AP style.
Be curious. Being curious leads to better stories, better reporting and more fun! Ask questions of your instructor, your
classmates and your sources. If you don’t understand something, seek clarification. If something or someone interests you,
pursue more information.
Fake tenacity and resilience until you feel it. You will be rejected and ignored by sources. Don’t complain. Stay
persistent and positive. Your grades may not be what you expected after a lifetime of being told you’re a great writer.
Hang in there.
Enlist time management strategies. You have to think ahead – in one class, you could be pitching a story, turning in a
different completed story, and working on a rewrite of yet another story. Don't worry; it’s doable. But don’t procrastinate.
Seek assistance. The Moody Writing Support Program is more than a writing aid – the program helps students
understand what makes a good story and how to pursue it. The program’s robust journalism coaching is an asset for J310F
students and designed to help them excel in the course. That’s why you are required to take your stories there for
consultation with a writing coach. (More information on Canvas course page.)
Your classmates are your colleagues. Treat them as such. You may compete for assignments, but you are NOT
competitors. At least not yet. This is one of your first networking opportunities, and if you’re lucky, your J310F
classmates will remain in your networking circle for decades to come.
REQUIRED MATERIAL:
Read, listen and watch the news on various platforms: digital, hard copy newspapers, radio and television. Sign up for
news alerts and follow established news media outlets on social media. The following are highly recommended:
                                                                                                                           1


•    ONLINE subscription to The Associated Press Stylebook, www.apstylebook.com
•    All information on Canvas as well as class handouts.
•    Read major news sources at local, national and international levels.
•    As a UT student, you have access to the digital Austin American-Statesman! Read it every morning. Log in here:
     http://nieonline.com/austin/studentconnect.cfm
         User name: to be announced                 Password: to be announced
COURSE ASSESSMENTS
Core components of this course are the writing assignments, complemented by lab work and quizzes. Most story
assignments are completed outside class, while other elements, including drills and quizzes, are completed in lecture and
lab. Assignments may be added or dropped as needed.
GRADING
Your work is evaluated based on professional standards, including newsworthiness, research and original reporting, story
structure, and mechanics (grammar, spelling and punctuation, and AP Style). Grading rubrics will be posted on Canvas.
The instructor may use plus and minus grades, following this range:
A        94-100            B+ 87-89        C+ 77-79          D 60-69
A-       90-93             B 84-86         C 70-76           F 59 and lower
                           B- 80-83
IMPORTANT: YOU MUST EARN AT LEAST an 80 average in this course to proceed to upper-division courses.
Grading Breakdown
     ● 70%: Story assignments.
     ● 10%: Quizzes. Quizzes will contain questions about AP style, grammar, current events and course content.
     ● 20%: Attendance. Attending class is the key to doing well! In the past, missing just one summer class has been
         very detrimental to students’ grades.
STORY ASSIGNMENTS
During the semester, you will write five stories. The following is a brief description of each.
Story 1: Breaking news (10%). You’ll be given a set of facts and quotes and write a short news story. (400-500 words)
Story 2: Covering a speech or event (10%). You will watch a video recording of a speech and report on it. You should
quote (1) person giving the speech (2) an expert who can discuss the topic being addressed (3) someone personally
involved with the topic being discussed. (500-700 words).
Story 3: Government story (10%). You will watch a recorded meeting of a Hood County Commissioners’ Court
meeting. You will write a story focused on one agenda item from the meeting. You should include (1) quotes from three
stakeholders (2) quote from an expert on the issue. (500-700 words)
Story 4: Diversity news feature (20%). Diversity is woven into the fabric of ethics and good journalism. Story must be
focus on an underrepresented group, including people singled out by gender, race, ethnicity, religion, physical, emotional
and intellectual abilities. Story must include (1) at least two people affected by the issue (2) statistics (3) expert opinion.
(800-1,000 words).
Story 5: News feature of your choice (20%). Report and write a news feature of your choice. Story should include at
least three sources and include statistics and expert opinion. (800-1,000 words)
MORE ON YOUR STORY ASSIGNMENTS
Filing Your Stories
                                                                                                                                2


     ●   All stories are submitted as Canvas assignments. A Word file (.doc or .docx) is preferred, though .rtf and .pages
         are accepted. Do NOT submit .pdf file types or Google Docs links. Save your files as
         LASTNAME_STORYSLUG.
     ●   All story assignments are for publication and public consumption. DO NOT tell sources that your story is “only”
         for class and/or cut deals with sources by promising a story won’t be published.
     ●   Put a working headline and byline on every draft and story. Failure to do so is considered a reporting hole (key
         missing information that diminishes a story) and will cost you points.
Cover Sheet
Graded story assignments must be accompanied with a cover sheet (template is on Canvas). Failure to include a cover
sheet is considered a reporting hole and will cost you points. The cover sheet includes:
     ● Your name, the story assignment and the date
     ● Story slug (one- or two-word description used by newsrooms to distinguish stories)
     ● The “budget line” or a one- or two-sentence description of the story
     ● A list of names of sources you interviewed (quoted and unquoted), phone numbers and/or e-mail addresses
Story Cycles
You just don’t write a story and, boom, it’s published. You get story ideas from events and previous publications; you
pitch a story to your editor (me) who approves it; you write multiple drafts before getting the story published. We follow
those same steps in this class. Depending on the story assignment, you will also complete:
     ● A story analysis of a published story similar to your assignment.
     ● Peer reviews in which you help edit your colleagues’ work.
CLASSROOM POLICIES
Attendance: Attendance is required and will be taken. You get a zero for any work not turned in if you are absent without
an official or medical excuse. Missing class will significantly hurt your grade.
Tardiness: You will lose half of your daily attendance points if you arrive late to either lecture or lab without an official
excuse. Class begins promptly at 9:30. If you miss assignments due to unexcused tardiness, you cannot make up those
missed assignments.
Late Work: Deadlines are critical in journalism. Don’t miss them. Late stories will be docked at least one letter grade.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Avoid conflicts of interest – in which you have a vested interest in the people, groups, events or organizations that you
might cover – and what could be perceived as conflicts of interest. Do not pitch stories that potentially contain a conflict
of interest. Potential conflicts of interest include (but are not limited to):
     ● School of Journalism and Moody College of Communications instructors, professors, administrators, staffers, and
         undergraduate and graduate students;
     ● Friends, family members and their friends, roommates, suitemates;
     ● Sorority/fraternity sisters/brothers;
     ● Bosses and former bosses, co-workers and former co-workers;
When in doubt about a potential conflict related to a story, ask as soon as possible. If it is discovered after a story pitch
has been approved that there is a conflict of interest, I will not accept the story and your deadline will NOT be extended. If
you turn in an assignment that involves a conflict of interest, whether or not you do so mindfully, you will lose significant
points on the assignment.
UNIVERSITY HONOR CODE AND ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness and respect toward peers and community.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
                                                                                                                              3


Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to
these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate UT rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from UT. For details see:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Plagiarism and Academic Dishonesty: In regard to journalism and J310F, academic dishonesty includes:
    ● Plagiarizing or using another media source’s, individual’s or your own (in part or in whole) work and representing
         it as new for this class. If you’ve done or started the work in another class, you must inform your instructor before
         pitching the story.
    ● Pitching or turning in an assignment from a previous class without instructor permission.
    ● Making up quotes, sources and facts.
    ● Not interviewing people who appear in your stories.
    ● Not giving appropriate attribution or citation of a source or background information. In this class, you will learn
         how to properly attribute information.
    ● Cheating during a quiz or any assignment, graded or not
NOTE: Assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an archived
database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods will also be used to determine if a story is
original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, I will make the final determination as to whether a
story has been plagiarized.
GENERAL GUIDELINES AND RESOURCES
The university has numerous resources to aid and support students. Use these to help you succeed in your classes and life.
Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
    ● Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, Fifth floor | 512-471-3515
         |cmhc.utexas.edu
    ● CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
|CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
    ● Brief assessments and referral services
    ● Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
    ● MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
    ● Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
The Sanger Learning Center: Even though we require J310F students utilize the Moody Writing Support Program,
students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist
appointments, peer academic coaching and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Canvas: This web-based course management system with password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu/ —is
used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and for
online quizzes and surveys. It is required for this course. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at
475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m. or with tutorials at:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
                                                                                                                             4


Using Email for Official Correspondence to Students: Email is recognized as an official mode of university
correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your email address. You should
check your email regularly and frequently—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may
be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Students Needing Accommodations: Please notify me of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate
a disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office in order that the
most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through Services for
Students with Disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or
232-2937 (video phone). Also: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Q drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6).
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin: The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide
support for your learning, including: The UT Learning Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/utlc/ Undergraduate
Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
ITS: Need help with technology? Call the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 or go to http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries: Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
instructors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Again, call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Evacuation Information: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The UT campus are required to evacuate buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm
activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
         nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
     ● In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
         unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
         Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Sample class schedule:
                                                                                                                            5


9:30-10:30      lectures on Zoom
10:30-11:00     newswriting/grammar/AP style exercises in breakout rooms
11:00-11:30     Zoom group discussion of exercises
11:30-12:20     reporting, writing, writing center appointments
                                                                             6/4                    6/5
                                                                             Zoom lecture: intro to Zoom lecture: What’s
                                                                             course, syllabus       news?
                                                                             discussion
 6/8                      6/9                         6/10                   6/11                   6/12
 Zoom lecture: What’s Zoom lecture: story             Zoom lecture: story    Zoom lecture: AP       AP style, grammar
 news? II                 structure, leads and        structure, leads and   style                  and current events
                          nut grafs                   nut grafs II                                  quiz I
                                                                                                    breaking news story
                                                                                                    due 3 p.m.
 6/15                     6/16                        6/17                   6/18                   6/19
 no Zoom lecture,         Zoom lecture:               Zoom lecture:          Zoom lecture:          AP style, grammar
 individual story         covering a speech           reportorial            covering government,   and current events
 consultations                                        persistence            FOIA                   quiz II
                          Watch: Sasha Baron Cohen                                                  speech story due 3
                          ADL speech. Read associated                                               p.m.
                          handout.
 6/22                     6/23                        6/24                   6/25                   6/26
 no Zoom lecture,         Zoom lecture:               Zoom lecture: news     Zoom lecture:          AP style, grammar
 individual story         covering government,        features, generating   news features,         and current events
 consultations            FOIA II                     story ideas, pitching  generating story       quiz III
                                                                             ideas, pitching.
                          Watch Hood County                                  Diversity story        government story
                          Commissioners’ Court
                          meeting 20:20-29, 38-53.                           pitches                due 3 p.m.
                          Read associated handout.
 6/29                     6/30                        7/1                    7/2                    7/3
 no Zoom lecture,         Zoom lecture:               Zoom lecture: finding  Zoom lecture: feature  Zoom lecture: TBD
 individual story         finding sources,            sources, interviewing, writing tips
 consultations            interviewing,               verification
                          verification
                                                                                                    diversity news
                                                                                                    feature due 3 p.m.
 7/6                      7/7                         7/8                    7/9                    7/10
 no Zoom lecture,         no Zoom lecture,            Zoom lecture: TBD      Zoon lecture: TBD      Zoom lecture: TBD
 individual story         individual story
 consultations            consultations
                                                                                                    final news feature
                                                                                                    due 3 p.m.
                                                                                                                         6
