                                   THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                 STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number: SW N393 R                                  Instructor:        Arlene Montgomery, Ph.D. LCSW
Unique Number: 87640                                      E-mail:            marksak@utexas.edu
Semester:         Summer 2020                             Phone:             Home (512) 480-8086
Class Time:       Tuesday/Thursday: 1:30-4:00 pm          Office Hours:      By appointment
Meeting Place: ZOOM
                             NEUROBIOLOGY AND SOCIAL WORK PRACTICE
            I.      Course Description
            This course will cover selected findings from recent neurobiological research as it
            elaborates understanding of relationship dynamics with individuals, couples, families,
            and groups. Although this research is usually found outside the usual discourse of the
            social and psychological sciences, a body of scientific work useful to social service
            providers will be reviewed. The support that recent scientific findings provide for aspects
            of psychological treatment theories and differential diagnosis will be reviewed. This
            course will focus on using multiple perspectives in the advanced application of
            neurobiology research to inform clinical intervention, with emphasis placed at the micro
            and mezzo levels of practice. The framework of the course is based on social work
            values and the ethical decision-making process, as illuminated by the NASW Code of
            Ethics. A bio-psycho-social and cultural emphasis will be applied to the various problem
            areas and disorders covered.
            II.     Course Objectives
            Upon completion of this course, students will demonstrate the ability to:
            a. Understand how recent scientific findings guide and inform social service
            interventions;
            b. Critically compare and analyze therapeutic and social service implications of recent
            scientific findings related to the impact of the relationship experiences on/in the human
            brain;
            c. Evaluate, select, and design a social service intervention which takes into account both
            the appropriate psychological theory and the scientific research which supports the use of
            that particular theory
            d. Adapt social service intervention methods to activities/programs which are designed to
            sensitively differentiate the needs of the client/client system as influenced by age, gender,
            sexual orientation, race, class, ethnic/cultural background, socioeconomic status, physical
            challenge, and other individual differences.
             III.   Teaching Methods


This course is designed to include a variety of teaching methodologies to achieve the
expectation of student mastery of the skills involved in the examination of social work
practice theory as it is supported by selected scientific findings. Readings, discussion,
lecture, experiential, videos, audio CDs, case examples, and presentations are designed to
enhance the learning experience.
IV.     Required Texts & Material, Recommended Texts, and Course Materials
Required Texts:
Schore, A.N. (2012). The science of the art of psychotherapy. New York: W.W.
 Norton & Co.
Montgomery, A. (2013). Neurobiology essentials for clinicians: What every therapist
 needs to know. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Required materials
(from Moskovitz, M., Monk, C., Kaye, C., & Ellerman, S.J.(Eds.).(1997). The
neurological and developmental basis for psychotherapeutic intervention. The
contribution of self-and mutual regulation to the therapeutic action: A Case Illustration.
Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson, Inc.).
Schore, A.N. (2003). Affect regulation and the repair of the self. New York,
NY: Norton, pp.279-281.
Montgomery, A.(2019). Attachment and neurobiology. Encyclopedia of Social Work,
 on-line.
Suggested Texts:
Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P., (Eds.). (2008). Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and
clinical applications. New York: The Guilford Press.
(Second edition: available in paperback)
Applegate, J. & Shapiro, J. (2005) Neurobiology for clinical social work: Theory and
practice. New York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Cozolino, L. (2002) The neuroscience of psychotherapy: Building and rebuilding the
human brain. New York: WW Norton & Co.
Badenoch, B. (2008) Being a brain-wise therapist: A practical guide to interpersonal
neurobiology. New York: WW Norton & Co.
Bennett, S. & Nelson, J. (Eds.). (2010). Adult attachment in clinical social work.
Practice, research, and policy. New York: Springer.


Farmer, R.C. (2009). Neuroscience and social work practice: The missing link.
Thousand oaks, CA: SAGE.
Mikulincer, M. & Shaver, P. (2007). Adult attachment: Structure, dynamics, and change.
New York: The Guilford Press.
Nelson, J. (2005). Seeing through tears: Crying and attachment. New York: Routledge.
Nelson, J. (in press). What made Freud laugh: An attachment perspective on laughter.
New York: Routledge.
Schore, A. (2003a). Affect dysregulation and disorders of the self. New York: W.W.
Norton
Schore, A. (2003b). Affect regulation and repair of the self. New York: W.W. Norton
Schore, A.N.(2019). The development of the unconscious mind. New York: W.W.
Norton.
Schore, A.N. (2019). Right brain psychotherapy. New York: W.W. Norton.
Siegel, D.N. (2015). Brain storm: The power and purpose of the teenage brain. New
York: Penguin.
Wallin, D. (2007) Attachment in psychotherapy. New York: The Guilford Press.
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University
of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
(471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student
should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor
of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The
professor expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should
arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show
respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors


as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national
origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an
atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. This atmosphere includes
working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism, and
ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and controversial issues.
These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer
a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations
relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas
and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility,
respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or
distressing reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so,
students are encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and
supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but
students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If
counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including
the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL
COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are not private. Even when open only to
approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the
general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such forums,
please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted,
linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived,
posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other
forms of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their
communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work
students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be
considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this,
social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their
professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites
and are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks.
Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media,
including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise
client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any
material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as
certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.


5
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social
work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work
program while in the classroom, the university community, and the broader area
communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the
Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not
limited to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected
works. Any unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law
and may result in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the
sharing of course materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be
a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other
things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those
materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies,
clients, and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on
educational supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights
and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals
outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could
result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic
performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work
Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are
responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a
change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—
daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s
policies and instructions for updating their e-mail address
at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy


6
day. If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to
observe a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning
environment that is free from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex
https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in
their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or any other forms of sexual
misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources.
Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information,
including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be
found here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by
accessing the Quick Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments
that involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these
assignments may present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent
to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies
and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the
professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about
their behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone
else, students may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their
concerns. This service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean
of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin
campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
         the building.
    · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the
         first week of class.
    · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
         office.


7
GRADING SCALE
        94.0 and Above               A
        90.0 to 93.999               A-
        87.0 to 89.999               B+
        84.0 to 86.999               B
        80.0 to 83.999               B-
        77.0 to 79.999               C+
        74.0 to 76.999               C
        70.0 to 73.999               C-
        67.0 to 69.999               D+
        64.0 to 66.999               D
        60.0 to 63.999               D-
        Below 60.0                    F
VI. Policy on attendance, participation, and due dates for assignments
Students are expected to log into class regularly and to participate in the class discussions
by contributing meaningful questions and discourse with fellow students and the
instructor. Readings are expected to be completed prior to class. Role will be taken;
leaving class should be explained as soon as possible to the instructor. Leaving will be
considered an unexcused absence unless arrangements have been made with the
instructor for the absence to be the excused. Points will be deducted from the final grade
for unexcused absences. The student is allowed one unexcused absence without penalty.
Students will not be permitted to make up work missed during unexcused absences. Late
assignments will not be accepted without penalty; some exceptions may be made by the
instructor. Failure to attend class regularly and demonstrate through class discussion that
one has read the assigned material will be considered in assigning the final grade.
If there is a compelling reason, students should have video on 95% of the class. The
instructor will discuss with the class appropriate breaks from the screen time.
VII. Course Assignments
Evaluation based on:
Reading assignment completion
Class participation.
Class attendance
Successful completion of assignments.
Paper #1 = 40% (due via email Saturday noon, June 20)
Paper #2 = 35% (first ½ due July 16 at midnight ;second ½ of paper #2 is due July 30 at
midnight)
at 12 midnight)
Text summary and presentation=15%
Article summary and presentation-6%


8
Participation and attendance= 4%
Student generated handouts:
Text Summary (12% of final grade)
Each student will be required to prepare a written summary of the major points of a
portion of chapters from the texts and provide copies (via email) for fellow classmates
and the instructor.
In addition to summarizing the text/articles, each student should choose 3 points they
consider most important, emphasize them in some way in the summaries, and be prepared
to particularly highlight those points in the class discussion.
Presentation to class
Choose two points from your text material and find film example(s) to illustrate it to the
class. Post the link to the class no later than the night before the presentation. The class is
expected to view the link before the class.
Additionally, each student will create an exercise for the class to illustrate one of the
main “take-home messages” from the material presented. For, example, a role play, a
reading of the text from a case in the Montgomery text, or other creative ways to teach
certain aspects of the material.
Define and give example of a neurobiological concept.
Additionally, each student’s text summary should address in writing the following as it
is related to the material summarized:(3%)
a. See Appendix (pp.279-281 in Schore, text, Affect Regulation and the Repair of the
Self, 2003 for principles of Regulation Theory
i. re-state a principle of Regulation Theory which most closely relates to section of text
summarized and apply to example from film of student’s choosing
ii. speculate on how information in section of text summarized affects or is affected by
one of the following characteristics: age, class, culture, ethnicity, country of origin,
language(s), educational attainment, religious background, sexual orientation, physical or
mental challenge, economic oppression, social oppression.
Note: although the above commentary should be on the summary, this material will not
be reviewed during the presentation. Howver, it can be used by students whenwriting the
papers.
Article summaries (4% of final grade)
Each student will summarize major points from an article on the syllabus and provide
copies of their notes to fellow classmates and the instructor the day before the assignment
is due.


9
The notes should include the following critical thought:
 (b.) 1 speculation regarding relevant scientific findings that (i.) supports and (ii.) calls
into question the scientific basis of selected principles of the treatment theory in the
article summarized. The scientific findings can be from any of the material in the
textbooks or in classmates summaries (reference this). When the article is discussed in
class, the student is expected to actively support the discussion.
Note: although the above commentary should be on the summary, this material will not
be reviewed during the presentation.
Presentation to class
Choose two points from your article material and find film example(s) to illustrate it to
the class.
For the text and article summaries, create a 6 question “quizlette” for the class to answer
at the end of the presentation. (2 points)
Paper #1,
40% of final grade}: The focus of the examination is the application of selected
neurobiological concepts as related to treatment considerations as well as to evaluate,
select, and design a social service intervention.
The 10 (or so) page paper (excluding bibliography) will be informed by any material
assigned. Additionally, 1 reference should be from the list of suggested texts found at
beginning or syllabus or from the recommended reading list found at the end of the
syllabus; 1 reference from the articles reviewed by students, and also reference your own
article (5 points).
The material will be the case of Karen. The paper should include the following:
       (10 points) Make a diagnosis of the client, using DSM 5 format. including codes,
         V,T,Z codes, as appropriate.
              List the criteria met by Karen’s symptoms (give examples) and list 5 of the
              defenses that help establish your diagnosis.
              For each criteria met and 3 of the defenses employed by Karen,
              speculate on the neuroscience supporting them.
              Describe both the behaviors of the speculated attachment category of
              childhood and adulthood and the neuroscience that accounts for the
               behaviors.
              Discuss briefly the attachment category most similar to the
              diagnosis/diagnoses with examples of how it is similar to the diagnosis
              and to the linking neuroscience.


10
                Choose a case from Montgomery text and discuss & give examples of 3
                symptoms, defenses or issues (or some combination) that are similar to
                Karen’s.
   2. Give an example of the client’s stressful symptom, memory, wish, experience,
   and/or defensive maneuver and describe principles and/or techniques, and/or
   strategies using
             Regulation Theory (specify which Principle) could be clinically useful in
              addressing same and explain why the principle would be useful.
              Mention 2 neurobiological findings that support the use of this
              principle/technique to treat Karen. (5 points).
   3.   Evaluate the above technique’s potential positive and negative effect on the
        treatment issue. For the negative impact aspect of using this technique, design and
        evaluate an appropriate clinical intervention from any other theory that would
        correct the negative impact. Briefly describe and give citation for theory.(5
        points)
   4. Using the dyadic experience between Karen and her therapist, find an example of
        at least 5 of the steps of projective identification.
            Definition & neurobiology of projective identification (include the defenses
            that are involved in projective identification and their definitions, examples, &
            neurobiology, as well) and Schore’s step-by-step description of projective
            identification, see p. 262 of Montgomery text (and the neurobiology of
            each step, to be in class discussion); how is this related to
             transference/counter/transference, neurobiologically? Additionally, choose a
             case from Montgomery text and speculate on the client’s projected material
             toward the therapist.
           (10 points)
   5. Give 1 example of the psychological defense of dissociation that was erected
        in the face of therapist intervention (describe intervention and behaviors that
        suggest dissociation occurred), which could include therapist error;
        define & describe the neurobiological underpinnings of the dissociative
        experience.
        From the Montgomery text, from one of the cases, choose an example of a
         dissociative moment or
         experience of the client. Speculate on the traumatic reminder that prompted the
        dissociation.
       (2 points)
   6. Describe an ethical conflict and quote the ethical guideline from NASW
       Code of Ethics that could be a result of the interface
       between the particulars of the client (Karen) and something about you, the
       student, such as ethnicity, religion, family issue, age, gender, sexual


 11
        orientation, race, class, cultural background, language, socioeconomic
        status, physical challenge, and/or other individual differences; speculate on
        how the interplay you describe between you and Karen could be explained
        neurobiologically. Note: a clinical conflict is not necessarily an ethical
        conflict, though it could be. Additionally, choose a case from the Montgomery text
        with whom you may have a strong reaction(counter-transference) that involves
        something about you, as well. Briefly describe your speculation.
       (3 points)
 IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
                        Topic:              Assignment Due:                 Readings:
                Required readings; to    Additional presentation        located in Canvas
                     be presented               material                 (recommended)
06-04              Introduction to
Class #1                course
               For next class, begin
               film, Postcards from
               the Edge
    06-09                               Sable, P. (2012).
               Attachment:
  Class #2                              Cassidy, J. (1999).
               Montgomery, A.
               (2013). Chapter 1,
               Affect Regulation and    Karen, R. (1990).
               the Autonomic
               Nervous System, 3-27.    Van Ijzendoorn, M. &
                                        Sagi, A. (1999)
               Schore, A.N. (2003a). Nelson, J. & Bennett,
               Parent-infant            S. (2008)
               communications and
               the neurobiology of      Bowlby, J. (1960).
               emotional
               development. Affect
               dysregulation and
               disorders of the self.
               New York: W.W.
               Norton & Co. Chapter
               4 (75-86).
               Neurobiology of fear Siegel, D. (2003).           Assessment tool: In Scarf, M.
    06-11      and trauma:                                       (1995). Intimate worlds, life
                                                                 inside the family. NY:
  Class #3     Schore, A. N.            Applegate, J and         Random House, from Chapter


12
          (2012)Chapter 3.        Shapiro, J. (2000).   2: The Beavers Scale of
          Right brain affect                            Family Health and
          regulation: An          Nelson, J. (in press) Competence: Levels 1-5)
          essential mechanism of
          development, trauma,
          dissociation, and...
          Montgomery, A.
          (2013). Ch. 3, Threat
          Management
   06-16
 Class #4  Coping with fear and                         Greenberg, G. (July 2001).
                      trauma          Buelow, et al.
                                                        Aisenberg, E. (2008).
          Schore, A.N. (2012).
          Chapter 6 Attachment,
          affect regulation, and
          the developing right
          brain: Linking
          developmental
          neuroscience to
          pediatrics.
          Schore, A.. (2012).
          Chapter 8 Attachment
          trauma and the
          developing right brain:
          Origins of pathological
          dissociation (259-320).
   06-18
 Class #5     Work on paper
                  together


13
   06-23                           Wallin, D. (2007).
 Class #6   Clinical work with                             Chapter 10 Cultural issues in
           relational templates Applegate, J &             Relational Diagnosis:
            resulting in coping Shapiro, J. (2005).        Hispanics in the United States
          with fear and trauma
                                                           Chapter 11 Cultural
                                   Schore, J. R. & Schore, Considerations in Diagnosis,
                                   A.N. (2008).
                                                           Vaillant(974) chart and
                                                           Montgomery (2013) Ch.2
                                                           Defensive Functioning Scale
                                                           (807-810); Glossary (811-
           Schore, AN. (2012).                             813); GARF Scale (814);
                      Chapter 5                            SOFAS Scale (817) in DSM-
                    Therapeutic                            IV-TR
                    enactments:
                     Working in
                     right brain
                    windows of
                  affect tolerance
                     (152-222).
          Montgomery, A.
                  (2013).
            Chapter 2, Defense
                    Mechanisms
                   and the Limbic
                       System,


 14
            Montgomery, A.
            (2013). Chapter 8,
            Integrating Selected
            Neurobiological
            Concepts int the
            Supervisory Process,
            pp. 244-277.
               Neuroception and Beebe, B. (2003)
    06-25    attachment-informed
                 interventions     Berlin, L., Zeanah, C.,
  Class # 7                        & Lieberman, (2008).
                Montgomery, A.
              (2013). Chapter 4, How Power Affects
                  Therapeutic      the Brain
            Engagement Issues and
             the Vagal System, 65-
                      113.
               Corinne & Brianna
                                   Lyons-Ruth, K. (2008).
06-30
            Early dysregulation    Boo, K. (2006,
            and resulting          February 6).
  Class #7  attachment injuries
                                   Brown, K. M. & Sorter,
            Schore, A.N.,          D. (2010).
            (2003a). Parent-infant
            communications and     Mikulincer, M. &
            the neurobiology of    Shaver, P. (2007).
            emotional
            development. Affect    Solomon, J. & George,
            dysregulation and      C. (2008).
            disorders of the self.
            New York: W.W.          The neurobiology of
            Norton & Co. Chapter   feeling safe
            4 (75-86).              Robertson on
                                   attachment
                                   Panksepp, J. (2013).
                                           How primary-
                                           process


15
                                            emotional
                                            systems guide
                                            child
                                            development:
                                            Ancestral
                                            regulators of hu
                                    Wallin, D. The
                                    dismissing patient. In:
                                    Attachment in
07-02 Class Attachment styles as Psychotherapy, New
    #8      templates for           York: The Guilford
            disordered              Press, 211-223.
            personality
            functioning
            Wallin,Assessing the    Wallin, D. (2007).
            patient’s state of mind
            with respect to         Wallin, D. The
            attachment. In:         preoccupied patient.
            Attachment in           In: Attachment in
            Psychotherapy, 206-     Psychotherapy, New
            210.                    York: The Guilford
            Text material, in       Press, 224-241.
            Canvas
                                    Bennett, S. & Nelson,
                                    J. (Eds.). (2010).
   07-07
 Class # 9      Montgomery, A.
               (2013). Chapter 5,
             Personality Disorders Blieberg (2001)
             as Affect Management
              Strategies, 114-192.
            Review for class:,
            DSM 5
             Personality Disorders
                591-644; Anxiety
              Disorders, 189-234;
             Obsessive-Compulsive
            and Related Disorders,
              235-164; Alternative
                DSM-5 model for
             Personality Disorders
                    ,761-782


16
             Wallin, D. (2007)
               Attachment in
            psychotherapy. (84-
                    98).
                                 Sagi,A,
                                  Van I Jzendoorn, M.,
                                 Aviezer, O. Donnell, F.,
   07-09                         & Mayseless, O..
         Developmental issues (1994).
         in assessing attachment
         styles                  Van Ijzendoorn, M. &
                                 Sagi, A. (2008)
             Montgomery, A.
                  (2013).        Nelson, J. (2005).
           adolescence. Chapter
                     6.          Nelson J. (in press).
         Traumatic Antecedents
         of Borderline
         Personality Disorder.
         In Pyschological
         trauma (pp. 111-126)
         Bessel A. van der
         Kolk.
         (in Canvas)


17
   07-14      Work on paper
Class # 10       together
   07-16
 Class #11                       Takahashi, K. (1990).
              Compare and        Tronick, E. (2007)
             contrast cultural   Multiple caretaking in
               sculpting of      the context of human
                attachment       evolution:
                                 Tronick, E. (2007) The
                                 Manta pouch:
                                 Tronick, E. (2007)
                                 Mother-infant
                                 interaction among the
                                 Gusii of Kenya.
                 Assessing       Nelson, J. (2005).
   07-21       “normative”
                                 Scheper-Hughes, N.
 Class #12                               (1992).
            Schore, A.N.( 2012).
           Bowlby’s environment Schoch, R. (1992).
              of evolutionary
           adaptedness: Current


 18
               decrement in U.S.
               Culture (339-382).          Nelson(2005)
                Review for class:
             Depressive Disorders,
                155-189; Anxiety
              Disorders, 189-253;
                   Dissociative
              Disorders; Trauma-
              and Stressor-Related
               Disorders; Somatic
             Symptom and Related
            Disorders; Sleep-Wake
               Disorders, 361-42
07-23       Considering               Bennett, S. & Nelson, van der Kolk, B. A. (1987
            therapeutic change vis    J. (Eds.). (2010).
  Class #13 a vis the neurobiology                           Assessment tool: Steinberg,
            of attachment and         Bennett, S. and        M., Rounsaville, B., et al.,
            regulation issues         Nelson, J. (2008).     (1994).
              Schore, A.N. (2012). Nelson, J. (2010).
               Chapter 4 The right
             brain implicit self lies Stern, D. (1998).
                  at the core of
             psychoanalysis (118-
                       151)           Wallin, The Dismissing
                                      Patient
    07-28        Psychotherapy        Solomon, M. & Siegel,
                  research and        D. (Eds).
  Class #14    attachment: some


19
                   illustrations      Grossmann, K.,
                                      Grossmann, K.E.,
                                      Spangler, G. Suess, G.
                                      & Unzner, L. (1985).
                                      Tronick, E. (2007).
                                      Van Ijzendoorn, M. &
                                      Sagi, A. (1999)
              Relational trauma and
                    attachment
               Schore, A.N. (2012).
                         Chapter 2.
                         Relational
                      trauma and the
                         developing
                      right brain: An
                        interface of
                       Psychoanalytic
                      Self Psychology
                            and
                       Neuroscience.
                          (52-70).
Paper #2: Application of Attachment Theory, Research and the
  Neurobiology of Attachment to a Fictional Character
The clinical data is taken from the “case material” on Suzanne, the character in Postcards
from the Edge. This examination is intended to represent a working draft of a clinical
assessment of the forces that have had an effect on the client’s presenting problem.
Charts or other schematics to present material are acceptable. For each question, use an
article from the Reference list at end of syllabus, the text material, article that you
presented, and/or any material presented by fellow classmates. (2 points)


20
First ½ of paper
Draft of assessment interviews with client: (#1-4 = 1 point)
1.       Social Work Setting:
2.       Referral Source:
3.       Presenting Problem:
4.       Identifying data: Create a description of Suzanne from the following list of
qualities, characteristics and stressors: age, gender, culture, ethnicity, country of origin,
language, educational attainment, religious background, sexual orientation, physical or
mental challenge, economic oppression, and social oppression. Additionally, describe her
general physical and mental health, previous treatment (if relevant), employment
situation, living situation, relevant relationship issues, and other important issues.
5.       (1 point) Mention any three of the above descriptors (question #4) which may
have an effect on the diagnosis and give neurobiological explanation for why this might
be so.
6.        (5 points) Make a diagnosis listing criteria met with examples and at least 3
defenses with examples and the neurobiological description which is the mechanism for
the criteria and defenses.
7.       (5 points) What may be the neurobiological significance of the diagnosis as it
relates to the attachment category? Speculate on the childhood and the adult attachment
category with examples of behavior(s) and note the relationship to the Autonomic
Nervous System.
8. (2 points) Give an example of your own right brain reaction to an example of any
material on this case and explain it from any neurobiological perspective as referenced
from any principle of Regulation Theory; include countertransference challenges as they
relate to the therapist’s attachment history and style and strategies.
 9. (10.5 points) For projective identification, take the step-by-step
         approach as found in Ch. 8 Montgomery, p. 262 (2013)
         using the argument on the stairs with mother. Describe the
         neurobiological mechanism
         behind each step with examples from scene.
Second ½ of paper
10.              (4 points) RE: 2nd kissing scene
a.        From the encounter between Suzanne and Jack), speculate on the adult
attachment category of both people, with some detail.
b.        Give a neurobiological explanation for the biology of affect regulation that is
implicit in their attachment category.


21
c.        What disowned part of a conflict/ambivalence might each one be likely to project
onto the other?
d.        Why would each one tend to keep the other side of the conflict/ambivalence
(make your best clinical speculation)?
  11. (1 point) Give a neurobiological explanation for the exchange between Suzanne and
Doris when Suzanne comes in late one night. Give some dialogue, such as, “Do you mind
if I drink?...Do you mind if I drop acid? Or “I hardly think that my drinking can be
compared with your drug taking” in order to illustrate the neurobiology implicit in the
encounter.
 12. (1 point) From the Evelyn Ames conversation, “I’m in it for the endolphin
rush…”Describe and explain Suzanne’s reaction (from neurobiological perspective) at
any point in the conversation.
 13. (1 point) Using the neurobiological information regarding the shame experience,
explain Jack and Suzannes’ reactions during their argument (e.g., “You know what this is,
it’s a jealous tantrum….” Or any other interactions or dialogue within that argument).
14. (1.5 points) Define and give examples from movie of 4 neurobiological concepts.
Reference List:
Ammamiti, M. & Gallese, V.(2014). The birth of intersubjectivity: Psychodynamics
    neurobiology, and the self. Chapter 5. Neurobiological basis of motherhood. (75-100).
    New York: W.W.Norton and Company.
Allen, J.G., Fonagy, P., & Bateman, A.N. (2008) Mentalizing in clinical practice.
       Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric Publishing, Inc.
Applegate, J and Shapiro, J. (2000). Neurobiology for clinical social work: Theory
    and practice New York: W.W. Norton & Co. Chapter 9 (40-57; 160-177).
 Aisenberg, E. (2008). Evidence-Based practice in mental health care to ethnic minority
       communities: Has practice fallen short of its evidence? Social Work, 53(4), 297-306.
Badennoch, B. (2008). Being a brain-wise therapist: A practical guide to
      Interpersonal neurobiology. NY: WW Norton & Co.
Bacal, H.A., & Newman, K.M. (1990). Theories of Object Relations: Bridges to Self
    Psychology. New York: Columbia University Press.
Barbanell, L. 92006). Removing the mask of kindness: Diagnosis and treatment of
       the caretaker personality disorder. USA: Jason Aronson.


22
Basham, K. Homecoming as safe haven or the new front: Attachment and detachment in
         military couples. Clinical Social Work Journal, 36:1, 83-96.
Bebee, B. & Lachmann, F.M. (2002). Infant research and adult treatment. Hillsdale,
      New Jersey: Analytic Press.
Beebe, B. (2003) Brief mother-infant treatment: Psychoanalytically informed video
    feedback, Infant Mental Health Journal, 24 (1), 24-52.
Berlin, L., Zeanah, C., & Lieberman, (2008). Prevention and intervention programs for
    supporting early attachment security, In: Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P., (Eds.). (2008).
    Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications. New York:
    The Guilford Press, 748-761.
Bennett, S. and Nelson, J. (2008). Closing thoughts: Special issue on attachment.
    Clinical Social Work Journal. 36:1, 109-112.
Bennett, S. & Nelson, J. (Eds.). (2010). Adult attachment in clinical social work:
Bennett, S. & Nelson, J. (Eds.). (2010). Adult attachment in clinical social work:
    Practice, research, and policy. New York: Springer. 1-8.
Berzoff, J. Flanagan, L.M., & Hertz, P. (1996). Inside out and outside in:
      Psychodynamic clinical theory and practice in contemporary multicultural contexts.
      Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson, Inc.
Blieberg, E. (2001). Treating personality disorders in children and adolescents: A
    relational approach. New York: Guilford Press.
Boo, K. (2006, February 6). Swamp nurse. The New Yorker, 54-65.
Bollas, C. (1987). Chapter 9 Extractive introjection. In: The shadow of the object:
         Psychoanalysis of the unthought known. New York: Columbia University Press.
         157-172.
Bowlby, J. (1960). Grief and mourning in infancy and early childhood. Psychoanalytic
      Study of the Child, XV, 9 – 27.
Bragdon, A.D. & Gamon, D. (2000). Brains that work a little bit differently: Recent
   discoveries about common brain diversities. USA: Allen D. Bragdon Publisher, Inc.
Brown, K. M. & Sorter, D. Listening closely: The significance of the therapist’s voice
    intensity, rhythm, and tone. In: Bennett, S. & Nelson, J. (2010). Adult attachment in
     clinical social work: Practice, research, and policy. New York Springer. 97-111.


23
 Bryant-Davis, T., & Ocampo C. (2006). A therapeutic approach to the
    treatment of racist-incident-based trauma. Journal of Emotional
   Abuse, 6(4), 1-22 doi: 10.1300/J135v06n04-01
Cassidy, J. (1999). The nature of the child’s ties. In Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P. (Eds).
     Handbook of Attachment: Theory, research and clinical applications. New York:
     The Guilford Press, 3-20.
Chavez-Duenas NY, Adames HY, Perez-Chavez JG, & Salas SP, (2019). Healing ethno-
        racial trauma in Latinx immigrant communities: Cultivating hope, resistance, and
        action. Am Psychol. Jan;74(1):49-62. doi:10.1037/amp0000289.
Cohler, B. J. (1999). The gay therapist’s response to a gay client practicing unsafe sex:
   A dilemma in brief psychotherapy. Psychoanalytic Social Work, 6(3/4), 161-202.
Carter, C.S., & Porges, S.W. (2013). Chapter 5.Neurobiology and the evolution of
        mammalian social behavior. In: Narvaez, D., Panksepp, J., Schore, A.N., &
        Gleason, T. R. (Eds.).(2103). Evolution, early experience and human
        development: From research to practice and Policy.Oxford: Oxford, pp.132-151.
Cozolino, L. (2016). Chapter 7 Attachment and intimate relationship (102-117) and
        Chapter 8. Core shame.(118-135) In: Why therapy works; Using our minds to
        change our brains. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Cozolino, L. (2016). Chapter 7 Attachment and intimate relationship (102-117) and
        Chapter 8. Core shame.(118-135) In: Why therapy works; Using our minds to
        change our brains. New York: W.W. Norton & Company. Cozolino, L. (2016).
        Chapter 7 Attachment and intimate relationship (102-117) and Chapter 8. Core
        shame.(118-135) In: Why therapy works; Using our minds to change our brains.
        New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Damasio. A. (2003). Looking for Spinoza: Joy, sorrow, and the feeling brain. New
   York: Harcourt Brace and Company.
Eagle, M. (2003). Clinical implications of attachment theory. Psychoanalytic Inquiry.
   Hillside, New Jersey: Analytic Press.
Edward, J, & Sanville, J. (Eds.). (1996). Fostering healing and growth:
    Psychoanalytic social work approach. Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson.
Elson, M. (1986). Self Psychology in clinical social work. New York: W. W. Norton
    & Co.
Fosha, D., Siegel, D.J., & Solomon, M. (2009). The healing power of emotion:


24
      Affective neuroscience, development and clinical practice. New York:
      WW Norton & Co.
Fonagy, P., Luyten, P., Allison, E., & Campbell, C. (2016). Reconciling psychoanalytic
     ideas with attachment theory. (780-804). In: Handbook of attachment: Theory,
     research and clinical applications. J. Cassidy & P.R. Shaver(Eds.). New York:
    Fonagy, P., Luyten, P., Allison, E., & Campbell, C. (2016). Reconciling
    psychoanalytic ideas with attachment theory. (780-804). In: Handbook of attachment:
     Theory, research and clinical applications. J. Cassidy & P.R. Shaver(Eds.).
      New York: Guilford.
Grossmann, K., Grossmann, K.E., Spangler, G. Suess, G. & Unzner, L. (1985).
      Introduction to Part IV: Cross-national studies of attachment in infancy and
      maternal sensitivity and newborns’ orientation responses as related to quality of
      attachment in Northern Germany. In: Bretherton, I. & Waters, E. (Eds.) Growing
      points of attachment theory and research Society for Research in Child
     Development, 50, 1-2, and.231-256
Karen, R. (1990). Becoming attached. Atlantic Monthly, 265, (2 February) 35–70.
Karr-Morse with Meridith A. Wiley(2012). Chapter 3, Scared sick: The role of childhood
         trauma in adult disease.(29-52). Scared sick : How experience becomes biology.
         New York: Basic Books.
Gabbard, G.O., Miller, L.A., & Martinez, M. (2007) Chapter 5. A neurobiological
    perspective on mentalizing and internal object relations in traumatized patients
    with Borderline Personality Disorder. In J.G. Allen. & P. Fonagy,(Eds.). Handbook
    of mentalization-based treatment.New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons.
Gardner, J. R. (1999).Using Self Psychology in brief psychotherapy. Psychoanalytic
   Social Work, 6(3/4), 43-86.
Ginot, E. (2015). Chapter 9 Intergenerational enactment of trauma: The role of
unconscious self-systems. In The neuropsychology of the unconscious: Integrating brain
and mind in psychotherapy.New York, NY: WW Norton.
Glikman, H. (2004, April). Low-income fathers: Contexts, connections, and self. Social
   Work, 49(2), 195-206.
Greenberg, G. (July 2001). The Serotonin Surprise. Discover, 22(7). 64-69.


25
Gur, R.C. (2005). Brain maturation and its relevance to understanding criminal
     culpability of juveniles. Current Psychiatry Reports. 7, 292-296.
Guttmann, G., & Scholz-Strasser, I. (Eds.). (1998). Freud and neurosciences:
     From brain research to the unconscious. Vienna: Austrian Academy
     of Science Press.
Haglund, P., & Buirski, P. Making sense together: The intersubjective approach to
   psychotherapy. Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson.
Hambrick, E.P., Brawner, T.W., Perry, B.D., Brandt, K., Hofmeister, C. & Collins, J.O.
         (2018). Beyond the ACE score: Examining relationships between timing of
         developmental adversity, relational health and developmental outcomes in
         children. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 33(3), 238-247.
Hill, D.(2015). Affect regulation theory. Chapter 11 Pervasive dissociated shame: A third
         sequela of relational trauma (183-192).Chapter11. New York: W.W. Norton &
         Company.
Silverman, R.C. & Lieberman, A. F.(1999). Negative material attributions, projective
         identification, and the intergenerational transmission of violent relational patterns.
         Psychoanalytic Dialogues: A Journal of Relational Perspectives. 9(2), 161-187.
Hesse, A.M. (2002). Secondary Trauma: How working with trauma survivors affects
   therapists. Clinical Social Work Journal, 30(3), 292-310.Hill, D.(2015). Affect
regulation theory. Chapter 11 Pervasive dissociated shame: A third sequela of relational
trauma (183-192).Chapter11. New York: W.W. Norton & Company.
Silverman, R.C. & Lieberman, A. F.(1999). Negative material attributions, projective
         identification, and the intergenerational transmission of violent relational patterns.
         Psychoanalytic Dialogues: A Journal of Relational Perspectives. 9(2), 161-187.
Howell, E.F. Itzkowitz, S.(Eds.). 2016. Is trauma-analysis psycho-analysis?
      The dissociative mind in psychoanalysis: Understanding and working with trauma.
      New York: Routledge.
Howard, P. J. (2000). The owner’s manual for the brain: Everyday application from
   mind-brain research. Atlanta: Bard Press.
Iacoboni, M. (2009). Mirroring people: The science of empathy and how we connect
     with others. New York: Picador
Johnson, H.C. (2104). Behavioral neuroscience for the human services: Foundations
      in emotion, mental health, addiction, and alternative therapies. New York, NY:
      Oxford University Press.


26
Karen, R. (1990, February). Becoming attached. The Atlantic Monthly, 35-70.
Kaslow , F.W.(Ed.) Handbook of relational diagnosis and dysfunctional family patterns.
     (1996). Chapter 10 Cultural issues in Relational Diagnosis: Hispanics in the United
     States; Chapter 11 Cultural Considerations in Diagnosis (152-170), Canada: John
     Wiley and Sons.
Kottler, J. A..,& Blau, D.S. (1989). The imperfect therapist: Learning from failure in
   therapeutic practice. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Kottler, J.A. (1993). On being a therapist. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Lanius, R., Lanius, U., Fisher, J, & Ogden, P. Psychological trauma and the brain:
        Toward a neurobiological treatment model(139-164). In
Neborsky, R.J. & Solomon, M.F. Attachment bonds and intimacy: Can the primary
        imprint of love change.(155-185). Short-term therapy for long-term change. M.F.
        Solomon, R.J. Nebrosky, M. Alpert, F. Shapiro, & D. Malan (Eds.). New York:
        W.W.Norton & Company.
LeDoux, J. (1996). The emotional brain. New York: Simon and Schuster.
Lyons-Ruth, K., & Jacobvitz, C. (1999). Attachment disorganization: Unresolved loss,
   relational violence, and lapses in behavioral and attentional strategies. In J. Cassidy
   and P. Shaver, (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical
   implications (pp. 520-554). New York: Guilford Press.
Lyons-Ruth, I., Dutra, L., Schuder, M., & Bianchi, I. (2006). From infant attachment
    disorganization to adult dissociation: Relational adaptations or traumatic
    experiences? Psychiatric clinics of North America, 29,63-86.
Lyons-Ruth, K., & Jacobvitz, D. (2008). Attachment disorganization: Genetic factors,
     parenting, context, and developmental transformation from infancy to adulthood.
     In J. Cassidy & P. Shaver(Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory, research,
     and clinical application (pp. 666-697), New York: Guilford.
Lyons-Ruth, K. (2008). Attachment disorganization: Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P., (Eds.).
     (2008). Handbook of attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications.
     New York: The Guilford Press, 672-680.


27
Liotti, G. (1992). Disorganized/disoriented attachment in the etiology of
     dissociative disorders. Dissociation ,5(4), 196-204.
Mattei, L. Coloring development: Race, and culture in Psychodynamic theories(221-237)
         In J. Berzof, L.M.Flanagan, & P. Hertz, Inside out and outside in:
         Psychodynamic clinical theory and practice in contemporary multicultural
         contexts. New Jersey: Aronson.
Neborsky, R.J. & Solomon, M.F. Attachment bonds and intimacy: Can the primary
         imprint of love change.(155-185). Short-term therapy for long-term change. M.F.
         Solomon, R.J. Nebrosky, M. Alpert, F. Shapiro, & D. Malan (Eds.). New York:
         W.W.Norton & Company.
Panksepp, J. & Biven, L. (2012). The archaeology of mind: Neuroevolutionary origins
     of human emotions. New York: Norton.
Porges, S.W. (2004). Neuroception: A subconscious system for detecting threats
    and safety. Zero to Three, 32,19-24.
Mahoney, D. M. (2000), Summer). Panic Disorder and self states: Clinical and research
    illustrations. Clinical Social Work, 28(2), 197-212.
Marano, H.E. (2003,July/August). The opposite sex: The new sex scorecard.
     Psychology Today, 38-46.
McGilchrist, I.(2010). Introduction and Chapter 1 Asymmetry and the Brain. In The
         master and his emissary: The divided brain and the making of the modern world.
         New Haven: Yale University Press.
McWilliams, N, (1994). Psychoanalytic diagnosis: understanding personality in the
     clinical process. New York: The Guilford Press.
Merlin, D. (2001). A mind so rare: The evolution of human consciousness. London:
    W.W. Norton & Co.
Meyer, W. A. (2001).Why they don’t come back: A clinical perspective on the no-
   show client. Clinical Social Work Journal, (1994), 325-339.
Mikulincer, M. & Shaver, P. (2007). Individual differences in attachment-system
     functioning. Attachment in adulthood. New York: The Guilford Press.
     (21-28 & 36-44).
Miller, N.E., Luborsky, L., Barber, J., & Docherty, J.P. (Eds.). (1993). Psychodynamic
    treatment research: A handbook for clinical practice. New York: Basic Books.
Montgomery, A. (2002). Converging perspective of dynamic theory and evolving
    neurobiological knowledge. Smith College Studies in Social Work. 72(2), 177-196.


28
Moskovitz, M., Monk, C., Kaye, C., & Ellerman, S.J.(Eds.).(1997). The neurological
    and developmental basis for psychotherapeutic intervention. Northvale, New Jersey:
   Jason Aronson, Inc.
Nol, J. (2004). Control-mastery: Theory and application. Psychoanalytic Social Work,
    11(1), 37-54.
Nelson, J. (2005). Seeing through tears: Crying and attachment. New York: Routledge,
      15-41.
Nelson, J. (in press) Affect attunement and misattunement and the formation of internal
      working models of attachment. What made Freud laugh: An attachment perspective
     on laughter. New York: Routledge. 71-152)
Nelson, J. (2005). Crying in the clinical hour, and how therapists deal with crying and
    caregiving, including their own. In: Seeing through tears: Crying and attachment.
   New York: Routledge, 151-192.
Nelson J. (in press). Laughter in the clinical hour. In: What made Freud laugh: An
    attachment perspective on laughter. New York: Routledge. Chapter 10.
Nelson, J. Separation, loss, and grief in adults: An attachment perspective. In: Bennett, S.
     & Nelson, J. (Eds.). (2010). Adult attachment in clinical social work: Practice,
    research, and policy. New York: Springer, 79-95.
Nelson, J. & Bennett, S. (2008) Introduction: Special issue on attachment. Clinical Social
    Work Journal. 36:1, pp. 3-8.
Ogden, P., Minton, K., & Pain, C. (2006). Chapter 3 Attachment: The role of the body in
          dyadic regulation. In Trauma and the body: A sensorimotor approach to
          psychotherapy. New York, NY: Norton.
Orange, D. M., Atwood, G.E., & Stolorow, R.D. Working intersubjectively:
     Contextualism in Psychonalytic practice. Hillsdale, NJ: The Analytic Press.
Ornstein, R. (1997).The right mind: Making sense of the hemispheres. Orlando,
    Florida: Harcourt Brace & Company.
Panksepp, J. (2013). How primary-process emotional systems guide child development:
        Ancestral regulators of human happiness, thriving, and suffering. In: Narvaez, D.,
        Panksepp, J., Schore, A.N., & Gleason, T. R. (Eds.).(2103). Evo;ution, early
        experience and human development: From research to practice and
        Policy.Oxford: Oxford, pp.74-94.


29
Perry, B.D., Hambrick, E., & Perry, R.D. (2016) A neurodevelopmental perspective and
clinical challenges. In R. Fong and R. McCoy (Eds.), Transracial and intercountry
adoptions: Cultural guidance for professionals (pp. 126-153). New York NY: Columbia
University Press.
Perry, B.D. (1999). Memories of fear: How the brain stores and retrieves physiologic
          states, feeling, behaviors, and thoughts from traumatic events. In J.M. Goodwin &
          R. Attias (Eds.), Images of the body in trauma (pp. 26-47). New York: Basic
          Books.
Ramachandran, V.S., & Hubbard, E.M. (2003, May). Hearing colors, tasting shapes,
     Scientific American, 288(5), 52-59.
Ringel, S. (2015, May). Attachment research developmental implications, and
      clinical interventions with children, adults, and couples. Encyclopedia of
      Social Work.
      doi: 10.1093/acrefore/9780199975839.013.855.
Rasmussen, B., & Bliss, S. (20140. Beneath the surface: An exploration of
      neurobiological alterations in therapists working with trauma. Smith College Studies
      in Social Work. 84(2-3), 332-349.
Ratey, J.J. (2001). A user’s guide to the brain: Perception, attention, and the four
     theaters of the brain. New York: Pantheon Books
Restak, R. (2003). The new brain: How the modern age is rewiring your mind. USA:
      St. Martin’s Press.
Robertson, J. (1953, April). Some responses of young children to the loss of
      maternal care. Nursing Times, 382-386.
Robertson, J. (1958c). Going to Hospital with Mother{Film}. London: Tavistock Child
     Development Research Unit.
Rosenfield, I. (1992). The strange, familiar, and forgotten: An anatomy of
    consciousness. New York: Alfred Knopf.
Rothshild, B. & Rand, M. (2006). Help for the helper: Self-care strategies for managing
      burnout and stress. New York: WW Norton & Co., Inc.
Sable, P. (2012). The pet connection: An attachment perspective. Journal of Clinical
       Social Work. 41:1 (93-99).
Sagi,A,van IJzendoorn, M., Aviezer, O. Donnell, F., & Mayseless, O. Sleeping out of
      home in a kibbutz communal arrangement: It makes a difference for infant-mother


30
     attachment. (1994). Child Development, 65 (4), 992-1004.
Saltzman, N., & Norcross, J.C.(eds.) (1990). Therapy wars: contention and convergence
    in differing clinical approaches. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Sameroff, A, J., McDonough, S.C., & Rosenblum, K.L. (2004). Treating parent-infant
   relationship problems. New York: Guilford Press.
Perry, B.D. (1999). Memories of fear: How the brain stores and retrieves physiologic
         states, feeling, behaviors, and thoughts from traumatic events. In J.M. Goodwin &
         R. Attias (Eds.), Images of the body in trauma (pp. 26-47). New York: Basic
         Books.
Perry, B.D. (1999). Memories of fear: How the brain stores and retrieves physiologic
         states, feeling, behaviors, and thoughts from traumatic events. In J.M. Goodwin &
         R. Attias (Eds.), Images of the body in trauma (pp. 26-47). New York: Basic
         Books.
Sapolsky, R. (2003, March). Bugs in the brain. Scientific American, 288 (3), 94-97.
Sapolsky, R. M. (2009).Stress, stress-related disease, and emotional regulation (pp.606-
         615). In James J. Gross (Ed.). Handbook of emotion regulation. New York: The
         Guilford Press.
Schallice, T. (1991). From neurobiology to mental structure. Cambridge: Cambridge
   University Press.
Scharff, J. A., & Scharff, D.E. (1992). Scharff notes: A primer of object relations
   therapy. Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson.
Scheper-Hughes, N. (1992). Death without weeping. Berkeley: University of California
    Press, 408-433
Schoch, R. (1992). California Q & A: Nancy Scheper-Hughes. California Monthly,
   102(5), 18-23.
Schore, A. N. (1994). Affect regulation and the origin of the self: The neurobiology of
   emotional development. Hillsdale, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Schore, A.N. (2003a). Affect dysregulation and disorders of the self. New York,
     NY: Norton.
Schore, A.N. (2003b). Affect regulation and the repair of the self. New York,
     NY: Norton.
Schore, A.N. (2012). The science and the art of psychotherapy. NY: Norton.


31
Schore, J.R., & Schore, A.N. (2008). Modern attachment theory: The central role of
     affect regulation in development and treatment. Clinical Social Work Journal,
     36,9-20.
Schore, A.N. (2019). Chapter 4 All our sons: The developmental neurobiology and
        neuroendcrinology of boys at risk.The development of the unconscious mind. New
        York: W.W. Norton & Co.
Schore, A.N. & Marks-Tarlow, T.(2019). Chapter 5 How love opens creativity, play, and
        the arts through early right brain development. In Schore, A.N..Right brain
        psychotherapy. New York, NY: WW Norton.
Searles, H. (1965). The effort to drive the other person crazy: An element in the etiology
    and psychology of schizophrenia. Collected papers on schizophrenia and related
    subjects. New York: International Universities Press.
Seeley, K. M. (2004). Short-term intercultural psychotherapy: Ethnographic inquiry.
      Social Work, 49 (1) 121-140.
Shaw, S.L.& Dallos, R. (December, 2005). Attachment and adolescent depression.
     Attachment & Human Development (7)4. 409-424.
Siegel, D. L., & Hartzell, M. (1993). Parenting from the inside out: How a deeper self-
   understanding can help you raise children who thrive. NewYork Tarcher/Putnam.
Siegel, D. (2003). Brain asymmetry, neural integration, and trauma. In Solomon, M &
     Siegel, D. (Eds.). Healing trauma: An interpersonal neurobiology of psychotherapy.
     New York: W.W. Norton, 14-29.
Silverman, R.C. & Lieberman, A. F.(1999). Negative material attributions, projective
        identification, and the intergenerational transmission of violent relational patterns.
        Psychoanalytic Dialogues: A Journal of Relational Perspectives. 9(2), 161-187.
Sinason, V. & Silver, A.S. (2009). Chapter 17 Treating dissociative and psychotic
        disorders psychodynamically. In Moskowitz, A., Schafer, I., & Dorahy.(Eds.),
Solomon, M.F., Nebrosky, R.J., McCullough, L., Alpert, M., Shapiro, F., & Malan, D.
    (2001). Short-term therapy for long-term change. New York: W. W. Norton & Co.
Solomon, M. & Siegel, D. (2003).(Eds). Healing trauma: An interpersonal neurobiology
     of psychotherapy. New York: W.W. Norton, 124-141.
Solomon, J. & George, C. (2008). The measurement of attachment security in infancy
     and childhood. In Cassidy, J. & Shaver, P. (Eds.), Handbook of attachment: Theory,
     research, and clinical applications. New York: The Guilford Press, (287-302)


32
Spitz, R.N. (1945). Hospitalism—An inquiry into the genesis of psychiatric conditions
     in early childhood. Psychoanalytic Study of the Child, 1, 53-74.
Stern, D. (1998). The process of therapeutic change involving implicit knowledge: some
     implications of developmental observations for adult psychotherapy. Infant
     Development, 19(3), 300-308.
Stern, D.B. (2010). Partners in thought: Working with unforgettable experience,
           dissociation, and enactment. Chapter 8, On having to find what you don't know
           how to look for: Two views of reflective function, New York: Routledge.
Steinberg, M., Rounsaville, B., et al., (1994). Distinguishing between multiple
      personality disorder (dissociative identity disorder) and schizophrenia using the
     Structured Clinical Interview for DSM IV Dissociative Disorders. Journal of
      Nervous and Mental Disorders, 182, 495-502.
Taylor, S.E. (2002). Chapter 1. The power of tending(1-7). Chapter 2. The origins of
         tending and Chapter 3. The tending brain.(16-35). In: Tending instinct: How
         nurturing is essential to who we are and how we live.New York: Henry Holt.
Taffel, R.(2014). The rise of the two-dimensional parent. Psychotherapy Networker.
September/October, 38(5), 18-25.
Takahashi, K. (1990). Are the key assumptions of the ‘Strange Situation’ procedure
      universal? A view from Japanese research. Human Development, 33, 23-30.
Tassie, A.K..(2015). Vicarious resilience fromattachment trauma: Reflections of long-
         term therapy with marginalized young people. J. of Social Work Practice, 29:2,
         191-214. doi:10.108002650533.2014.933406.
Taylor, S.E.(2002).Chapter 1. The power of tending(1-7). Chapter 2. The origins of
         tending and Chapter 3. The tending brain.(16-35). In: Tending instinct: How
         nurturing is essential to who we are and how we live.New York: Henry Holt.
Tronick, E.Z. (2003). Of course all relationships are unique: How co-creative
      processes generate unique mother-infant and patient-therapist relationships
      and change other relationships. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 23(3), 473-491).
Tronick, E. (2007). The role of culture in brain organization, child development,
    and parenting. In: The neurobehavioral and socio-emotional development of
    infants and children. New York: W.W. Norton, 97-101.
Tronick, E. (2007) Multiple caretaking in the context of human evolution: Why don’t the
      Efe know the Western prescription for child care? In: The neurobehavioral and
      socio-emotional development of infants and children. New York: W.W. Norton,


33
      102-122.
Tronick, E. (2007) The Manta pouch: A regulatory system for Peruvian infants at high
    altitude. In: The neurobehavioral and socio-emotional development of infants and
   children. New York: W.W. Norton, 123-133.
Tronick, E. (2007) Mother-infant interaction among the Gusii of Kenya. In: The
    neurobehavioral and socio-emotional development of infants and children. New
   York: W.W. Norton, 134-152.
Vaillant, G.E. (1977). Adaptation to life. Boston: Little, Brown, and Company.
van der Kolk, B. A. (1987). The psychological consequences of overwhelming
      life experiences. In Psychological trauma. Bessel A. van der Kolk (Ed.).
      USA: American Psychiatric Association, 1-30.
van der Kolk, B.A., McFarlane, A.C., & Weisaeth, L. (Eds.). (1996). Traumatic stress:
   The effects of overwhelming experience on mind, body, and society. New York:
    Guilford Press.
van Ijzendoorn, M. & Sagi, A. (1999) Cross-cultural patterns of attachment: Universal
    and Contextual Dimensions. In: J. Cassidy & P. Shaver (Eds.). Handbook of
    attachment: Theory, research, and clinical applications. New York: The Guilford
    Press, 880-882 & 896-901.
van Ijzendoorn, M. & Sagi, A. (2008) Attachment in the Kibbutz: The Israeli Case.
     In Cross-cultural patterns of attachment: Universal and Contextual Dimensions.
     In: J. Cassidy & P. Shaver (Eds.) (2008). Handbook of attachment: Theory, research,
    and clinical applications. New York: The Guilford Press, 889-892)
Vaughn, B.E., Bost, K.K., & van IJzendorrn, H. (2008). Attachment and temperament:
      Additive and interactive influences on behavior, affect, and cognition during
      infancy and childhood. In J. Cassidy & P. Shaver(Eds.), Handbook of attachment:
     Theory, research, and clinical application (pp. 192-216), New York: Guilford.
Vaughn, S. (1997). The talking cure: The science behind psychotherapy. New York:
     G.P. Putnam’s Sons.
Vaughn, B.E., Bost, K.K., & van IJzendorrn, H. (2008). Attachment and temperament:
      Additive and interactive influences on behavior, affect, and cognition during
      infancy and childhood. In J. Cassidy & P. Shaver(Eds.), Handbook of attachment:
     Theory, research, and clinical application (pp. 192-216), New York: Guilford.
Voeller, K.K.S. (1986). Right-hemisphere deficit syndrome in children.
       American Journal of Psychiatry, 143, 1004-1009.


34
Wachtel, P.L. (2008). Chapter 4. From the two-person to contextual: Beyond infancy and
        the consulting room (54-95). Relational theory and the practice of psychotherapy.
        New York: Guilford.
Wallin, D.J. (2007). Attachment in psychotherapy. New York, NY: Guilford.
Wallin, D. (2007). The dismissing patient. In: Attachment in Psychotherapy, New York:
The Guilford Press, 211-223.
Wallin, D. (2007) Attachment in psychotherapy. New York: The Guilford Press., (84-98).
Wallin, D. (2007). Assessing the patient’s state of mind with respect to attachment.
    In: Attachment in Psychotherapy, New York: The Guilford Press, 206-210.
Wallin, D. (2007). The preoccupied patient. In: Attachment in Psychotherapy,
   New York: The Guilford Press, 224-241.
Wallin, D. (2007). The unresolved patient: Healing the wounds of trauma and loss.
     Attachment in psychotherapy. New York: The Guilford Press, 242-25
Wilson, A. & Prillaman, J.L.(1997) Early development and disorders of internalization. In
        Moskovitz, M., Monk, C., Kaye, C., & Ellerman, S.J.(Eds.).(1997). The
        neurological and developmental basis for psychotherapeutic intervention.
        Northvale, New Jersey: Jason Aronson, Inc.
