s p r i n g     2 0 2 0
m o n d a y :     1 - 2 : 3 0                             A
w e d n e s d a y :       1 - 2 : 3 0
                                        D   R
        C                               I   T   R
                                                o
       T                           R
        I                                       h i t a
                                                s h
                             E
O                                               R a
                                                o
N


     This class will focus on those two words very intensely: “ART”
and “DIRECTION.” An ART DIRECTOR is basically someone
who directs art. The noun being “art” and the verb being “direct.”
An art director is (usually) not only the person who came up with
the idea, but they know how to execute it properly. What they are
doing is directing the viewer’s eyes so they can see and feel the idea
in the most amazing and impactful way possible.
      What am I looking at?
  Where’s the focal point?
           Why should I care?
            where did i park?
              is this gonna be
                    on the test?


      Great art direction is everywhere: in the architecture of a house, a logo,
a photograph, a concert poster, the composition of a scene in a movie, and
yes, even a newspaper ad. Art direction is color palette, typography, graphic
design and energy. And by energy I mean there’s tension – something
powerful is drawing you in and keeping you captive. Something about that
image – whether it be that infamous scene by Steven Spielberg in “Close
Encounters” where the boy just opened the front door and is flooded by
the red lights of the UFO, that timeless “Endless Summer” poster, or any
of the hundreds (literally, hundreds) of famous logo designs by Paul Rand.
      This class will break down assignments into the following 5 categories:
Typography, composition, directing photography, directing film, creating
energy.
      It doesn’t matter how you want to art direct. You can take these skills
and be a fine artist, be a filmmaker, a product designer, a typographer, a vid-
eo game designer, an animator, or even invent a whole new genre of content.
What matters is that you have the skillset to know how to DIRECT art.


     This class will focus on the 6 elements
that make up great art direction. (These are
not necessarily in order of importance:)
     1. Composition (think about the rule of
thirds, the Golden Mean, or just symmetri-
cal vs asymmetrical design - also think about
the lighting and overall color-palette. Think
about the harmony - the balance of negative
and positive space, figure/ground continuity)
     2. Flow (use your power as art director
and DIRECT the ART, think about where the focal point is, what do
you want the viewer to see first? Second? Third?)
     3. Narrative (every good image tells a story, or at least has some
depth beyond just being a pretty picture or some good typography)
     4. Emotion (think about
how you want to viewer to
feel when they see your image
- and sometimes it might ac-
tually be the state of mind you
were in when you created it)
                                  5. Insight (this is your point of view,
                                this is how you see the world)
                                  6. Stamp (this is you your style, your
                                ultimate display of showing off all your
                                mad skills)
                                  All of this is what gives a great piece
                                of art direction energy, and thus, life.
                                All of your work will be based on
                                these 6 elements.


     These are the following assignments – BUT PLEASE NOTE, THAT
THIS IS SUBJECT TO CHANGE! I may give these out in a different order,
or I may eliminate or add some. This is just a rough idea of what we’ll be
doing for the next 4 months. The key thing is that it’ll be a lot of fun!!!
1.   Photograph alphabet and numbers around town
2.   Create a piece of art inspired by the corner of Guadalupe and MLK
3.   Create a poster for your life as a theme park (think: “Disneyland”)
4.   Match up what actor might fit what font
5.   Create a type poster based on a quote in the typeface of that “actor”
6.   Photograph the same thing for 7 days – TEAM ASSIGNMENT
7.   Create a color palette based on that
8.   Create art from everyday things (#sundaysketches)
9.   Pitch how you would direct “Bad Guy”
10. Shoot a music video – TEAM ASSIGNMENT
11. Create a set of 12 stickers around something about you
12. Do a New Yorker cover
13. Make a short film about “LETTING GO” – TEAM ASSIGNMENT
14. Go back and create a piece of art inspired by the corner of
     Guadalupe and MLK


Each assignment will be given a letter grade based on the rubric below:
25%: Clarity – how clear is the message you are trying to convey?
25%: Concept – how great and powerful is this idea?
25%: Flow – are you in control of how people are seeing your idea?
25%: Craft – how well did you execute your concept?
Oh, and by the way, I will be taking attendance at each class - and I will
have several in-class assignments. So please show up. And be attentive.
Come and see what everyone else is working on. And give your peers
constructive criticism. Part of being a creative being a team player.
Act like it.


Policies
Class Policies
Statement on Learning Success
        Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me
know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements
of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are
listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you with a person or center if you would like.
Grading Policy
        As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course.
If you miss a smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be
impacted significantly. Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
Grade   Cutoff    Points needed
A       94%       940
A-      90%       900
B+      87%       870
B       84%       840
B-      80%       800
C+      77%       770
C       74%       740
C-      70%       700
D       65%       650
F       <65%      <650
Grace Policy: Time-bank options
        Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate any unex-
pected, unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not have to utilize this
policy, but if you find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to contact me
as soon as possible to notify me that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy one of two ways
(please choose, and let me know):
•       You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
•       You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
Absences
        If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with
the necessary information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with your
team members; you are responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a class.
Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating
circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday, please
let us know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still
be responsible for any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-down
and notes on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise
questions, you may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific questions
you have in advance so that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.


Student Rights & Responsibilities:
•        You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
•        You have a right to respect.
•        You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
•        You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
•        You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
•        You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
         your learning environment.
•        You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
         shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
•        You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
         the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
•        You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • 		
•        Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it,
         and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
•        You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is 		
         excluded.
•        You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
         these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc)
         Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor
your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your
own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of
plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible
for understanding UT’s Standards of Conduct and Academic Integrity principles.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop dead-
line, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q
drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution.
Religious Holy Days
Please notify me at least fourteen days prior to the date of the observance of a religious holy day. If you
must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment or a project in order to observe a religious holy day,
I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.


University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differ-
ently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know
as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the
course. There are also a range of resources on campus.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circum-
stances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that
you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated,
please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can
only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality
of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice)
or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and
cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support at the Counseling and Mental Health Center.
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for
more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please call 512-471-3614 or drop
in for a visit at JES A332.
BeVocal
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the power to
prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene and reduce
harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on campus, go to:
wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Additional Services for Students:
University Writing Center
Libraries
ITS
Student Emergency Services


Important Safety Information:
        If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
the Behavior Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050. You can also submit a report online at the BCAL
web site. Your report can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns.
        The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Campus Safety
and Security. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside.
•       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
•       Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
        first week of class.
•       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not
        re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
        The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
•       Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
        can be found at:
        The office of Emergency Preparedness provides information on safety apps for your mobile
        device, emergency preparedness manual, and a guide for surviving an active shooter situation.
Title IX Reporting
        Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally-
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environ-
ment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community,
the university can:
1.      Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2.      Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
        harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3.      Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
        Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that
are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
the Title IX Office web site or contact them by email at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
