 Economy, Culture, and Society (SOC 321E)
 Summer 2019                                                                      Professor: Daniel Fridman
 Monday to Friday 11.30–12.45pm                                               Email: dfridman@utexas.edu
 Location: JGB 2.202 (subject to changes)
                                                                             Teaching Assistant: Eldad Levy
                                                                              Email: eldadlevy@utexas.edu
(Note: syllabus subject to changes)
Course description and goals
Markets have become increasingly prevalent in the organization of social and economic life. Are they an
acceptable way of organizing societies? For what purposes? This course explores the role of markets and
economic thinking vis-à-vis alternative ways of shaping the provisioning of goods and services,
particularly the notion of gift-giving. It introduces students to sociological research and theories that lie
at the intersections between culture and the economy, particularly what sociologists call “markets and
morals.” It delves into some of the following questions: Is a gift an act of pure generosity? What kind of
obligation does a gift create for the receiver? What is the difference between a gift and a market
exchange? What are the consequences of the expansion of market arrangements? Does money corrupt
social relationships? Are there alternative or hybrid forms of provisioning (not exclusively market)? How
do markets influence our current everyday lives? Our answers to the questions above will lead us to
explore some of the core issues that sociology has dealt with: social organization and social structure,
social norms, the relation between individual and society, the nature of economic and non-economic
exchange, reciprocity, obligation, cultural meanings, technology, and power, among others. Our answers
will have an impact on our ideas of who we are: Are we altruistic and generous? Are we selfish and self-
interested? What are the conditions under which generosity and self-interest work or do not work?
These are not trivial questions, since our answers have an impact on crucial policy questions. With the
recent expansion of neoliberalism, market arrangements based on rational and self-interested
individuals have been posed as the most efficient form of organizing social life in various realms (not just
the economic). What are the consequences of these arrangements? The readings will take us from pre-
modern to current societies; from the potlatch in North American native peoples to understanding who
pays for dinner or drinks; from gifted money to charity and philanthropy; from Burning Man to organ
and blood donation; from expressing gratitude to tipping; from Wikipedia to credit scores; from online
dating to art markets.
Course Requirements
Attendance and reading: Regular attendance at all class meetings is expected. It is essential that you
come prepared to class and that you read carefully, take notes and bring ideas and questions to
contribute to and benefit from lecture and discussions. Classes are organized under the assumption that
                                                                                                            1


you read the texts once before class (which does not mean that you have to fully understand the texts,
but rather that you read the whole text and came up with a few ideas, several doubts, and many
questions –and that you voice them). Don’t be shy about asking questions and providing comments in
class. Remember that other students will probably benefit from your questions/comments and the
clarifications they may lead to. Most important, your questions, comments, and examples will make the
class more interesting for everyone.
You will soon realize that reading, re-reading, and coming to class will all be necessary to succeed in this
course. If you cannot attend a session for whatever reason, you will very likely be missing something
important. It is your responsibility to catch up. Ask another student for notes and news from the class
you missed.
Weekly Memos: You will submit 5 (five) weekly memos of 500-700 words discussing the readings
assigned for the week. Memos are due on Mondays at 8 am. The memo should be about 2 readings. You
can write about the readings assigned for the upcoming week or about 1 reading from the previous
week and 1 reading for the upcoming week.
Your memos should not simply summarize the readings. Instead, they should identify key issues,
problems, arguments, evidence, and conclusions. Sound analytical thinking starts with asking questions
about what you read. As a rule, you should always assume that a given work has both positive and
negative attributes. Considering or answering some of the questions below will help you deepen your
understanding of what you are reading; though not all of them may be relevant to every article you
read.
1.   What is the author’s point of view/perspective/approach?
2.   What is the main question and argument of the reading?
3.   What kinds of evidence are presented to answer the main question?
4.   What makes the argument compelling and what doesn’t?
5.   Do the conclusions answer the main question/s?
6.   How did the reading change your views about an issue?
7.   What further questions can be posed given what you learned?
8.   How does it fit other readings in the course?
Class Participation and in-class Activities: You will be expected to participate in class, ask questions,
discuss, and provide comments. You will also participate in several small group activities and
discussions.
Group Presentation of a paper: Besides the regular assigned readings, students will work in groups of
two to present one extra reading (only read by the group) to the rest of the students in 10-15 minutes.
More information on the presentation format will be given in class.
Exam: You will have one in-class exam on the last day of class. More information about exam format and
what it covers will be provided during class.
                                                                                                           2


Absences from examinations and other matters
Based on prior experience, coming to class is crucial for your success in this course. Missing more than
two or three sessions in the semester will likely have an impact on your learning and your performance.
While you do not need to notify me or the TA if you will have to miss one session or two in the semester
for whatever reason, you do need to let us know in advance (or as soon as the issue comes up) if there is
a problem that will keep you from attending class more than that. If you miss class more often and do
not notify us of a problem, it will be reflected in your participation grade (and indirectly in your
performance in exams and assignments).
If you miss an examination or assignment or several class sessions, you will not receive credit for it,
unless one of the following three reasons apply: a) Religious holidays; b) serious emergencies; c) illness.
For (a) and (c), please let me know as soon as possible, at least two weeks in advance. For (b) and (c),
please provide documentation (doctor’s note) and contact me as soon as you know that you will miss an
examination. If you do not provide documentation, you cannot take a makeup exam or an alternative
assignment.
To show that you’ve read the syllabus, that you logged in to Canvas, and that you can google, find out
what is the current team of the player who scored the third goal in the second leg of the 2018 Copa
Libertadores final, and write the answer in the assignment called “Did you read the syllabus?” in Canvas.
Please refer to the University Catalog for rules and procedures concerning dropping classes or receiving
and incomplete or any other issue that is regulated by university-wide or college-wide rules:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/
We can work together to solve problems concerning course requirements, but only if you speak to me
or the TA in a timely manner. We can only help you if we are notified ahead of time and with proper
documentation when applicable.
I would also appreciate your feedback throughout the semester if you have an idea that you think will
make the course and your learning more successful.
Grading
Students are expected to attend all classes and complete all assigned work, are responsible for ensuring
they are properly registered in all their courses, and that they have officially dropped any courses which
they do not plan to include in their program. All written work will be graded on the quality of content as
well as writing skills.
Your grade will be calculated as follows:
                                                                                                         3


 Attendance                10%
 Weekly Memos              25%
 In class participation    20%
 Paper presentation        20%
 Exam                      25%
At the end of a course, total percentages will be converted to letter grades as shown in the table below.
Rounding will be as follows:
79.5 = 80 (B-)
BUT 79.4 = 79 (C+)
In other words, when rounding is performed, nn.5 is always rounded UP.
 Points      Grades                                        Description
 95-100      A          Exceptional, outstanding and excellent performance. Usually achieved by a
                        minority of students. These grades indicate a student who is self-initiating,
 90-94       A-
                        exceeds expectation and has an insightful grasp of the subject matter.
 87-89       B+         Very good, good and solid performance. These grades indicate a good grasp of
 83-86       B            the subject matter or excellent grasp in one area balanced with satisfactory
 80-82       B-                                      grasp in the other area.
 77-79       C+
                          Satisfactory, or minimally satisfactory. These grades indicate a satisfactory
 73-76       C
                                      performance and knowledge of the subject matter.
 70-72       C-
 67-69       D+
                            Marginal Performance. A student receiving this grade demonstrated a
 63-66       D
                                             superficial grasp of the subject matter.
 60-62       D-
 Under       F          Unsatisfactory performance.
 60
Readings
There will be two sources for our readings:
    1) Books, which are available at the co-op bookstore and other booksellers (and on reserve at the
         Perry-Castañeda library).
    2) Readings available online via Canvas. You have to print them out on your own.
                                                                                                         4


You will find in the schedule an indication of the source for each reading. Please bring the texts to the
classes.
The following books are required:
         Marcel Mauss, The Gift: The Form and Reason for Exchange in Archaic Societies, W.W. Norton,
          1990 [1923]. (other editions available)
         Michael Sandel, What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of Markets, Farrar, Straus and Giroux,
          2012
Emergencies
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at Austin
Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Commitment to Inclusiveness and Diversity
All students with diverse learning styles and needs are welcome in this course.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
The sooner you let us know your needs the quicker we can assist you in achieving your learning goals in
this course.
Academic Honesty
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Any instance of academic dishonesty (including plagiarism) will not be tolerated. University of Texas at
Austin’s policies on academic integrity will be strictly followed in any of such instances. If you have not
seen it, please take a moment to read these policies:
                                                                                                            5


http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
If you have doubts about citation procedures, or if you are not sure if something constitutes plagiarism
or not, please consult with me or the teaching assistant. You may also take a look at this guide:
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/cwgs/_files/pdf-4/ai2012.pdf
Email and Communication outside the classroom
          Most announcements will be made in class, but some news will be broadcasted through Canvas.
It is your responsibility to setup Canvas’s notification system to receive all announcements by email or
any other media. Use the classes for questions (in other words, send an email only when the issue
cannot wait until the next class). Before sending an email, consider if you can instead ask a question in
class, right after class or in office hours. Please do not expect a rapid response. A number of days may go
by before I get a chance to answer your email. Please avoid sending emails during weekends, and I
promise I will do the same. Evenings and weekends, and a few hours before class and exams I do not
answer emails.
          Please check your messages before sending them for tone issues and correct grammar, and
include your name and the name of the course in your message.
Cell Phones and other electronic devices
          Please turn off your cell phones, PDAs, blackberries, ipods, and other devices before class.
Seriously, don’t check your messages or send SMS in class. Using your electronic communication device
is visible and disrespectful.
Laptops: Take a look at these excerpts:
          “The current research examines the nature of in-class laptop use in a large lecture course and how that use
          is related to student learning. Students completed weekly surveys of attendance, laptop use, and aspects of
          the classroom environment. Results showed that students who used laptops in class spent considerable
          time multitasking and that the laptop use posed a significant distraction to both users and fellow students.
          Most importantly, the level of laptop use was negatively related to several measures of student learning,
          including self-reported understanding of course material and overall course performance.”
          Carrie B. Fried, In-class laptop use and its effects on student learning. Computers & Education, Vol. 50, Issue
          3, April 2008, Pages 906-914
          “Two groups of students heard the same exact lecture and tested immediately following the lecture. One
          group of students was allowed to use their laptops to engage in browsing, search, and/or social computing
          behaviors during the lecture. Students in the second condition were asked to keep their laptops closed for
          the duration of the lecture. Students in the open laptop condition suffered decrements on traditional
          measures of memory for lecture content. A second experiment replicated the results of the first.”
                                                                                                                          6


         Hembrooke, Helene, and Geri Gay. 2003. The laptop and the lecture: The effects of multitasking in learning
         environments. Journal of Computing in Higher Education 15, no. 1 (9): 46-64.
         “Laptops are commonplace in university classrooms. In light of cognitive psychology theory on costs
         associated with multitasking, we examined the effects of in-class laptop use on student learning in a
         simulated classroom. We found that participants who multitasked on a laptop during a lecture scored lower
         on a test compared to those who did not multitask, and participants who were in direct view of a
         multitasking peer scored lower on a test compared to those who were not. The results demonstrate that
         multitasking on a laptop poses a significant distraction to both users and fellow students and can be
         detrimental to comprehension of lecture content.”
         Faria Sanaa, Tina Weston and Nicholas J. Cepeda, 2013. Laptop multitasking hinders classroom learning for
         both users and nearby peers, Computers & Education, 62, March:24–31
         In other words, by bringing your laptop you would be boycotting your learning, which is the
main reason for taking a class. I do recognize that taking notes on a laptop or other electronic device
might be efficient, sometimes necessary, and many students are used to it. However, bring a paper
notebook instead. Screens discourage good communication in the classroom and encourage exciting
distractions. If you absolutely need a laptop in class, make sure your internet is off and you don’t run
applications unrelated to the class.
Guns
Pursuant to SB11 (http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/84R/billtext/pdf/SB00011F.pdf) and UT-Austin
Campus Carry Policy (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/ and
https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/campus-concealed-carry), persons with a current legally valid
Concealed Carry License may carry a concealed legal handgun on or about their person in this class.
Please take note of several provisions:
1. All legal provisions associated with concealed carry on campus must be followed without fail at all
times. In addition to SB11 and UT-Austin Campus Carry policy, please review at least the 84 pages of
applicable law curated by TX DPS (http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/InternetForms/Forms/CHL-16.pdf).
Please take special note of two of the many legal provisions:
a. Holstering requirements: “A license holder who carries a handgun on campus must carry it in a holster
that completely covers the trigger and entire trigger guard area. The holster must have sufficient tension
or grip on the handgun to retain it in the holster even when subjected to unexpected jostling” (UT-
Austin HOP 8-1060, VII-A-2).
b. “On or about your person means a person licensed to carry a handgun must carry a handgun in a
manner that the handgun is close enough to the license holder that he or she can reach it without
materially changing position” at all times (UT-Austin HOP 8-1060, IV).
2. Open carry, including partially or wholly visible guns, is not permitted on campus at any time except
under circumstances in which the actor would have been justified in the use of force or deadly force”
(SB11, Section 4 and Texas Penal Code, Section 46.035(a-1)). Violation is a Class A misdemeanor or a
third degree felony. If any legal requirement is violated at any moment, the person who witnesses the
violation should leave the classroom and call 911 immediately without waiting to ask me for permission.
Police will respond. This will disrupt the class and may create a dangerous situation for all of us.
Violations may result in criminal penalties and sanction by the university, up to and including expulsion.
3. Office visits: You must ask me about my policy regarding concealed carry before entering my office
and wait for my instructions before entering. Pursuant to UT-Austin policy (HOP 8-1060, VII-C), I must
                                                                                                                    7


give oral notice of my prohibition on concealed handguns in my office. I mention this policy here for
your convenience; however, oral notice must be given upon your first visit to my office. Following
instructions from Campus Safety and Security, once you have been informed orally the first time, my
prohibition stands until I revoke it. If my instructions are violated, I will call 911 and the police will
respond. Violations may result in criminal penalties and sanction by the university, up to and including
expulsion.
Student Support Services
The Writing Center                       http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Sanger Learning Center                   http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
Career Services                          http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc
                                         http://www.utexas.edu/academics/career-services-offices
Health Services                          http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Services http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Services for Students with Disabilities  http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
                                                                                                        8


Schedule
    Week     Topic                     Material
 1
    June 6-
             Introduction                Read the syllabus carefully
    7                                    Start reading Marcel Mauss
                                         Marcel Mauss, The Gift, Introduction, Ch 1, Ch 2, Ch 4
                                         David Graeber, The Myth of Barter. In Debt: The First 5,000 Years,
    June
                                          pp. 21-41. (CANVAS)
 2           Gift economies             In class Movie: Gifting It
    10-14
                                        In class activity 1: The Gift in Burning Man discussion
                                        In class activity 2: Debt forgiveness
                                        In class activity 3: Scroogenomics
                                        Pierre Bourdieu, The economy of symbolic goods (CANVAS)
                                        David Graeber, Give it away (CANVAS)
    June
             The duality of the gift /  Godbout & Caillé, The World of the gift, pp. 1-20, 23-35, 82-87, 171-
 3           Utilitarianism and           90 (CANVAS)
    17-21
             generosity
                                        In class Movie: Saving Banksy
                                        In class activity 1: movie discussion
                                        In class activity 2: Pay what you want experiment
                                        Daniel Fridman and Alex Luscombe , "Gift-giving, Disreputable
                                          Exchange, and the Management of Donations in a Police
                                          Department"
                                        Dan Ariely, The cost of social norms: why we are happy to do things,
                                          but not when we are paid to do them, in Predictably Irrational
    June     Bribes and gifts /
 4                                        (CANVAS)
    24-28    Markets and morals
                                        Michael Sandel, What Money Can't Buy, Intro & 1, 2, 3, 4 (BOOK)
                                        In class Movie: Real Value
                                        In class activity 1: movie discussion
                                        In class activity 2: Doctor’s gifts
                                        In class activity 3: Price gouging
                                        Viviana Zelizer, The Social Meaning of Money, pp. 1-12, 18-30.
                                        Frederick Wherry, The Culture of Money and Prices, in The Culture
                                          of Markets, pp. 81-102. (CANVAS)
 5  July 1-5
             Culture and money //       Daniel Fridman, Creating a world of abundance, in Freedom from
             Network marketing            Work (pp. 115-122, 131-151)
                                        In class Movie: Betting on Zero
                                        In class activity 1: Movie discussion
                                        In class activity 2: Venmo
                                         Kieran Healy, Last Best Gifts, Altruism and the Market for Human
                                          Blood and Organs, Ch 1, 2, 3
    July 8-
             The social organization     Philip Roscoe, It's not the Money, Honey, in I Spend, Therefore I
 6           of altruism // Markets,      am: How Economics Has Changed the Way We Think and Feel, pp.
    11
             rankings, and scoring        165-188 (CANVAS)
                                         In class Movie: Black Mirror (Nosedive)
                                         In class activity: Movie discussion
                                                                                                              9


Papers to choose for group presentations
    1. Degenshein, A. (2017). Strategies of valuation: repertoires of worth at the financial margins. Theory
        and Society, 1–23. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-017-9297-z
    2. Herrmann, G. M. (1997). Gift or Commodity: What Changes Hands in the U. S. Garage Sale? American
        Ethnologist, 24(4), 910–930.
    3. Hood, K. (2017). The science of value: Economic expertise and the valuation of human life in US
        federal regulatory agencies. Social Studies of Science, 0306312717693465.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0306312717693465
    4. Kiviat, B. (2017). The art of deciding with data: evidence from how employers translate credit reports
        into hiring decisions. Socio-Economic Review. https://doi.org/10.1093/ser/mwx030
    5. Lainer-Vos, D. (2013). The Practical Organization of Moral Transactions: Gift Giving, Market Exchange,
        Credit, and the Making of Diaspora Bonds. Sociological Theory, 31(2), 145–167.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0735275113489123
    6. Patrick, M. (2018). Gift exchange or quid pro quo? Temporality, ambiguity, and stigma in interactions
        between pedestrians and service-providing panhandlers. Theory and Society, 47(4), 487–509.
        https://doi.org/10.1007/s11186-018-9324-8
    7. Sykes, J., Križ, K., Edin, K., & Halpern-Meekin, S. (2015). Dignity and Dreams: What the Earned Income
        Tax Credit (EITC) Means to Low-Income Families. American Sociological Review, 80(2), 243–267.
        https://doi.org/10.1177/0003122414551552
    8. Elder-Vass, D. (2016). “Co-operative peer production: Wikipedia.” in Profit and Gift in the Digital
        Economy. Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.
    9. Verdery, K. (1995). Faith, Hope, and Caritas in the Land of the Pyramids: Romania, 1990 to 1994.
        Comparative Studies in Society and History, 37(4), 625–669.
    10. Wherry, F. F., Seefeldt, K. S., & Alvarez, A. S. (2019). To Lend or Not to Lend to Friends and Kin:
        Awkwardness, Obfuscation, and Negative Reciprocity. Social Forces.
        https://doi.org/10.1093/sf/soy127
                                                                                                             10
