                                                ADV 378 (06104)
                                                 PR 378 (06528)
                                               ADV 391K (06213)
                                   Audience Development and Engagement
                                                      Fall 2018
  Class Meets: [Time, Days, and Location]
  Instructor: Prof. Erin Reilly                                   Office: BMC 5.306
  Email: erin.reilly@austin.utexas.edu                          Office hours:
  Phone: 207-251-1617                                           2-3pm / Tues & Thurs
                                                                and by appointment
                                             Course Description
University Catalog Course Description:
Traditionally, audiences for content were broken up into four simple quadrants – male, female, young and old – but
now it’s possible to develop much more nuanced audience models based on fan behaviors and motivations. Rather
than the “blunt instrument” of who is accessing the content, content producers and advertisers can now gain a
better understanding of why people are accessing that content and customize their plans accordingly. Further, fans
are far more than just consumers. They make it possible for stories, artists, and teams to persist and flourish over
time. Content creators, digital strategists and marketers should pay closer attention to what fans want and need and
offer them more and better opportunities to deepen their engagement and extend it from their core passions into
other, related content and communities.
In this course, students will be introduced to the latest thinking on better understanding audiences and their
motivations, new approaches and tools for content strategies and what metrics can be used to measure their
engagement in ways that prove valuable to content creators, marketers and audiences.
  What will I learn?
  Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
     •   Positive attitude
     •   Team collaboration
     •   Thinking skills (develop observation skills, divergent thinking and identifying patterns)
     •   Self-management
  Learning Outcomes
      1.  Expose students to real-world challenges facing the media & entertainment industry
      2.  Introduce students to new metrics and measurements to leverage engagement
      3.  Encourage students to test out multiple methods to measure and collect data on engagement
      4.  Construct personalized fan journeys for a variety of industries
      5.  Learn how to turn this into content strategies to activate fans
  How will I learn?
                                                                 1


    •    Writing Assignments                                         •   Pair Share Activities
    •    Guest Lectures                                              •   Final Team Projects
    •    Classroom Discussions
Pre-requisites for the course:
N/A
How to succeed in this course:
My role is to be a “guide on the side”… to help you acquire the skills needed to succeed as a strategist /
engagement expert.
Your role is to show up, be present, have a willingness to learn, do good work and accept constructive feedback
from myself and your peers.
                       Overall, let’s have some fun …we’re talking about our passions after all!
                                          Course Requirements
Required Materials
   •    Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green. Spreadable Media: Creating Meaning and Value in a Networked
        Culture (New York: New York University Press, 2013)
I may periodically post additional required readings to the class website at Canvas. These readings will be short
articles in mainstream publications, such as newspapers and magazines, that help shed contemporary light on
issues discussed in this course.
Required Devices
Computer, ability to record and edit videos.
Classroom expectations
Class attendance
Attendance is required at all class, presentation, client and team meetings. We may also have a significant number
of meetings that are off site and/or outside the scheduled class time. There will be no excused absences. Failure to
attend any of these meetings will affect your grade and could reduce your final grade by as much as two letter
grades. Attendance means showing up to the class or meeting on time. Habitual lateness will affect your grade.
Class participation
Teamwork: This course is primarily structured around teamwork. You will self-assign yourself to a pair and a group,
and the bulk of your work in the course will be carried out and evaluated based on these teams. Teams will consist
of varying personalities, skills and interests and you must find a way to manage these differences. The ability to
cooperate, to communicate and to work effectively is essential to creating successful strategies and creative briefs,
both in this class and in the real world. Once students have been assigned to teams, I will not adjust the
membership of these teams. Although I don’t anticipate any problems, if issues do arise I expect you to resolve
them yourselves, just as you would in a real-world job situation.
Deadlines: This class simulates the real world, and in the real world, deadlines are non-negotiable. All assignments
must be handed in on time. Late assignments or projects will not be accepted and you will not earn any points (i.e.
you will receive a grade of 0) for that assignment. The usual litany of excuses (I slept through my alarm, I missed the
bus, I have a cold, my grandmother died) won’t work. In the real world, failure to meet a deadline could result in
you losing your job. Now is the time to practice time management and adherence to deadlines.
                                                               2


Time management: This course is very demanding on your time. Your teammates in this class will judge you on
how much, and the quality of, work you contribute to your class project. Do not lose track of what is most
important.
Communication: The primary way I will communicate with you outside of class is through e-mail. You are
responsible for making sure you get any messages from me and you are responsible for the content of those
announcements. I may notify you via e-mail about a change in meeting times or assignment deadlines. Failure to
check your e-mail does not excuse you from meeting the responsibilities outlined in the message. At a minimum,
you should check your e-mail once every day.
Plagiarism: Everything you produce in this class must be your original work. If you have help from anyone outside
this class it will be considered a breach of UT’s policy on Scholastic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
Assignments
1. Auto-Ethnography | 15%
     Write a short five-page auto-ethnography describing their own history as a fan of sports, music, a popular
     media franchise or anything else. It’s best to choose one genre of fanship to focus on. You should explore
     whether or not you think of yourself as a fan, what kinds of fan practices you engage with, how you define
     a fan, how you became invested in the fanship that have been part of your life, and how your feelings
     about being a fan might have adjusted over time. (NOTE: As you learn the Leveraging Engagement
     framework, you will return to this assignment week after week so the more detail you can offer, the
     better.)
2. Ethnography Activities | 15%
     This grade is a culmination of completing the following linked quizzes and submitting a video and reflection
     essay in association to the interview sheet and behavioral checklist below.
         • WHY you're a FAN?
         • Identify the Motivators: Ethnography
         • What kind of Soccer Fan are you? PART 1: Submit a Video recording of PAIR SHARE Activity
             referencing this interview sheet
         • Submit Behavioral Checklist with reflection essay
3. Survey Activities | 15%
     This grade is a culmination of completing the following Identify the Motivators: Survey and What kind of Soccer
     Fan are you? PART II. Fill out this quiz and then return to the break out room to work in the same pair as
     Lesson 2. Analyze and discuss their survey results compared to the video interviews conducted of the pair.
     Write a 1-2 page reflection on the similarities and differences identified. Be sure to DISCUSS the following
     questions:
          • How are the tools different?
          • How do they help to support a more clearer picture of your fanship?
4. Day in the Life (Pair Share Activity) | 15%
     The goal of this pair share assignment is to work as a team to identify either yours or your partner’s fandom
     written in the Auto-Ethnography writing assignment OR together, choose a fandom reflective of the case
     studies shared in Week 2 or 3 (Sports or Marvel fans) where you can interview a fan about their day. Be
     creative in depicting a day in the life of the fan, highlighting his/her interaction with the industry. Together, use
     a timeline tool, such as https://www.officetimeline.com/, to brainstorm a 24 hour period, showing how many
     times and in what context the fan interacts with the industry. Visually display this and share with the class via
     Blackboard. Make sure to consider Who, What, When, Where and Why throughout the 24 hours and answer
     the following question: “What levers does this industry have to attract, engage and transact with this fan?”
                                                                 3


   Include with the Timeline Visualization a written 1 page summary of the fan’s day offering insight into the fan’s
   engagement mindset and concrete examples of actions to take based on how the fan is motivated to engage
   with media.
5. Analyze an Interactive Media Program & Write a Case Study | 15%
   Choose one of the following 2018 Interactive Media Programs nominated for a Television Academy Interactive
   Media Emmy to review, analyze and write a case study similar to the Three Eyed Raven example provided in
   Lesson 5. Identify the audience the campaign is intended for with specifics related to the Leveraging
   Engagement framework, including actual attractors and activators mentioned in the Spreadability chapter that
   supports the spread of the content from the community.
6. Building an Engagement Campaign – TEAM FINAL PROJECT | 25%
   Your final Team Project is based on the knowledge and understanding you’ll accumulate throughout this
   course. As a team, you will complete and showcase the following steps in building an engagement strategy:
       1. Conduct research,
       2. Analyze a fandom,
       3. Identify some specific mindsets that have at least some commonalities in motivation,
       4. Develop a creative strategy, and
       5. Present the campaign to the class.
   Work in Teams of 3. Break out the roles and responsibilities up front to make sure the different parts of the
   strategy is complete. Each part requires the input from the other so it’s important that you share weekly with
   each other and get feedback from the rest in your team.
   Identify a Property: Choose one of the following Fall Lineup TV series or something comparable. If you don’t
   see it here, consider looking deeper into the networks. You can also choose a movie but it has to already have a
   built-in fanbase.
   * Image Link: https://tvline.com/2018/07/24/fall-tv-premiere-dates-2018-schedule-calendar-printable/
   **NOTE: If your team wants to choose something else, get approval by instructor before moving forward. **
   Together decide on a property with a built-in fanbase that you all will enjoy developing a project on. This
   shouldn’t be one of the properties any of you wrote about for your personal assignments.
            Scenario that might unfold… Let’s say your entire team is crazy about sports! One of you loves
            Soccer, another Football and the third is all about Baseball. Each of you wrote about your
                                                             4


              specific passion in your personal ethnography and other individual assignments. Together, your
              team can’t agree on a team or a specific sport to focus on but all of you have seen every Star
              Wars movie and know at least 1 or 2 fans to talk to. So, your team chooses to build the Final
              Project on Star Wars. Go Team!
   Points to consider in the design:
       • Weeks 3-7 provide you all the steps and tools for research, measuring and identifying your fan’s
           mindsets.
       • Weeks 10-12 provide case study examples and a handout, “Building a Campaign.” This will be useful in
           ensuring all the detail your team will be assessed on is included in your final output.
       • Your presentation / final video should include visual, audio and written material.
       • It should portray a deep understanding of the property’s brand and its relationship to fans.
       • Build the campaign on a pain point where the property could do better to involve their fans OR choose
           an upcoming release OR event that fans will be interested in.
       • Be specific on different actions that will embrace the fans but also offer nuances of the campaign that
           will target different sub-sets of the fandom.
Grading for this Course
The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to
which you have done so.
 Assignments                                                    Points possible            Percent of Total Grade
 1. Discussions / In Class Participation                                   10                          10
 1. A u t o - E t h n o g r a p h y                                        15                          10
 2. E t h n o g r a p h y A c t i v i t i e s                              10                          10
 3. Survey Activities                                                      10                          10
 4. Day in the Life / Pair Share Assignment                                15                          10
 5. Analyze an Interactive Media Program and Write Case                    25                          20
   Study
 6. Final Team project                                                     50                          30
                                                                          135                        100%
Course Outline
   All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
   https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
   Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
   note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
   much advanced notice as possible).
  Week       Date    Day
                            Class Topic                       Out of class activities      Assignments due
                                                            5


1  8/30  Th Intro / Guidelines & Topics
2  9/4   Tu The Rise of Fans
   9/6   Th Learning a Fandom                                        Auto-Ethnography
3  9/11  Tu Guest: Henry Jenkins
   9/13  Th LE Framework: Motivation
4  9/18  Tu LAB: Ethnography Tools
   9/20  Th Ethnography: Fan Behavior         Group Work             Ethnography Activities
5  9/25  Tu LE Framework: Situational Context
   9/27  Th Survey: Fan Behavior              Group Work             Survey Activities
6  10/2  Tu Understanding Data
   10/4  Th Lab: Social Media Analysis
7  10/9  Tu Lab: NLP Analysis
   10/11 Th Data Analytics: Fan Behavior      Group Work             Data Activities
8  10/16 Tu Capturing Attention
   10/18 Th Guest: Frank Rose
9  10/23 Tu Guest: Peter Robinson, Dubit
   10/25 Th LAB: Emotional Scheduling                                Day in the Life
            Content Strategies: Cultural
10 10/30 Tu
            Attractors & Activators
   11/1  Th LAB: Brainstorm Creative Strategy Group Work
            Review TV Academy’s Emmy                                 Final Team Project: Creative
11 11/6  Tu                                   Group Work
            Nomination Videos                                        Strategy Brief
   11/8  Th Guest: Melissa Eccles
            PLAY! - TV Academy’s IMPG Emmy                          Analyze an Interactive Media
12 11/13                                      Capital Factory Visit
            Nominations                                             Program & Write a Case Study
                                                6


   11/15 Activating Fans
13 11/20 Guest: Sangita Shresthova
   11/22 Thanksgiving Holiday
14 11/27 Supporting Your Fans
   11/29 Guest: Elan Lee or Jack Conte
15 12/4  Final Team Project Presentations
   12/6  Final Team Project Presentations
                                          7


                                                      Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also
encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I
am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
Writing Assignments
You will be required to write two papers, the Auto-Ethnography (due Week 3) and the Case Study (due Week 12).
In-class Activities
There will be several in-class activities and exercises meant to lay the foundation for understanding different
methods for measuring engagement. Some of these activities are graded, others are for credit. Failure to
participate in any of the activities (or to participate with lackluster enthusiasm and professionalism) will knock your
final grade down a letter.
Final Team Project –Engagement Campaigns
You will carry out engagement campaigns as the final project. You will be placed in groups of three students at the
beginning of the semester, and this will be your group for the semester. You and your teammates will work as an
engagement strategy team. You will pitch your campaign at the end of the semester indicated in the syllabus.
Weekly meetings and participation – LAB time:
We will not meet during every scheduled class time. Instead, LAB time will consist of you meeting in your groups or
out in the field workshopping the different methods or projects assigned. Your attendance, attitude, contribution
and participation in these meetings and in the field will be assessed and will contribute to your final grade.
Attendance and Professionalism
Attendance at all classes and meetings is required. It is also assumed that students will be active participants in
class. Simply being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be engaged and involved scholars.
Participation – not just attendance – is integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to you earning a high grade.
Active participation means contributing to the discussion, listening to what your colleagues have to say and
engaging with the readings and in-class activities. It means showing up on time, not checking Facebook or email on
your computer, not texting on your phone. NOTE that if you do not participate in class discussions, you will not earn
full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
Peer Evaluations
You will be asked to provide an assessment of your and your teammates' contributions to the
Final project. They will be taken into account in final assignment of grades.
Grading System:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s provost office
(http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/). Advertising and PR majors are required to have a
minimum grade of C in all communication courses and in all required and elective courses in order to continue in
the program.
                                                                 8


 NOTES on Grading:
    • Late work is not accepted.
    • I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6% that translates into a B+ and
         will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
    • Any questions or comments about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7) days after the grade
         is announced or posted.
    • When I grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the work and the
         accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100 points and then lose them
         based on mistakes you make. Your final points represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the
         number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
 Absences
 The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating circumstances due
 to an emergency. You will be given attendance/participation credit for any session that you miss that is
 documented to the teaching team in writing by a medical doctor’s statement, or an official statement from a UT
 faculty member about an ensemble or other organization’s off-campus commitment. NO OTHER ABSENCES WILL BE
 EXCUSED.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
    •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    •    You have a right to respect.
    •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
    •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
         excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching
         team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
    • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your
         experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
         energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
    • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
         standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
     Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
     differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities.
     Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to
     address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please
     advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
                                                                  9


     The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
     academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that
     are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you
     will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
     You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the             University Honor Code
     which can be found at the following web address:
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
     deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q
     drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
     Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently.
     If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
     possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There
     are also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
     This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
     that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to
     share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me
     know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you
     discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions.
     If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
     (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
     available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
     support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
     depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
     http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
     year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
     classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for
     more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
     visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
                                                                10


Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
      If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
      Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
      right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
      assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions.
      UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its
      forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
              1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
              2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
                    become involved in a Title IX investigation.
              3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
      Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a
      Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion,
      or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be
      sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
      remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
      information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
      titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
  •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
      nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
  •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
  •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
      unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
      Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
  •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                 11
