ARC 521F DESIGN V INTERMEDIATE STUDIO: INTEGRATION                                            Fall 2019
MWF 1pm-5pm
Instructors: Michael McCall
Office Location: WMB 4.116A
Office Hours: W 12-1pm
email: mike@mccalldesign.com
PREREQUISITES
ARC 521E; ARC 415L; and ARC 333 with a grade of at least C in each.
CURRICULUM FLAG
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage students in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing a student
with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to
the student’s major. At least one-third of the grade will be based on independent investigation
and presentation of one’s own work.
INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO
Students pursuing the Bachelor of Architecture must complete four Intermediate Design
Studios during their second and third years. Building on the Foundation Design Studios taken
during the first year, the goal of the Intermediate Studios is to prepare students for Advanced
Design Studios in their fourth and fifth years.
Each Intermediate Studio will be structured around one of four broad themes of inquiry
(Operational, Environmental, Integration, and Speculation) and will offer a critical framework
and vocabularies for design and development into key issues emphasized in the theme.
Intermediate Studios will also serve as a platform to prepare students for the range of offerings
of the Advanced Studios (e.g. Comprehensive, Urban Design, Landscape Architecture, etc.).
Intermediate
THEME: INTEGRATION
This studio emphasizes architecture as a tectonic expression through structural systems,
construction methods and materiality, assembly, spatial and formal compositions, etc.
While desirable, the competent resolution of the spatial, structural and mechanical aspects of a
building is never a self-serving goal: Embedded in the very constitution of every building and its
technical solution is always – whether conscious or not – an attitude towards the environment
it exists in, the people it serves, or the institution(s) it represents. If we believe in the agency of
architecture as a cultural practice, then the very tools of architectural production such as form,
space, structure, or material, can be seen to directly inform the possibilities for community and
interaction. Decisions about the internal logics and logistics of a building thus exist as a complex
exchange between scales and systems, between publics and users, and the conditions,
histories, and constitutions of the city.


We will use iterative processes of precise structural, formal, and spatial inquiry to discover
unanticipated relationships between form, site, and cultural context. Through the precise
manipulation of these relationships we will address the challenge to develop a new “civic
architecture” of collective significance.
STUDIO TOPIC
Global Warming: A Time for Action
The emission of greenhouse gases caused by human activities is the main reason for the rapid
rise of temperatures in our planet over the last 100 years. The effects of the earth’s global
warming are already being felt and include rising sea levels, more extreme weather and the
expansion of deserts. Many people consider global warming one of the most pressing issues
facing the planet today. It is in this spirit of urgency and call to action that the Fighting Global
Warming Network (FGW Network) was founded.
The goals of the FGW Network are three-fold and will be pursued in parallel:
     • Improving our understanding of the problem through research.
     • Promoting awareness through outreach.
     • Developing and implementing specific solutions.
Sanctioned by the United Nations but completely independent from it, the FGW Network is a
non-partisan and non-governmental organization established and financed only by concerned
citizens of the world. Initial seed money of $ 10 Billion has been secured through donations by
the 100 wealthiest people in the world.
The network will start with chapters in 10 cities across the globe. Austin has been selected as
one of the 10 cities in the network. The other 9 are Panama City (Panama), Curitiba (Brazil),
Madrid (Spain), Helsinki (Finland), Lagos (Nigeria), Dubai (UAE), Kochi (India), Xian (China) and
Perth (Australia).
The final project of the semester will entail the design of the headquarters for the Austin
Chapter of the FGW Network. Students will work individually.
The building will be located Downtown Austin, in the southeast corner of the intersection of
8th Street and Red River Street. With a total area of 50,000 sq. ft, the building will include a
variety of spaces developed to implement the goals of the FGW Network. A detailed program
will be discussed later in the semester.
STUDIO STRUCTURE
The semester is divided into three assignments. The first two assignments will temporarily
isolate topics, methods, and scales of production, while the last assignment extends previous
design and research toward a comprehensive resolution of an architectural project in the city.
Assignment #0: Sketchbook (9”x 12”) (all semester)


The visual communication aspect of the course will emphasize three components. One, daily
use of a sketchbook as a visual thinking and organizational vehicle will be mandatory. Students
will work in their individual sketchbooks daily to develop ideas and document their process.
Sketchbooks must be brought to every class, pinup, review and lecture. They will be checked
weekly for quality and quantity of work. Two, the studio will emphasize the diagram as a
primary tool for communicating design intent and qualities of performance of both the
architectural idea and object. Three, all visual work must be carefully considered and crafted for
its aesthetic impact as well as its ability to communicate effectively. The overall quality of your
visual communication will be incorporated into your final grade.
Assignment #1:
Research and Analysis “Extraction”
(2 weeks)
15% of final grade
Students will work in teams of three
How is it that architecture can bring people together to explore their futures and to express
community purposes and aspirations? What presence(s) should “civic architecture” express as
public cultural institutions and the embodiment of common belief? There is no one idea of
what constitutes a “civic architecture”. In this assignment students will work in teams to
examine buildings that constitute “civic architecture” of different kinds. Each case will display
specific operational and organizational strategies, a formal and structural logic, and material
attitude. Particular attention will be given to the role of structure and material in relation to
occupancy, hierarchy, and space. Case studies will be scrutinized across scales, ranging from the
city to the detail. At the same time, the case studies provide vehicles to situate the problem of
the “civic experience” within the evolution of the discipline of architecture. The goal of this
research is to generate a reference catalogue for the entire studio, which will introduce
possibilities and limits of particular strategies, structures, and materials.
learning outcomes:      Critical Thinking, Graphic Skills, Collaborative Skills
media:                  structural model, diagrams, drawings
readings:               t.b.a.
Precedents (preliminary list, may be subject to change):
        1. Alvar Aalto / Saynatsalo Town Hall, Saynatsalo, Finland, 1952.
        2. Louis Kahn / Phillips Exeter Academy Library, Exeter, NH, USA, 1965-71.
        3. Lina Bo Bardi / Museum of Art, Sao Paulo, 1968.
        4. Sanaa / Kanazawa Museum of Contemporary Art of the XXI Century, Ishikawa, Japan,
           1999-2004.
        5. Mauricio Rocha +Gabriela Carrillo / Center for the Blind, Mexico City, 2001.
        6. Wiel Arets / Utrecht University Library, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 2004.
        7. Alberto Kalach / Vasconcelos Library, Mexico, 2007
        8. Morphosis / San Francisco Federal Building, 2007.
        9. Wang Su + Lu Wenyu / New Academy of Art, Hangzhou, China, 2008.


         10. Yi Architects / Stuttgart City Library, Stuttgart, Germany, 2011.
         11. RMA Architects / KMC Corportate Office, Hyderbad, Telangana, India, 2012
         12. Shim. Sutcliffe, Wong Dai Sin Temple, Markham, Canada, 2015.
         13. David Adjaye Associates / Smithsonian National Museum of African American
             History and Culture, 2016.
         14. Brooks + Scarpa / Sorenson Center for the Arts, Cedar City, Utah, 2017.
Assignment #2:
“Projection”
(2.5 weeks)
20% of final grade
Students will work in pairs
Assignment 02 will transition from the “extraction” of an operational strategy from a case study
to its “projection” within the constraints of a literal site volume (i.e. ‘wall’, ‘tower’, ‘cube’) and a
minimal program. Working with selected strategies from the first assignment, student teams
are encouraged to creatively explore extremes within a clearly defined structural and formal
logic and the potential for this logic to inform program. (A rigorous pushing of systemic
boundaries – even if eventually resulting in its ‘failure’ - is highly encouraged. Students’
inquiries should be guided by the question: “What if?”) The architectural objects created in this
assignment will be interpreted both at a literal 1:1 scale as well as an architectural scale,
working back and forth between conceptual universality and architectural specificity.
learning outcomes: Critical Thinking, Design Composition Skills, Graphic Skills, Collaborative
                         Skills
media:                   study model, drawing, diagram
readings:                t.b.a.
Assignment #3:
Fighting Global Warming Network - Austin Chapter Headquarters
(9 weeks)
65% of final grade
Students will work individually
The main project for this semester will be the design of the “Fighting Global Warming Network -
Austin Chapter Headquarters.” A concise architectural program will be included in assignment
#3. The program will demand a decisive conceptual attitude in relation to site and program. At
the same time it will provide opportunities for each student to develop their unique visions for
how they conceive a new “civic architecture” in both the crisis of our contemporary historical
context and the physical context of Austin, Texas within the broader context of the global
environment.
The final project will be developed in three stages:
         Phase 01:       Conceptual Strategy


        Phase 02:        Architectural Strategy
        Phase 03:        Development
Each stage will have its associated scale(s) of inquiry and deliverables. In stages 01 and 02
students will develop conceptual, formal, and structural strategies for the entire site and
program, while phase 03 will be the detailed development of the project at a higher resolution.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will be exposed to a series of learning goals several times and from different angles
over the four Intermediate Studio sequence. The goal is that similar issues are repeated from
studio to studio but from different angles, allowing students to find, within the diversity of the
topics, a “common thread” as they go through the sequence of the four studios. The level of
expectation will grow as students go from being introduced to an issue, to becoming competent
at it. Some issues would be only mentioned in passing in one studio but will be studied in more
depth in another.
     •  Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and
        space, both exterior and interior; building envelope
     •  Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of
        materiality, structures, construction, and environmental system
     •  Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant
        contextual; environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project
     •  Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents;
        research skills
     •  Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of
        media strategy and level of skill displayed
     •  Basic grasp of accessibility and egress
     •  Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all
        activities of the studio
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning
encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio
offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals,
which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the
public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members,
and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and
spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where
project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and
commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental
mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture


DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the
design conversations taken place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc).
Students are encouraged to participate and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS
students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (three per semester by lead
practitioners from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio that
follow are important for the holistic education of intellectually engaged students and
participation will have an impact on students’ grades (see below).
Lectures
Sept 16, 5pm: Michael Murphy / MASS Design Group
Sept 30, 5pm: Adam Greenspan / PWP Landscape Architecture
Oct 8, 4pm: Sir David Adjaye OBE / Adjaye Associates | The Booziotis Endowed Annual Lecture
Oct 24, 6:15pm: Thom Mayne / Morphosis | ACADIA Conference Keynote Address
Oct 25, 9am: Harlen Miller / UNStudio | ACADIA Conference Keynote Address
Oct 25, 6:15pm: Dominique Jakob / Jakob+Macfarlane | ACADIA Conference Keynote Address
Nov 6, 5pm: Lydia Kallipoliti / ANAcycle
Exhibitions
Oct 14–Dec 1: Morphosis: The Amplification of Interconnectedness, opening reception Oct 23,
5pm
Events
Oct 21–23: ACADIA Workshops
Oct 24–26: ACADIA Conference
 EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion
of each grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades
are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the
discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal
weight:
    Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
        • The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant
            method of inquiry
        • The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software,
            sketch drawing and models, etc.) in the development of the design


        •   Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go
            beyond what is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration
            of the design?
    Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge
    introduced in companion courses.
        • A strong and clearly stated design objective
        • Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of
            programmatic elements – and sectional development
        • Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as
            demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures
            and construction, structural and environmental system integration, building
            materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
        • Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness,
            floor plates, and assembly
    Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and
    finesse in the final design presentation.
        • Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media
            strategy and level of skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the
            design process; technical documentation
    Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group
    discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a
degree in the School of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C-
will not satisfy degree requirements.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-           Excellent
               Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual
               language, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues
               concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
               complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-        Above Average
               Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully
               completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in
               effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
               demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C           Average


              Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not
              pursued with dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor
              Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of
              presentation are not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the
              required competence and knowledge base.
F             Fail
              Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not
              acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive
              unexcused absences.
X             Excused Incomplete
              Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not
              completing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It
              may only be used after consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an
              agreement as to a new completion date. Work must be completed before the
              second week of the next semester in which the student is enrolling, according to
              the School of Architecture policy.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3)
unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter
grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written
documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one
(1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or
absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or
absences; asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A
student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence
and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student
is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.


By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Representing the work of others as your own, including
plagiarism, is taken very seriously at UT. You must cite your sources when you use the words or
ideas of others; otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary
action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q DROP POLICY
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop.
PERSONAL PRONOUNS
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the
student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and
Sexuality Center (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/).
The instructor will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from
what appears on the official roster and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc).
Please advise the instructor of any changes early in the semester so appropriate updates may
be made to their records.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your
way, there are options available for help:
     • In-house CARE counselor (see below)
     • For immediate support
            o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
            o CMHC Crisis Line:
                24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     • Free services at CMHC:
            o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html


             o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
             o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
             o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health
support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty
and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her.
Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
         Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
         https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities.
Instructors are committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but
this is possible only if you discuss your needs early. Any student with a documented disability
who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official
letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
THE SANGER LEARNING CENTER
All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Learning Center’s classes and workshops,
private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than
70 courses in 15 different subject areas. More than 20,000 students use the services at the
Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance. For more
information, please visit http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
UNDERGRADUATE WRITING CENTER
http://uwc.utexas.edu
BEVOCAL
BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to
intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a
culture of care on campus, go to: https://wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal/.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls


can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts
and share your concerns.
FOOD PANTRY & CAREER CLOTHES CLOSET
Student Emergency Services in the Office of the Dean of Students has launched UT Outpost
(UA9 Building, 2609 University Ave; ring bell for service) to support students on our campus
that is equipped with a food pantry, and a career clothes closet to ensure every Longhorn has
access to professional clothes for job and internship interviews. Emergencies and financial
hardships can interfere with student success beyond the classroom, and this program will serve
as an additional resource for students. Learn more:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/utoutpost.php
TITLE IX REPORTING:
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs
in our community, the university can:
         1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
         2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
             harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
         3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies:
             https://titleix.utexas.edu/policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to
the Title IX Coordinator. Your instructor is a Responsible Employee and must report any Title
IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one.
Before talking with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources,
visit https://titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the
careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other
substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is
accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio
without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your
studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.


The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and
reuse to reduce material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue
bins or any other containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system
for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication
coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology
Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the
Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
     • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and
        building they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one
        used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
        the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
        class instructors.
     • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin
        Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found
at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
BUILD LAB POLICY
All students, faculty, and staff who wish to use the UTSOA Build Lab must take the EHS’s online
training. As this training is supplemental to UTSOA’s Build Lab training, no one is excluded or
grandfathered from the requirement; both are required in order to use the Build Lab’s tools
and equipment. The Build Lab has a card reader installed at the entrance. Those who have
taken the online EHS training will be able to gain access during operating hours by swiping their
UT ID cards at the door. More information can be found at:
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/SOABuildLab/Build+Lab+Access+and+Training.
REQUIRED RESOURCES:
We use Adobe software in this course. When accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs,
you will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID. You are not required to purchase Creative
Cloud services to sign in on our lab computers, but you are required to create a free Adobe ID.
That can be done here: https://accounts.adobe.com/


RECOMMENDED RESOURCES:
Ideas
   • Allen, Edward, The Architect’s Studio Companion: Rules of Thumb for Preliminary Design
      (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2007)
   • Allen, Stan, Points + Lines: Diagrams and Projects for the City (excerpts) (New York:
      Princeton Architectural Press, 1999).
   • Banham, Reyner, The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment (excerpts)
      (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1969).
   • Burns, Carol J., and Andrea Kahn, eds., Site Matters: Design Concepts, Histories, and
      Strategies (New York: Routledge, 2005).
   • Frampton, Kenneth, Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of Construction in
      Nineteenth and Twentieth Century Architecture, John Cava, ed. (Cambridge, MA: The
      MIT Press, 1995).
   • Kiel Moe Integrated Design in Contemporary Architecture (New York: Princeton
      Architectural Press, 2008)
   • Thomas, Randall, ed., Environmental Design: An Introduction for Architects and
      Engineers (New York: E & FN Spon, 1996)
Systems
   • Allen, Edward, Fundamentals of Building Construction: Materials and Methods
      (New York: Wiley, 1999).
      ---. The Architect’s Studio Companion: Rules of Thump for Preliminary Design (Hoboken,
      NJ: Wiley, 2007)
   • Brookes, Alan, and Grech, Chris, Connections: Studies in Building Assembly (New York:
      Whitney Library of Design, 1994)
   • Brown, G.Z., Sun, Wind & Light: Architectural Design Strategies (New York: Wiley, 2001).
   • Ching, Frank, Cassandra Adams, Building Construction Illustrated (New York, Wiley,
      2001)
   • Finley, Dawn, and Mark Wamble, “Notes on System Form: The Rest of the World Exists,”
      in Perspecta, Vol. 34 (2003), pp. 110-117.
   • Ford, Edward, The Details of Modern Architecture, vols. 1 & 2 (Cambridge, MA: MIT
      Press, 1990 & 1996)
   • Kieran, Stephen, and James Timberlake. Loblolly House: Elements of a New Architecture
      (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2008).
      ---. Refabricating Architecture: How Manufacturing Methodologies Are Poised to
      Transform Building Construction (New York: McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc., 2004).
   • Kwok, Alison and Walter Grondzik, The Green Studio Handbook: Environmental
      Strategies for Schematic Design (New York: Architectural Press, 2006)
   • Oesterle-Liev-Lutz Huesler, Double Skin Facades, Intergrated Planning (London: Prestel,
      2001)


Materials
   • Ball, Philip, Made to Measure: New Materials for the 21st Century (Princeton, NJ:
       Princeton University Press, 1997).
   • Bielefeld, Bert, and Isabella Skiba, Technical Drawing (Basel: Birkhäuser, 2007).
   • Brookes, Alan, and Grech, Chris, The Building Envelope
   • Brownell, Blaine, ed. Transmaterial: A Catalog of Materials that Redefine Our Physical
       Environment (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 2006).
   • Kolarevic, Branko, and Kevin R. Klinger, eds., Manufacturing Material Effects: Rethinking
       Design and Making in Architecture (New York: Routledge, 2008), pp. 25-46.
   • Schulitz, Helmut C., Steel Construction Manual (Basel & Boston: Birkhäuser, 2000).
   • Schittich, Christian, Glass Construction Manual (Basel, Birkhäuser, 2007)
   • Fuchs Matthias, Construction Materials Manual (Basel, Birkhäuser, 2006)
Codes
   • Ching, Francis D.K., and Steven R. Winkel, Building Codes Illustrated: A Guide to
       Understanding the 2000 International Building Code (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2003).
   • 2003 International Building Code (Country Club Hills, IL: International Code Council).
       https://codes.iccsafe.org/content/document/719?site_type=public
   • Texas State Law Library, Building Codes https://www.sll.texas.gov/law-
       legislation/building-codes/
   • 2012 Texas Accessibility Standards (TAS) Online
       https://www.tdlr.texas.gov/ab/abtas.htm
Other Standards
   • LEED v4 for BUILDING DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION, Updated July 25, 2019.
       http://www.usgbc.org/sites/default/files/LEED%20v4%20BDC_07.25.19_current.pdf
Periodicals
   • Detail
   • El Croquis
   • The Plan
   • GA: Global Architect
