                                                  E s349S     l  1-Jane Austen
          Instructor: Bertelsen, L                                      Areas: H
          Unique #: 80790                                               Flags: none
          Semester: Summer 2019, 2nd term                               Restrictions: n/a
          Cross-lists: n/a                                              Computer Instruction: No
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English or rhetoric and writing.
Description: This course will emphasize the dialectic of land and sea in Jane Austen’s work and life. We will read Northanger
Abbey, Pride and Prejudice, Mansfield Park, and Persuasion—the first two novels addressing the relationship of estates,
money, and marriage at the end of the eighteenth century; the second two exploring a wider world, including West Indian
plantations, seaside resorts, and most importantly the Royal Navy, at the dawn of the nineteenth century. The first half of the
course will pay special attention to the landed gentry and clergy who formed the society into which Jane Austen was born and
which she knew most intimately. The second half will engage the careers of her two youngest brothers, both of whom served
as British naval officers during the Napoleonic wars. Through them, we will examine Austen’s novelistic treatment of life on the
home front in a nation under threat of invasion and on the verge of becoming an imperial power.
Texts: Northanger Abbey, ed. Grogan, 2nd ed. (Broadview, 2002); Pride and Prejudice, Donald Gray 3rd ed. (Norton Critical,
2001); Mansfield Park, ed. Sturrock (Broadview, 2001); Persuasion, ed. Bree (Broadview, 1998).
Requirements & Grading: Four quizzes (15% each); take home final essay exam (40%); extra credit possible for classroom
participation; attendance has no effect on course grade; no make-up quizzes. Plus/minus grading will be used.
Schedule:
July
15: Introduction
16: Tradition and Celebrity
17: Juvenilia
18: Parodic Romance: Northanger Abbey
19: Reading Day
22: Northanger Abbey
23: Northanger Abbey
24: Northanger Abbey
25: Quiz
26: Jane Austen Writes Again
29: Pride and Prejudice
30: Pride and Prejudice
31: Pride and Prejudice
August
1: Pride and Prejudice
2: Quiz
5: Mansfield Park
6: Mansfield Park
7: Mansfield Park
8: Mansfield Park


9: Quiz
12: Persuasion
13: Persuasion
14: Persuasion
15: Persuasion: book to film
16: Quiz; final take home essay exam assigned.
19: Final take home essay exam due (by e-mail)
Policies: Documented Disability Statement: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-
6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone), or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity: Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work. For
additional information on Academic Integrity, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Other:
Web Site: Canvas.
