University of Texas at Austin School of Architecture
ARC F328W / F392W
Furniture Design
Summer 2020
Instructor: Mark Maček
Description
The course is listed as an Advanced Visual Communication and/or Open Elective taught online. The course
examines the role of furniture design as an extension of architecture and interior practices but also as a
distinct practice of its own, informed by responsiveness to the human body with an equal emphasis on
materials, history, and means of production. In addition to readings and discussion, each student will
determine the scope of a series of projects that will be developed through an iterative process with
implications for the process of making. As a design/research course, the participating students are
responsible for generating and maintaining an ongoing discussion prompted by assigned readings and
focused studio-style projects. Emphasis is placed on the students’ creative formation of connections
between ideas and artifacts.
Structure
The course follows the unfolding of two lines of inquiry in the pursuit of a furniture practice. The primary
trajectory will engage ideas through the making of physical designs. Questions will be framed in material
through the way it is composed in relation to the human body. The second line of inquiry will engage ideas
through analytical and interpretive seminar discussions. Questions will be revealed from the work of others
and brought to bear on our investigation. The co-existence of these activities will affect the nature of
ideas unfolding through the semester.
          Design
          At its core, this class is about design. Considerable energy will be placed in the details, intentions,
          and refinements of the artifacts designed. Creating a place to allow ideas to unfold is central to
          the goal. Our intent here is to view the act of design generatively. There will be four assignments,
          each longer and more developed than the previous one.


         Seminar
         The goal will be a critical reading and discussion of the texts. The challenge is to look into the
         works and ask how this thinking affects our activities as designers. Required reading will be
         posted on Canvas at least one week before they will be discussed. Students are expected to
         come to class prepared to critically address each reading and sustain a group discussion for the
         duration of the session. Bring to class one question to be posed to the group for discussion. The
         schedule is subject to change by the instructor with prior notice.
Technology
Upper-division students should be proficient in hand drawing and 3D rendering techniques as well as
physical model making in a variety of media. You have your own graphically capable computer able to
run modeling software. Each assignment will have further defined requirements specified.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three unexcused absences will be
encouraged to drop the course. The minimum penalty for three unexcused absences is full letter drop in
your final grade for the class. Please contact me if you expect to be late or miss class.
A student who misses a class or assignment due to the observance of religious holy day will be given the
opportunity to complete the work within a reasonable time. By UT policy, a student should notify me at
least fourteen days prior to the date of an observed religious holy day
Schedule (June 4 – July 9)
Week 1
June 4 Introduction
         Readings: Hall, Edward T. The Hidden Dimension
June 5 Lecture: Body & Mind
         Reading: Bachelard, Gaston. The Poetics of Space
         Design assignment Project 1: NEST
Week 2
June 8 Pin up and presentation: NEST rough draft
         Reading: Pye, David. The Nature and Art of Workmanship
June 9 Lecture: The Material Wood
June 10 Pin up and presentation: NEST due
         Reading: Turkle, S. Simulation and Its Discontents
June 11 Lecture: Design History 1
         Design assignment Project 2: TABLE
June 12 Pin up and presentation: TABLE schematic design
Week 3
June 15 Pin up and presentation: TABLE models and development
         Reading: Benedikt, M. Architecture Beyond Experience
June 16 Lecture: Wood construction and species
June 17 Pin up and presentation: TABLE due


June 18 Lecture: Design History II
        Design assignment Project 3: CABINET
June 19 Pin up and presentation: CABINET schematic designs
        Reading: Sennett, R. The Craftsman
Week 4
June 22 Pin up and presentation: CABINET models and development
        Reading: Crawford, Matthew. Shop Class as Soulcraft
June 23 Lecture: Woodworking, metalworking, and makers
June 24 Pin up and presentation: CABINET revisions
        Reading: Weinthal, L. Toward a New Interior
June 25 Guest Lectures
June 26 Pin up and presentation: CABINET due
        Design assignment Project 4: CHAIR
        Reading: Walker, C. H. A Theory of Mouldings
Week 5
June 29 Pin up and presentation: CHAIR concepts
        Reading: Wittgenstein’s Handles
June 30 Lecture: Design Academy Eindhoven
July 1 Pin up and presentation: CHAIR full scale
July 2 Roundtable class discussion
July 3 Pin up and presentation: CHAIR full scale revised
Week 6
July 6 Pin up and presentation: CHAIR progress
July 7 Film
July 8 Pin up and presentation: CHAIR FINAL REVIEW
Grading
I evaluate final project designs based on intent (expression of a design idea combined with inquiry),
process (self-criticism, iterations, variations), and resolution (effort and craft). A grade of incomplete will
only be granted for illness or family emergency.
        Grade Percentages
        In class discussions          25%
        Project 1                     10%
        Project 2                     15%
        Project 3                     20%
        Project 4                     30%
