                                                                                              Page 1 of 10
                                          RTF 323C/AAS 320
                                           SCREENING RACE
                                            Fall 2019 Syllabus
                         UT’s Course Flag: Cultural Diversity in the United States
         Moody College of Communication: Meets Communication and Culture Requirement
CLASS LECTURE TIME: MONDAY-WEDNESDAY-FRIDAY 9:00 AM—10:00 AM
CLASS SCREENING TIME: MONDAY 5:00—7:30 PM
CLASSROOM: CMA 3.116 (lectures and screenings)
PROFESSOR: DR. MADHAVI MALLAPRAGADA
Office Hours: Monday 10 AM—11:30 AM
Office Location: CMA 5.126
Email: madhavim@austin.utexas.edu
Telephone: (512) 471-9239
TEACHING ASSISTANT: Kira Deshler
Office Hours: Wednesday 12:00 Noon—2:00 PM
Office Location: CMA Lobby
Email: kiradeshler@utexas.edu
Course Description: In this course, we will focus on an ongoing, contemporary development in
mainstream U.S. media industries—namely, the turn towards “multicultural” markets, “multicultural”
audiences/consumers and “multicultural” programming. Consumers reports such as Nielsen’s Reports
are increasingly studying the links between the shifts in the U.S. demographics and the opportunities
for market growth and expansion. As mainstream and traditional media industries strategize to
compete and profit in an increasingly multi-platform, multi-content media universe, they have
embraced a new slogan, “ The multicultural is the new mainstream.” Interestingly, despite the
multiplicity indicated in “multicultural,” when it comes to media industries, the multicultural is
predominantly imagined as three racial groups—African Americans, U.S. Hispanics and Asian
Americans. Hollywood, television and digital media industries are increasingly strategizing ways to
target and appeal to these three “multicultural” groups. Some of the key questions we will tackle in this
course are: how is the multicultural mainstream being constructed and imagined by the media
industries? How are the industries trying to target the three key racial groups in this new imagination
of the American mainstream? What are some of the specific industry practices and strategies that are
being adopted and/or abandoned in the efforts to target the multicultural mainstream? How does this


                                                                                                Page 2 of 10
turn towards multicultural markets signal a transformation possibly, in the overall functioning of the
media industries? What are some of the challenges and obstacles in the path to such a transformation
in U.S. media industries?
Course Goals: The overall goals of this course are two-fold. The first goal to get an in-depth
understanding of how the multicultural mainstream is being imagined and targeted through
contemporary industry practices. The second goal is to develop a critical approach to U.S. media
industries and their strategies by considering issues of inclusion/exclusion, historical approaches to
racial and ethnic minorities in industry culture and current debates over diversity in media industries.
Class readings, lectures, screenings, assignments and discussions are geared to advance these two
goals.
Course Requirements: (Plus/Minus awarded for the Course Final Grade)
Attendance                                           10%
Class Participation                                  10%
Student Presentation                                 15%
Opinion Piece Assignment                             15%
Exam 1                                               25%
Exam 2                                               25%
Required Course Readings: All course readings will be available on Canvas. Readings will be a
combination of scholarly article, trade news articles, industry reports and opinion pieces. Most of the
readings will be available as PDF files. In some cases, if an online reading includes video content or if a
print version does not look clear to read, we will post the link to the reading in the appropriate folder
on canvas. All readings on canvas will be organized into weekly folders. All readings are REQUIRED
material for this course. Please refer to the weekly schedule on this syllabus for information on
assigned readings for each class day. On occasion, a reading that is listed on this syllabus might be
replaced with another one that is more relevant to our class discussions. In such an event, you will be
notified via email and in class. You are expected to bring a physical or digital copy of the reading to
class on the assigned day.
Required Course Screenings: This course has a required Class Screening. The day, time, and
location of the screenings are listed at the top of this syllabus. There will be some weeks when we
won’t have an assigned screening, or you might have to listen to a podcast/watch an online video on
your own time. Refer to the syllabus and class announcements to keep up with the screening schedule.
Screening material will be used for class discussions as well as exam questions.


                                                                                                Page 3 of 10
Course Procedures and Assignments
Assigned readings:
Class lectures, discussion topics and class screenings presume that all students have completed the
assigned reading for each class meeting. Since we cannot cover all topics from the readings in detail
during the lecture, it is important that you carefully go through the assigned readings before the class
meeting. You should come to class prepared to discuss the key points and arguments of the readings.
You are also required to bring a copy of the readings to class.
Lectures:
You are expected to attend every class session and take detailed and systematic lecture notes. You are
expected to note down everything that is covered in class, including content on lecture slides,
information related to in-class clips, and key points raised during class discussion. Exams are very
closely tied to the lecture and material covered in class, so make a habit of taking notes in this course!
Attendance: (10%)
Attendance will be taken at the beginning of every class meeting. Please be punctual. Each student is
granted four personal leave days without penalty. This provision is meant to cover unexpected
absences (such as not being in class because you are sick) and not intended as sanctioned holidays.
The fifth absence, however, will lower your attendance grade by a half point and each subsequent
absence will have a similar effect. You are responsible for being aware of all assignments,
handouts and announcements made in class. Keep this in mind in the event you are late to class,
leave early or are absent from class.
Class Participation: (10%)
Beginning early in the semester, you will be asked to apply the course materials through class
discussions. You are not only expected to actively participate in class, but also to demonstrate an
ability to integrate the course materials into your discussions and assignments. In addition to being
graded for your class participation, your responses to reading materials and class discussions are an
integral and valuable part of the pedagogical practices of my class. So speak up in class!
Opinion Piece Writing Assignment: (15%)
This assignment is due November 15th. This assignment will require you to develop a critical
opinion piece related to one of the key ideas discussed in this course. There are very specific
guidelines for how to develop this assignment. You will be given a handout in class and we will devote
one class session, Friday, October 11, 2019 to go over the strategies and techniques for writing this
assignment. We will use sample opinion pieces in class to understand how to write our own opinion
pieces.
Student Presentation : (15%)
For this assignment, students will form groups of 2 and make a presentation to the class for about 10-
15 minutes. All presentations will be made during Friday class sessions. Student presentation on any
given Friday will be tied very closely to the material covered on the Monday and Wednesday of that


                                                                                                 Page 4 of 10
particular week. Detailed guidelines will be given in class. Although this is a group presentation, when
it comes to grading, we will evaluate each student individually to ensure fairness and accountability.
Student Presentations begin on Week 4, September 20th.
Two Exams: (Exam 1 is 25%; Exam 2 is 25% à Total 50%)
There will be two exams over the course of the semester. Exam 1 is on Friday, October 18th. (Week
8) and will include materials covered from Week 1 to Week 8 (October 16th). Exam 2 is on Monday,
December 9th (Week 16) and will cover materials from Week 9 to Week 15 (December 6th). You will
be given an exam review sheet prior to the exam. Material for the exam will include course readings,
class lectures, class discussions, class screenings and in-class clips. The format will be discussed in
class.
General Course and Academic Guidelines
Services for Students with Disabilities
The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-
6259, 471-6441 TTY.
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of
the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonest damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For
more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center, located in the FAC 211, phone 471-6222,
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc/ offers individualized assistance to students who want to
improve their writing skills. There is no charge, and students may come in on a drop-in or
appointment basis.


                                                                                                 Page 5 of 10
Moody College Writing Support Program
The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3.322,
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting offers one-on-one assistance without charge to
students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have
specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to
strengthen core-writing skills in each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students
may book half-hour appointments on our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the
writing process.
Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a work
assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an
opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of
the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days
prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It
is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail
address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current
with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Classroom Evacuation Procedures
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
For more information, please go to https://preparedness.utexas.edu/


                                                                                              Page 6 of 10
                                           Class Schedule
 All readings should be completed prior to the class session across which they are listed. Readings and
 screenings may be subject to change—in which case, you will be notified in class or via Canvas email.
                     Any change will be updated on the Syllabus posted on Canvas.
                                            MODULE ONE
Week 1         Topic:       Course Overview
Readings:      Wed 8/28     Syllabus Overview
               Fri 8/30     Course Overview; Introductions; Class Discussion on Topic given on 8/28
Week 2         Topic:       The New Mainstream
Readings:      Mon 9/2      NO CLASS; LABOR DAY HOLIDAY
                            NO SCREENING
               Wed 9/4      Garcia, “Ethnicity Inc.”
               Fri 9/6      The Center for Multicultural Science, “New Mainstream Demographics”
Week 3         Topic:       The Multicultural Edge
Readings:      Mon 9/9      Nielsen Report, “The Multicultural Edge: Rising Super Consumers” (1-17)
Screening:                  The Database: Today’s Multicultural Consumer (1:05)
                            Podcast. Listen to it on your own time before 9/13 class
                            URL: https://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/podcast/2018/the-
                            database-meeting-todays-multicultural-consumers/
               Wed 9/11     Nielsen Report, “The Multicultural Edge: Rising Super Consumers” (18-34)
               Fri 9/13     Waterson, “Personalized ads Draw Multicultural Consumers”
Week 4         Topic:       Mainstream Media Industries’ Turn to a Multicultural Frame
Readings:      Mon 9/16     Advertising Age, “In Living Color: Diversifying TV is good for advertisers”
                            Anderson, “New CAA study says diverse casting increases box office
                            potential across all budgets”
                            Stilson, “Multicultural Talent is Surging on TV and winning mainstream
                            audiences”


                                                                                   Page 7 of 10
Screening:          5 online videos that you will watch on your own time before 9/18 class
                    1) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DLFqwxd0vsI
                    2) https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=54&v=W8gIy154tn
                       0
                    3) https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/video/success-diversity-rich-
                       films-celebrated-at-hollywood-film-awards-video-1158265
                    4) https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/video/lena-waithe-talks-
                       hollywood-diversity-programs-watch-1206570
                    5) https://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/hollywood-reporter-
                       unveils-initiative-promote-inclusivity-industry-1165241
           Wed 9/18 Umstead, “Multicultural Content goes MultiPlatform”
                    Baysinger, “Upfronts 2013: Searching for the best route to the
                    Multicultural Mainstream”
                    Easter, “How an L.A agency became Hollywood’s go-to for connecting with
                    multicultural audiences”
           Fri 9/20 Student Presentations: Groups 1 and 2
                                           MODULE TWO
Week 5     Topic:   Network TV and the Multicultural Ensemble Cast
Readings:  Mon 9/23 Brook, “Convergent Ethnicity and the Neo-Platoon Show” (331-341)
Screening:          Lost; Ugly Betty; Heroes
           Wed 9/25 Brook, “Convergent Ethnicity and the Neo-Platoon Show” (341-353)
           Fri 9/27 Student Presentations: Groups 3 and 4
Week 6     Topic:   Branding Blackness
Readings:  Mon 9/30 Fuller, “Branding Blackness on US Cable Television” (285-296)
Screening:          The Wire; Chapelle’s Show
           Wed 10/2 Fuller, “Branding Blackness on US Cable Television” (296-305)
           Fri 10/4 Student Presentations: Groups 5 and 6
Week 7     Topic:    Casting and Color Blindness
Readings:  Mon 10/7 Warner, “The Racial Logic of Grey’s Anatomy: Shonda Rhimes and her


                                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                     “Post-Civil Rights, Post-Feminist ” Series” (631-639)
Screening:           Grey’s Anatomy
           Wed 10/9  Warner, “The Racial Logic of Grey’s Anatomy: Shonda Rhimes and her
                     “Post-Civil Rights, Post-Feminist ” Series” (639-647)
           Fri 10/11 Parham, “The Ryan Coogler Effect: What Black Panther’s Success Means
                     for Black Directors”
                     Lee, “Black Panther: Lessons in Hollywood Diversity and Black Pride”
                     Opinion Paper Assignment—Discussion and Strategies
Week 8     Topic:    Black American Media Moguls and the Digital Media Ecology
Readings:  Mon 10/14 Everett, “Black Film, New Media Industries and BAMMs (Black American
                     Media Moguls) in the Digital Media Ecology”
Screening:           The Mis-Adventures of Awkward Black Girl
           Wed 10/16  O’ Connell, “Oprah Winfrey, Ava DuVernay on the Push for ‘Inclusion’(Not
                     Diversity, Tackling Black Lives Matter beyond the ‘Hashtag’”
           Fri 10/18 EXAM 1; Bring Blue Books
                                           MODULE THREE
Week 9     Topic:    Cable Visions for Latino Audiences
Readings:  Mon 10/21 Martínez, “Monolingualism, Biculturalism and Cable TV: HBO Latino and
                     the Promise of the Multiplex” (194-204)
Screening:           The Bronze Screen: 100 Years of the Latino Image in Hollywood Cinema
           Wed 10/24 Martínez, “Monolingualism, Biculturalism and Cable TV: HBO Latino and
                     the Promise of the Multiplex” (204-214)
           Fri 10/25 Student Presentations: Groups 7 and 8
Week 10    Topic:    Post-Network Era and the “New Latino”
Readings:  Mon 10/28 Chávez, “Building a “New Latino” in the Post-Network Era: mun2 and the
                     Reconfiguration of the U.S. Latino Audience” (1-10)
Screening:           I love Jenni and Universo/mun2 programming examples


                                                                                        Page 9 of 10
           Wed 10/30 Chávez, “Buidling a “New Latino” in the Post-Network Era: mun2 and the
                     Reconfiguration of the U.S. Latino Audience” (11-20)
           Fri 11/1  Student Presentations: Groups 9 and 10
Week 11    Topic:    Hollywood and “Post-Racial” Multiculturalism
Readings:  Mon 11/4  Beltrán, “Fast and Bilingual: ‘Fast and Furious’ and the Latinization of
                     Racelessness”(75-88)
Screening:           Fast & Furious
           Wed 11/6  Beltrán, “Fast and Bilingual: ‘Fast and Furious’ and the Latinization of
                     Racelessness” (88-96)
           Fri 11/8  Student Presentations: Groups 11 and 12
                                            MODULE FOUR
Week 12    Topic:    Asian American Markets and Hollywood Casting
Readings:  Mon 11/11 Davé, Racial Accents, Hollywood Casting and Asian American Studies
Screening:           Crazy Rich Asians
           Wed 11/13 Rebecca Sun and Rebecca Ford, “The Stakes are High for ‘Crazy Rich
                     Asians’ and that’s the Point”
                     Namking, “Realistic Asian-Americans have finally arrived on TV”
           Fri 11/15 Student Presentations: Groups 13 and 14; Opinion Papers Due
Week 13    Topic:    Mixed Race and Industry Controversies
Readings:  Mon 11/18 Nishime, “Mixed Race Matters: What Emma Stone and Bruno Mars Can
                     Tell us About the Future of Asian American Media”
Screening:           Aloha or Ghost in the Shell
           Wed 11/20 Tseng, “What Happens when you let Everyone in the World Audition for a
                     Hollywood Studio Film”
           Fri 11/23 Student Presentations: Groups 15 and 16
Week 14    Topic:    Student Presentations
Readings:  Mon 11/25 Student Presentations: Groups 17 and 18


                                                                                  Page 10 of 10
          Wed 11/27 No Class; Thanksgiving Holiday
          Fri 11/29 No Class; Thanksgiving Holiday
Week 15   Topic:    Silenced Others: Native Americans and Hollywood
Readings: Mon 12/2  Floyd, Negotiating Publicity and Persona: The Work of Native Actors in
                    Studio Hollywood, (119-129)
          Wed 12/4  Floyd, Negotiating Publicity and Persona: The Work of Native Actors in
                    Studio Hollywood, (129-135)
          Fri 12/6  Student Presentations: Groups 19 and 20
Week 16   Topic:    Exam 2
          Mon 12/9  Exam 2; Bring Blue Books
