               ADV 468K/483-3 ​        Portfolio 2
                                                   (Unique Numbers: 06075, 06250)
the person handing out grades:                         the real brains of the operation (your TA):
Ryan Romero                                            Regan Gavin
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com                             rtgavin@utexas.edu
Office: BMC 4.306                                      Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays                          Hours: TBD
         12:30pm - 2pm, 3:30pm - 5pm
Second verse same as the first
Well, almost. You’ve done it before, now we’re going to do it again only bigger, better, and
creative...er. You’re going to come up with big ideas that don’t only work once, but multiple
times, in multiple directions, on multiple media. Your design must be better. Your execution
must be better. Your copy must be better. Your YOU must be better.
Trading books for tiny statues
While most classes require books and course packets that cost you hundreds of dollars, P2
mostly just costs all of your free time. However, we highly encourage you to begin setting aside
money for entry, tickets, postage, etc. for work you wish to submit to award shows.
Depending on the semester, you may wish to enter several pieces of work in anywhere from 2
to 4 award shows. For reference, the local Addy Awards usually costs $25-$35 per
entry/category, with tickets to see the show around $50 for students. So, save those pennies.
Stand and deliver
You’ll be presenting more than simply hanging stuff up on walls, though that happens as well.
This means you’ll need a more final idea before you stand in front of the class and make a fool
of yourself. How much sleep did you think you were getting this semester? Might want to
rethink that. Half-baked ideas will not be critiqued. Bring your A game.
Final critique, take 2
As before you are expected to fully execute the best of the best ideas using all digital, manual,
bought, borrowed and stolen methods available. Unlike before, the expectation is higher. In
final critique you will show a MINIMUM of 15 pieces. Even more so than in P1 you’ll be working
on your projects in your “free” time. Don’t underestimate the commitment. P3 is not a given.
         NOTE: The lightnin’ round
         If you don’t show the required work in final critique (for whatever reason) you cannot
         earn a grade higher than an 80...and that’s if you were perfect (read: not gonna happen).
         I must see and approve all portfolio work prior to the critique. I reserve the right to
         remove work shown without my approval. If I remove work and you don’t meet the
         minimum requirements you may not participate and you won’t advance to P3.


Push your pixel pushing skills. What passed for quality in P1 doesn’t cut it anymore. You have
to grow. Though no longer mandatory, Lynda classes and the like are highly encouraged.
Remember, advertising is subjective. There are no right answers. Do better each time and play
nice with others. The ad biz is small and incestuous. Your friends here will be your colleagues,
competitions, and cohorts. Love them. Fear them. Respect them. You’re all in this together.
                 Go buy this stuff...again (yes, that means you’re mounting work):
                 ‣ 500 sheets of white copy paper (cheap is good)
                 ‣ Black Sharpie fine-tip markers (A stack of them. They tend to get lost.)
                 ‣ 1-2 Sheets of black on black foam core board
                 ‣ A fresh X-Acto #1 knife + pack of extra blades (borrowable/shareable)
                 ‣ A metal straightedge ruler (borrowable/shareable)
                 ‣ A can or 2 of 3M Spray Mount (NOT Super 77)
                 ‣ One black queen-size FLAT bed sheet (lowest thread count wins!)
Final Grades
65% = Final Portfolio (15 pieces minimum)
20% = Final Critique
15% = Participation, attitude, and professionalism
Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum
grade of C in all communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major. I
believe that grade is a B for graduate students.
My grades are true to form. You earn a C by being average. That means you showed up and
checked all the boxes. Impress me and get a B. If I think you could start a business with me
tomorrow you might just be gunning for an A.
How to succeed
‣ Treat this like it’s already your job.
‣ Fail big! Make mistakes and own them. We all learn from them.
‣ Play nice. Be a good partner. Seriously. Do your end and then some.
‣ Spend at ​LEAST​ 10 hours outside of class for every one hour in class. No, really. Do it.
‣ Study award shows and latest work, seek out all kinds of existing and emerging creativity,
and develop your skills. Keep your eyes open.
‣ Seek a balance. Absorb advertising and culture as much as possible but leave yourself time
for your own contributions. Remember, you’re a creative now. Create.
Open Away From Face.
        Attendance + Late Work
        You are a budding professional in a deadline-driven industry. That means you are expected to
        do all of the work all of the time. That means showing up ready to present in every class. If I
        decide to call on you or your partner to show me what you’re up to, you better have something
        to say. If the class, as a whole, does not have enough prepared for class then class may just be
        cancelled. And trust me, you need every bit of class time you can get each semester.


favorites exist.
I, like every professor, has on occasion been accused of having favorites. Guess what. I do. So
do your parents, your bosses, everyone you meet in the world, and you. My favorite students are
the ones who apply themselves, do the work, process all the feedback and work to better their
work and themselves. They needn’t always do as I suggest but they should seek to understand
criticism and use that information to do better. Then, they come back big, hard, and often. They
don’t make excuses. They don’t show up without work. They don’t keep repeating the same
mistakes over and over without seeking help to rectify them. Why do I like these people?
Because they’re here to do the work.
Here’s the good news. You’re already my favorite student and staying that way makes you more
successful at what you came here to do. But show me you don’t want to work, you don’t want
to care, you don’t have time to participate and while you won’t lose the opportunity to do good
work, you will begin to lose respect. That’s how the world works. Nobody expects you to be
good right off the bat, few are. You just have to want to be good and then take the steps to get
there. Do that and you’ll always be my favorite snowflake.
thicker skin through advertising.
No matter how much of an introvert you may be, how delicate your feelings are, or how attached
you are to your art, advertising is not and will never be private. It is a public endeavor. Period.
Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes harshly, by your colleagues and me. Fair and
honest critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. It can even be difficult for those who are.
Remember: you are not your work. Don’t take criticism to heart, take it to head. Consider it.
Process it. Use it. Keep your cool and know that very few ideas make the final cut. Critique is
difficult to hear no matter who says it and no matter how they say it. The people in this room are
here to build your book and get you a job. We are not a creative director worried about you
taking his job, we’ve nothing to gain from making you feel bad, and we’re not the internet trolls
who will tear your work down from the shadows. Sadly, all of that is going to happen later on in
the real world. For now, know that we’re your instructors, your colleagues, and your friends
trying to make you better. Breathe. Listen. Grow.
let’s get passionate.
We talk about a lot of things in class. As creatives our goal is to make real, truthful human
emotional connections. And both humans and emotions are nothing if not messy. Touchy
subjects will be brought up and discussed because we’re putting real work out into the real
world where those subjects exist. While we have to discuss (and grow from doing so) the impact
these thoughts and ideas have on society from an academic perspective, I will not tolerate
racism, hate speech, misogyny or any other kind of marginalization and neither should you.
We’re navigating a very delicate time in our society and if someone, including myself, ever
crosses a line, even accidentally, I encourage you to come to me or to my TA and address your
concerns. Chances are the person in question was simply mistaken or ignorant on the subject
and will want to apologize. This is how we grow. This is how we move forward. You are safe
here. You are welcome here. Do not bottle up your concerns as nobody can feel creative if they
don’t feel safe and we won’t undermine our mission to grow your creativity.


Cheating
The usual university rules apply to cheating and plagiarism. When it doubt, refer to Wheaton’s
law. If you are caught doing either, you will automatically fail this course. Please familiarize
yourself with the university’s policy on plagiarism​ ​here.
Moving on to P3
To move forward in the highly competitive Texas Creative sequence, you must earn at least a
“B-” in this class (79.5% or higher) to be eligible for admission to Portfolio 3. Earning a “B-” or
better DOES NOT guarantee your progression. Evidence of exceptional work, mastery of
concepts, growth from previous semesters, and professionalism is also required.
Email, Canvas, and the irony of Slack.
In this course, and in Texas Creative in general, we have a few methods of communication. I’m
very reachable on my email. So you will be as well. Make sure your Canvas email is updated to
a current, reachable account. You will be responsible for checking it regularly for class work
and announcements. I’m soooo done with GroupMe so we’re going to see if we can’t get the
whole crew on board with Slack this semester. You can find our slack at:
Texas-Creative.slack.com​ . This allows all-snowflake communication for all of us. Hop on and
join the Portfolio2 channel. Do so or risk missing important news, updates, jobs,
announcements, free money giveaways, beach vacations, concert tickets, and more.
It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for support. Our
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW | CMA
4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is unavailable)
         Need Immediate Help?
                     - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                        | 512-471- 3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
                     - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
                        cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.


But, when? WHEN?!​ ​(subject to change)
R, 8/29  - Welcome: Syllabus, Introductions, Success plan, etc.
T, 9/3   - Bring your books to discuss. Choose first and Media Partnership Projects (campaign 3)
R, 9/5   - Bring your books to discuss. Choose first and Media Partnership Projects (campaign 3)
T, 9/10  - Project 1
R, 9/12  - Project 1
T, 9/17  - Project 1. Choose Project 2
R, 9/19  - Project 1. Choose Project 2
T, 9/24  - Project 2
R, 9/26  - Project 2
T, 10/1  - Project 2
R, 10/3  - Project 2
M, 10,7 -  Receive campaign 3 briefs and insights from partnered teams offline.
T, 10/8 -  Either Project
R, 10/10 - Either Project
T, 10/15 - Midterm Reviews
R, 10/17 - Midterm Reviews
T, 10/22 - Present Project 3 (Team offline discussions and class workshoping)
R, 10/24 - Present Project 3 (Team offline discussions and class workshoping)
T, 10/29 - Project 3 - Creative Internal - Choose Project 4
R, 10/31 - Project 3 - Creative Internal - Choose Project 4
T, 11/5  - Project 3 - Creative internal
R, 11/7  - Project 3 - ​Combined teams present to entire classes (Extended class time, TBD)
T, 11/12 - Project 4
R, 11/14 - Project 4
T, 11/19 - Any Project
R, 11/21 - Thanksgiving Holiday
T, 11/26 - Any Project
R, 11/28 - Thanksgiving Holiday
T, 12/3  - Any Project
R, 12/5  - Any Project
T, 12/10 - Any Project
R, 12/12   Final Critique
           8:00am -             Doors open and setup.
           8:30am -             Doors close. You’re there are you don’t participate.
           9:00am -             Tables finished. You leave.
           12:00pm -            Doors reopen. Late students do not advance.
