                  THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:              SW 360K/SW 395K         Instructor:        Dr. Nick Winges-Yanez
 Unique Number:              87555/87695             Email:             nwingesyanez@utexas.edu
 Semester:                   Summer 2020             Office:            3.XXX
 Meeting Time/Place:         Online                  Office Phone:      512-232-0744
 Office Hours:               Tuesdays, 9-11am        Cell Phone:        512-766-6415 (Google
 Or by appt.                                                            Voice: voice, text)
                                    Spirituality & Disability
I.       STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
In this course, we will review the intersection of spirituality and disability and the complex
historical influences that impact discussions of disability in relationship to religion. We will
analyze three major world religions and some ways they conceptualize disability. This course
will explore the social justice issues surrounding disability and spirituality using the perspective
of social work values and ethics to guide learning. Particular attention will be given to the
concepts of diversity and inclusion.
II.      STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Learning objectives for this course are as follows:
    •    Demonstrate understanding of how religion has played an integral role in defining
         society’s understanding of disability.
    •    Identify how disability is defined and conceptualized within three of the world’s
         major religions: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
    •    Demonstrate understanding of the social justice issues surrounding religion and
         disability.
    •    Demonstrate understanding, affirmation, and respect for persons and their unique
         experience from different backgrounds, including age, gender, race, ethnicity,
         culture, class, religious belief or spirituality, family structure, sexual orientation,
         physical or mental ability, national origin, or other issues of diversity related to
         disability and spirituality.
    •    Demonstrate understanding of the complexity of disability, spirituality (defined via
         religion) and intersectionality.
    •    Apply information from this course to your own discipline or personal life.
III.     TEACHING METHODS
This class is entirely online.
                                                                                                     1


In order for this course to succeed, we must all make a commitment to honoring the diversity of
the human experience and remaining open to the exploration of this diversity. As part of our
commitment to cultivating this kind of environment, we bring the following assumptions to the
course:
    ● Students and professors both bring valuable experience, knowledge, and insights, and our
        learning this semester will be a collective effort.
    ● We all have areas of knowledge and mastery. Likewise, we all have gaps. Education is
        the process of filling these gaps, sharing knowledge, and illuminating new insights,
        connections, and questions.
    ● Everyone has the right to voice. We ask that you treat one another professionally, but
        encourage you all to ask questions, interrogate assumptions, and share your knowledge.
    ● Critical feedback and evaluation are constructive tools for growth and improvement.
        Throughout this class, you will be pushed to think deeply and critically about course
        materials, and to question your assumptions. This is all part of the learning process.
    ● It is accepted as a given in this course that discrimination, oppression, and
        marginalization are part of our society. This includes ableism, sexism, racism, classism,
        homophobia, transphobia, and other forms of intolerance. We will not tolerate their
        expression (in any form) in this course. We will, however, invite these issues into our
        dialogue for critique and exploration.
    (excerpted from Dr. Ben Anderson-Nathe)
IV.     REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
Textbook:
• Brodd et al., Invitation to World Religions, 3rd edition (available online and at the bookstore)
All other readings and materials will be provided to students in Canvas.
V.      COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Critical Thinking: Disability studies is the study of how disability interacts with society,
economics, history, politics, and other areas. Disability as an identity and an experience is
integral to any discussion of -isms (eg. Racism, heterosexism, classism, etc.). I do not want any
work in this course to be busy work. My goal is for students to unpack preconceived notions,
biases, and unlearn a lot of misinformation AND THEN figure out how to apply this new
information or way of thinking to life; this application can mean professionally or personally or
both.
To This End: UNGRADING. What is this? Grading every student on a Universal Standard
does not work and is contrary to Critical Disability Studies. Every student engages with material
differently. The multidimensional experience of learning requires not a standard rubric, but a
discussion – but how to do this? Well, I will give students some assignments during the first
couple of weeks and provide a very general rubric of what I’m looking for. Then, students will
begin to assess themselves. For each assignment, I will provide a lot of feedback versus a grade.
Why? Because generally, once students see their grade, they abandon the feedback part – but the
feedback is the most important part!
I expect students to engage a lot with each other through Slack and Canvas. From these
interactions and discussions, I will have each student write up a processing paper that discusses
                                                                                                   2


what this provided you and how you engaged with the material and your peers. These papers
will be due every two weeks.
At the end of the course, you will write up a paper, do a podcast, create a video – create a final
product that discusses what you got out of this course and how you can take this material with
you in the future – whether it be the actual material OR how to talk with someone about a very
delicate subject (like disability, religion, politics). Each student, in this paper, will also provide
the grade they believe they should get based on their interaction with the course*.
*I reserve the right to change any grade a student gives themselves. Students may feel
uncomfortable with this process, so this is why I am the backup.
Lesson Assignments: Students will complete all readings or other assigned materials (including
videos or additional topical research) for each lesson. In addition, students will complete
assignments to demonstrate their understanding of these readings and course materials. Details
will be provided each lesson so that these activities can best address the topics at hand.
•   Slack: SLACK
    https://join.slack.com/t/spiritualitya-fez3010/shared_invite/zt-eql8eak0-
    8FgNG7NdSMQalWQ3TMLeKA
You will need to join Slack (app) to have additional group discussions; these discussions are in
addition to your group work and self-assessments.
Interact with classmates on Slack for each lesson (in the channels section on the left side of
homepage). Discuss the materials, what came up for you, questions, thoughts. I expect students
to engage throughout the module (2 weeks) with at least 4-5 posts that are meaningful; i.e., not
adding one-word responses, or “I agree/disagree”, or “great post”, etc. You can also add various
media here to get your point across or engage other students. I ask that you maintain the framing
from above (1).
•   Discussion Boards: This is where students will be in smaller groups to answer a specific
    prompt or question related to lesson materials.
             o Your post must be at least 2 paragraphs AND add something new to the
                 discussion. Alternately, students can post an audio/video that is at least two
                 minutes long.
             o You must respond to at least one other student (if you are the first to post,
                 ask some questions of your peers regarding the topic). This can also be an
                 audio/video.
             o These discussion posts substitute in-class discussions. Respond to one
                 another, comment, and respectfully and thoughtfully counterpoint. I do read
                 all posts. At times, I will respond and comment as well. However, I try not to
                 interrupt the flow of the conversation between students.
    •   Reflection Product: At the end of each module, students will write a paper or create
        a video reflecting on the materials AND assignments from the module. What was
        new? What was surprising? What was uncomfortable? How was the group
                                                                                                       3


        interaction? At the end of each paper/video, tell me what grade you think you
        earned for that module.
    •   Grad Students Only: Grad students will have a separate group discussion in addition
        to the other assignments with different resources to reflect on.
    •   Final Project: Each student will write up a paper, create a podcast, create a video –
        a product that you create about your overall takeaways from this course, the
        learning process, the self-assessment process, and how to apply the material/skills
        gained from this class to your profession or your personal life (if you are not yet
        sure of your profession).
        Questions to consider:
    1. What was most useful in this class?
    2. What was the process of ungrading like?
    3. How do you feel about engaging in discussions about disability/spirituality with
        others?
    4. What is something you learned? What surprised you?
    5. How is this material useful to you?
    6. REQUIRED – what grade do you give yourself and why?
EXTRA CREDIT: An extra 2 points (to be attributed to Lesson Assignments) are possible for
completing the TCDS survey posted at the beginning and end of the semester in the
announcement section of Canvas.
There will be no exams for this class. Students will demonstrate their understanding of the
materials and proficiency in the course learning objectives through lesson assignments. I will
often ask you to synthesize information from previous lessons in order to build upon what
you’ve already learned.
All due dates will be 11:59pm Wednesday evenings.
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and Above             A
        90.0 to 93.999             A-
        87.0 to 89.999             B+
        84.0 to 86.999             B
        80.0 to 83.999             B-
        77.0 to 79.999             C+
        74.0 to 76.999             C
        70.0 to 73.999             C-
        67.0 to 69.999             D+
        64.0 to 66.999             D
        60.0 to 63.999             D-
        Below 60.0                 F
                                                                                               4


VII. CLASS POLICIES
Late Work: Whenever possible, contact the professor in advance of any anticipated late work.
Discussion posts can only occur during the week assigned since class interaction is part of the
grade.
Class Participation: Students are expected to participate in any required activities or assignments.
Failure to do so will have a negative impact on one’s grade. Since this is an online course,
student participation will be assessed via assignments, online discussions, and interactions on
Slack.
Behavior Expectations: All students are expected to carry themselves in a respectful and
professional manner.
Communication: Students are encouraged to contact the professor with any questions or
concerns. Email will be the primary form of communication, and the professor will respond to
emails received on weekdays (Monday-Friday) within 36 hours.
Grades: Grades received are final and are not subject to negotiation. An extra 2 points are
possible for the assignments grade by completing both surveys (beginning and end of semester)
for TCDS (these will be in announcements).
The professor reserves the right to make changes to course readings, assignments, and due dates
detailed in this syllabus.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University
of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to
the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed
and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations no later
than       five    business      days       before      an     exam.      For     more     information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The
professor expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on
time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We
expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. This
atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
                                                                                                      5


heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged
to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’
participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for communicating
clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may contact a service
provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online
at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY             ON          SOCIAL           MEDIA             AND          PROFESSIONAL
COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are not private. Even when open only to
approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the general
membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such forums, please assume
that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented
on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to
professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms of
electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social
worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings
at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could
jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material
should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might
lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally,
students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and
professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of
Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the
classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
                                                                                                       6


enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action
being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific,
express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and
an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing
includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing
those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies,
clients, and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on
educational supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and
Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the
educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken
according to the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections
3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO
STUDENTS. Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore,
students are responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-
mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum
twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be
time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972, the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that
is free from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
                                                                                                      7


here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present
some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's
responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or
community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about
their behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else,
students may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This
service is provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin
campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
·      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
·      If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
of class.
·      In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
·      Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
  Date               Topic                 Assignment Due               Readings, etc.
                                          (Every Wednesday
                                             by 11:59pm)
                                              Due 6/10:             •   Lecture
  6/04       Lesson 1: Introduction          Privilege Pie          •   Syllabus
                                            Getting to Know         •   Bennett, J.M. &
                                                  you                   Volpe, M.A. (2018).
                                                                        Models of Disability
                                           Canvas Discussion            from Religious
                                                                        Tradition
                                                                    •   “Special needs” is an
                                                                        ineffective
                                                                        euphemism
                                                                    •   APA Language
                                                                                                    8


                                                     • Clare, E. Excerpt on
                                                       Privilege
                                      Due: 6/17      • Lecture
6/11  Lesson 1: Introduction to    Slack discussion  • Invitation to World
             Disability                                Religions p. 8-21
     Introduction to Spirituality Canvas Discussion  • Harvard Religious
                                                       Literacy Project,
                                    *Grad Student      “Four Principles,”
                                  Canvas Discussion  • Disability
                                                       (Keywords to
                                                       Disability Studies)
                                                       pp. 5-11
                                                     • Crip (Keywords to
                                                       Disability Studies)
                                                       pp.46-48
                                                     • Disability Justice
                                                     • Lecture
6/18   Lesson 2: Christianity          Due 6/24      • Harvard Religious
                                   Slack Discussion    Literacy Project,
                                                       “Christianity”
                                  Canvas Discussion  • Invitation to World
                                                       Religions:
                                    *Grad Student      Christianity pp.
                                  Canvas Discussion    419-477
                                                     • Tillotson, N., Short,
                                                       M., Ollerton, J.,
                                                       Hearn, C., &
                                                       Sawatzky, B.
                                                       (2017). Faith
                                                       matters: From a
                                                       disability lens.
                                                     • Lecture
6/25  Lesson 2: Christianity and       Due 7/01      • Gayes, D. (2012).
             Disability            Slack Discussion    No beauty or truth
                                                       excluded
                                  Canvas Discussion  • Dingle, S. (2017).
                                                       This is why
                                    *Grad Student      disabled people
                                  Canvas Discussion    were so devastated
                                                       by Christian silence
                                  Reflection product   on health care
                                                                             9


                                                 •   Cole, A. (2017).
                                                     Seeing adversity
                                                     from the back of a
                                                     sanctuary.
                                                 •   Liberation,
                                                     Inclusion, and
                                                     Justice: A Faith
                                                     Response to
                                                     Persons with
                                                     Disabilities
                                              Grad Only: Trans/Crip
                                              Religion
                                                 •   Lecture
7/02   Lesson 3: Judaism        Due 7/08         •   Invitation to world
                            Slack discussion         religions: Judaism
                                                     (pp. 361-417)
                           Canvas Discussion     •   Harvard Religious
                                                     Literacy Project
                             *Grad Student           video: Judaism
                           Canvas Discussion
                                                 •   Lecture
7/09 Lesson 3: Judaism and      Due 7/15         •   Imhoff, S. (2017).
           Disability       Slack Discussion         Why disability
                                                     studies needs to
                           Canvas Discussion         take religion
                                                     seriously.
                             *Grad Student       •   Jones, M. (2007).
                           Canvas Discussion         Judaism, theology
                                                     and the human
                           Reflection product        rights of people
                                                     with disabilities
                                                 •   Disability Visibility
                                                     Podcast
                                              Grad Only: Video on
                                              Judaism, Disability Justice
                                                 •   Lecture
7/16    Lesson 4: Islam         Due 7/22         •   Invitation to world
                            Slack discussion         religions :Islam (pp.
                                                     479-535)
                           Canvas Discussion
                                                                           10


                                     *Grad Student       •    Harvard Religious
                                   Canvas Discussion          Literacy Project
                                                              video: Islam
                                                         •    Ibrahim, I. & Ismail,
                                                              M.F. (2018).
                                                              Muslims with
                                                              disabilities:
                                                              Psychosocial
                                                              reforms from an
                                                              Islamic perspective
                                                         •    Lecture
 7/23                                   Due 7/29         •    Bazna, M.S. &
          Lesson 4: Islam and                                 Hatab, T.A. (2008).
               Disability           Slack Discussion          Disability in the
                                                              Qu’ran
                                   Canvas Discussion
                                                         •    Al-Aoufi, H., Al-
                                     *Grad Student            Zyoud, N., &
                                   Canvas Discussion          Shahminan, N.
                                                              (2012). Islam and
                                   Reflection product         the cultural
                                                              conceptualization
                                                              of disability.
                                                         •    Disability Visibility
                                                              Blog Post
                                                      Grad Only Disability
                                                      Visibility Podcast
                                  Due 7/31
 7/30         Final week          Final Project
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY (not complete)
Adams, B. Reiss, and D. Serlin (Eds.) (2015) Keywords for disability studies. New
      York, NY: New York University Press.
Al-Aoufi, H., Al-Zyoud, N., & Shahminan, N. (2012). Islam and the cultural
      conceptualization of disability. International Journal of Adolescence and
      Youth, 17(4), pp. 205-219.
                                                                                    11


Brodd, J., Little, L., Nystrom, B., Platzner, R., Shek, R., & Stiles, E. (2019).
         Invitation to world religions (3rd ed.). Oxford University Press.
Cole, A. (2017). Seeing adversity from the back of a sanctuary. PD Wise.
https://pdwise.com/stories/seeing-adversity-from-the-back-of-a-sanctuary/
Imhoff, S. (2017). Why disability studies needs to take religion seriously.
Lewis, V. A. (2015). Crip. Disability. In R. Adams, B. Reiss, and D. Serlin (Eds.)
         Keywords for disability studies (pp. 46-48). New York, NY: New York
         University Press.
Watts Belser, J. (2016). Judaism and disability. In D.Y. Schumm & M. Stoltzfus
         (Eds.) Disability and world religions: An introduction (pp. 93-114). Baylor
         University Press.
                                                                                    12
