ANT 391: Research Design & Grant Writing (31820)
Jason Cons & Courtney Handman
Thursdays 3-6pm, WCP 5.118
  Jason Cons                                            Courtney Handman
  WCP 5.138, x23832                                     WCP 4.124, x10059
  jasoncons@utexas.edu                                  chandman@austin.utexas.edu
  Office hours: F 10-12 or by appointment               Office hours: M 9-10a, W 1:30-2:30p or by
                                                        appointment
Course Description
This course is designed to prepare graduate students for a range of professional activities including:
developing research questions and research methods for dissertation research, writing grants to secure
funding for fieldwork, developing publications, and more. While it is specifically focused on ethnographic
work for students in sociocultural and linguistic anthropology, it will also provide background for
interested students working in other subfields and disciplines.
Course Assignments
This course will be a mix of standard seminar discussions and peer workshop discussions, and the
structure of the assignments reflects this. During many weeks, you will need to do two things prior to
class: (1) read and think carefully about the assigned texts in preparation for a productive seminar
discussion; and (2) prepare or submit a written assignment of some sort. Many of these writing
assignments are oriented around building up elements of a grant proposal or research paper for
publication. In most cases, these assignments will be submitted via the course canvas site for comments
from us. A number of other assignments (due Feb 27 and Mar 5) are meant to give you some experience
with various research methods. These will also be turned in via canvas for comments. Finally, for some
assignments (due Jan 30 and Feb 20) we ask that you prepare reverse outlines that you will present in
small groups. You do not have to turn these in (but you need to do them nonetheless!). During the final
weeks of the class, we will peer workshop full drafts of whatever document you have been working on
over the semester.
Your grade is based on your participation in class discussions, your written assignments, and your
responsiveness to comments and criticisms.
January 23: Introduction
Read:
Michael Watts. 2001. “The Holy Grail: In Pursuit of the Dissertation Proposal.” Mimeo
Assignment for Next Week: Reverse outline the second proposal assigned to you
January 30: Forms of the Business: The Dissertation Proposal Grant
Read:
     • SSRC. ND. “On the Art of Writing Proposals: Some Candid Suggestions for Applicants to the Social
         Science Research Council Competitions.”
     • William Cronon. “Learning to Do Historical Research: A Primer on How to Frame a Researchable
         Question.” https://www.williamcronon.net/researching/questions.htm
                                                                                                          1


    •   Two Proposals to be distributed in class
Assignment for Next Week: Write a draft of your research question(s).
February 6: Asking a Question (Differently): Theory and Research 1
Read:
    • Bruno Latour. 1996. “Preface” and “Introduction.” Aramis, or, The Love of Technology. Harvard
        University Press.
    • Timothy Mitchell. 2002. “Can the Mosquito Speak?” Rule of Experts: Egypt, Techno-Politics,
        Modernity. University of California Press.
    • Ian Hacking. 2006. “Making Up People.” London Review of Books. 28(16, August).
    • Alexi Yurchak. 2015. “Bodies of Lenin: The Hidden Science of Communist Sovereignty.”
        Representations. 129.
Assignment for Next Week: Write the first page of your grant application
February 13: Defining/Refining Your Paradox: Theory and Research 2
Read:
    • Christian Lund. 2014. “Of What Is This a Case?: Analytic Movements in Qualitative Social Science
        Research.” Human Organization. 73(3).
    • Courtney Handman. 2017. “Walking Like a Christian: Roads, Translation, and Gendered Bodies as
        Religious Infrastructure in Papua New Guinea.” American Ethnologist. 44(2).
    • Jason Cons. 2020. “Delta Temporalities: Choked and Tangled Futures in the Sundarbans.” Ethnos.
Assignment for Next Week: Identify an article that you think exemplifies a good scholarly engagement.
Reverse outline it and be prepared to give a brief presentation on its form.
February 20: Forms of the Business: The Peer Reviewed Journal Article
Read:
    • Niko Besnier and Pablo Morales. 2018. “Tell the Story: How to Write for American Ethnologist.
        American Ethnologist. 45(2)
    • Tom Boellstorff. 2008. “How to Get an Article Accepted in American Anthropologist (or
        Anywhere).” American Anthropologist. 110(3).
    • Matthew Engelke. 2004. “Text and Performance in an African Church: The Book, ‘Life and
        Direct’”. American Ethnologist. 31(1).
    • Radhika Govindrajan. 2015. “The Goat Who Died for the Family: Animal Sacrifice and Interspecies
        Kinship in India’s Central Himalayas.” American Ethnologist. 42(3).
Assignment for next week: Conduct a two-hour ethnographic observation of a site somewhere in/around
Austin. Write up and post your fieldnotes.
February 27: Methods: Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes
Read:
    • James Clifford. 1990. “Notes on (Field)notes.” Fieldnotes: The Making of Anthropology. Cornell
        University Press.
    • Timothy Pachirat. “Hidden in Plain Sight” and “Kill Floor.” Every 12 Seconds: Industrialized
        Slaughter and the Politics of Sight. Yale University Press.
                                                                                                       2


    •    Erving Goffman. 1956. “Introduction.” The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life. University of
         Edinburgh Press.
Strongly Recommended:
    • Roger Sanjek. “A Vocabulary for Fieldnotes.” Fieldnotes: The Making of Anthropology. Cornell
         University Press.
    • Robert Emerson et al. 2011. “Fieldnotes in Ethnographic Research” and “In the Field:
         Participation, Observing, and Jotting Notes.” Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes. University of
         Chicago Press.
Assignment for next week: Conduct a 30-minute interview with someone. Before you begin, take 5
minutes to jot down the expected outcomes of the interview – what possible research question could this
interview help you answer? Record and transcribe the interview. Reflect back on the interview and the
questions you brainstormed in class last week. What would you change?
March 5: Methods: Conducting an Interview
Read:
    • Susan Harding. 2000. “Speaking is Believing.” The Book of Jerry Falwell: Fundamentalist Language
         and Politics. Princeton University Press.
    • Adam Reed. 2003. Papua New Guinea’s Last Place: Experiences of Constraint in a Postcolonial
         Prison. Berghahn Books.
Assignment for next week: Complete the methods section of your proposal.
March 12: Methods: Historical and Archival Research
Read:
    • Ann Stoler. 2002. “Colonial Archives and the Arts of Governance.” Archival Science. 2
    • Carlo Ginzburg. 1980. “Prefaces to the English and Italian Edition. The Cheese and the Worms: The
         Cosmos of a Sixteenth Century Miller. Johns Hopkins University Press.
    • Guha, Ranajit. 1994. Prose of Counter-insurgency. Culture/Power/History: A Reader in
         Contemporary Social Theory, pp.336-71.
    • Shannon Lee Dawdy. “Clockpunk Anthropology and the Ruins of Modernity.” Current
         Anthropology. 51(6).
Assignment for next week: No formal assignment. Spring break!
March 26: Methods: Ethics and Positionality
Read:
    • Donna Haraway. 1988. “Situated Knowledges: The Science Question in Feminism and the
         Privilege of Partial Perspective.” Feminist Studies. 14(3).
    • Margery Wolf. 1992. A Thrice-Told Tale: Feminism, Postmodernism, and Ethnographic
         Responsibility. Stanford University Press.
    • Chakrabarty, D., 1992. Postcoloniality and the artifice of history: who speaks for “Indian” pasts?
         Representations 37, pp.1-26.
Assignment for next week: write a draft of your lit review
April 2: Publication and Peer Review
Read:
                                                                                                         3


    •    Jason Cons. “Publication Dossier for ‘Staging Climate Security’”
April 9: Peer Presentation/Review and Writing an Abstract
Reading and assignment:
    • Several students will submit full drafts of their grant proposal or research paper to the canvas site
         no later than 4 days before the class. The other students will read these and be prepared to
         discuss these drafts in class. Feel free to provide your fellow students with written comments in
         addition to anything you suggest to them in class.
April 16: Peer Presentation/Review and Working with Research Assistants
Reading and assignment:
    • Several students will submit full drafts of their grant proposal or research paper to the canvas site
         no later than 4 days before the class. The other students will read these and be prepared to
         discuss these drafts in class. Feel free to provide your fellow students with written comments in
         addition to anything you suggest to them in class.
April 23: Peer Presentation/Review and Conference Presentations
Reading and assignment:
    • Several students will submit full drafts of their grant proposal or research paper to the canvas site
         no later than 4 days before the class. The other students will read these and be prepared to
         discuss these drafts in class. Feel free to provide your fellow students with written comments in
         addition to anything you suggest to them in class.
April 30: Peer Presentation/Review
Reading and assignment:
    • Several students will submit full drafts of their grant proposal or research paper to the canvas site
         no later than 4 days before the class. The other students will read these and be prepared to
         discuss these drafts in class. Feel free to provide your fellow students with written comments in
         addition to anything you suggest to them in class.
May 7: Peer Presentation/Review and Course Conclusion
Reading and assignment:
    • Several students will submit full drafts of their grant proposal or research paper to the canvas site
         no later than 4 days before the class. The other students will read these and be prepared to
         discuss these drafts in class. Feel free to provide your fellow students with written comments in
         addition to anything you suggest to them in class.
Course Policies
Use of Canvas: I use Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu) to distribute course materials, to communicate, to
post grades, and to submit assignments. Rely on this site for the most up-to-date information about the
course (not the printed syllabus). You can find support at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through
Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., if you are not familiar with it.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
                                                                                                           4


work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Student Accommodations: Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     •    Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
     •    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     •    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity: Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
     “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
     University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is
assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is
encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements
Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further
investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence,
and stalking committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also
requires reporting incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively
known as Title IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such
incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain confidentiality,
please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and
Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these services
for any needed support and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
University Resources for Students:
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning,
use these to help you succeed in your classes
The Sanger Learning Center: Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use
the Sanger Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome
                                                                                                          5


to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
The University Writing Center: The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with
writing for any UT student, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop
strategies to improve their writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’
resourcefulness and self-reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center: The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides
counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life
goals and enhance their personal growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS: Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries: Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas: Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t
feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
      • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
          Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
          week of class.
      • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
          enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
          University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
      • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
          procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Guns: Pursuant to SB11
(http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/84R/billtext/pdf/SB00011F.pdf) and UT- Austin
                                                                                                              6


Campus Carry Policy (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/; https://www.policies.utexas.edu/
policies/campus-concealed-carry), persons with a current legally valid Concealed Carry
License may carry a concealed legal handgun on or about their person in this class. Please
take note of several provisions:
1. All legal provisions associated with concealed carry on campus must be followed without fail at all
times. In addition to SB11 and UT-Austin Campus Carry policy, please review at least the 84 pages of
applicable law curated by TX DPS (http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/InternetForms/Forms/CHL-16.pdf).
Please take special note of two of the many legal provisions:
        a. Holstering requirements: “A license holder who carries a handgun on campus must carry it in a
        holster that completely covers the trigger and entire trigger guard area. The holster must have
        sufficient tension or grip on the handgun to retain it in the holster even when subjected to
        unexpected jostling” (UT-Austin HOP 8-1060, VII-A-2).
        b. “On or about your person means a person licensed to carry a handgun must carry a handgun in a
        manner that the handgun is close enough to the license holder that he or she can reach it without
        materially changing position” at all times (UT-Austin HOP 8-1060, IV).
2. A license holder may not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any
university driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area. (SB11,
Section 4 and Texas Penal Code, Section 46.035(a-1)). Violation is a Class A misdemeanor or a third
degree felony.
If any legal requirement is violated at any moment, the person who witnesses the violation should leave
the classroom and call 911 immediately without waiting to ask me for permission. Police will respond.
This will disrupt the class and may create a dangerous situation for all of us. Violations may result in
criminal penalties and sanction by the university.
                                                                                                           7
