ACC 356                                                                                       Fall 2019
                     Financial Accounting Concepts and Research
                                        ACC 356 – Fall 2019
Professor:      Sara Toynbee, PhD
Office:         CBA 4M.250                                             Telephone: 512-471-9474
E-Mail:         sara.toynbee@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesday 2.30-3.30pm, Thursday 8.15-9.15am, and other times by appointment.
Class Hours: 02455: T/Th 9.30-11.00am in UTC 1.118
                02460: T/Th 11.00am-12.30pm in UTC 1.118
                02465: T/Th 12.30-2.00pm in UTC 1.118
Teaching Assistants: Rui Silva and Alyssa Sternadel
                        TA Contact Information and Office Hours will be posted on Canvas
Course Summary and Objectives
ACC 356 is the first in a three-course sequence of upper division/graduate financial accounting courses
in the integrated MPA program. The main objective of this course is to give you a foundation in
accounting concepts that prepares you for the two following financial accounting courses, which cover
more advanced accounting topics (380K.1 and 380K.2).
The course is divided into three parts. The first part of the course introduces the Financial Accounting
Standards Board’s (FASB) Conceptual Framework. We begin by understanding the objective of
financial reporting and the concepts the FASB use to set accounting standards for U.S. entities. We
will cover the definition and recognition of financial statement elements (i.e., assets, liabilities,
equity, revenues, expenses). We will also explore how these elements are initially and subsequently
measured and presented in financial statements.
In the second part of the course, we will study a select number of actual accounting standards under
US GAAP, seeing how standard setters have addressed various issues in setting accounting standards.
These standards reflect some important and controversial areas in accounting.
The last part of the course brings together the first two parts, as well as moves beyond financial
statements to evaluate the broader information environment of US public companies. We will also see
the importance of the Conceptual Framework in dealing with current accounting standard issues.
Almost all controversial issues in financial accounting can be reduced to disputes over recognition and
measurement. After completing this class, you will leave with a framework for thinking about
accounting that can be used to analyze virtually any financial reporting issue.
Required Course Materials
1. Course Notes – Each week we will post class notes to Canvas that contain reading assignments,
    technical notes, and practice questions that require you to answer questions from the readings as
    well as apply this material. These notes will be an invaluable resource for the course.
2. Financial calculator – A calculator with time value of money capabilities is required.
There is no expensive textbook required!
                                                     -1-


ACC 356                                                                                      Fall 2019
The course notes and other materials are the intellectual property of the professors teaching this course
and are given to you, for free, on an individual basis only. You may not, in anyway, share, distribute or
post electronic, hardcopy or other versions of the class materials with other people or on websites or
other avenues of social media without explicit permission from the professor. Posting or sharing
materials, or even snippets of materials, will be considered a violation of our University’s Academic
Policies for all parties involved.
Recording Class
Recording all or any part of class without explicit written permission from the professor is strictly
prohibited. Violations will constitute a violation of the academic integrity policies of our University
and may lead to a failing grade in this class and legal prosecution. If you need to record the class,
please email me to seek permission at least a week in advance and include details about the date,
topics, individuals involved, and a clear explanation of the reasons for this need.
Performance Evaluation
Course grades are determined by the following assessments.
                      Component                                               Percent
                      Class Participation, Quizzes, and Homework Questions     20.0%
                      Test 1                                                   25.0%
                      Test 2                                                   25.0%
                      Accounting case                                          15.0%
                      Reporting case                                           15.0%
                        Total                                                 100.0%
Class Participation – Attendance is required. Students who miss more than two classes will likely get
lower than a B. As your absence can detract from the learning experience of others, if you will miss
part of or a whole class, please post to our Discussion Board before (or after) class when this occurs.
The post can include an apology to your classmates, if sincere, and can include whatever information
you believe is both personally and professionally prudent. If, for any reason, you are uncomfortable
posting the circumstance to the class, you may email me in private. The benefits of attending class
should be obvious; however, in the event that they are not, the following information might be useful:
based on prior year data, students who missed more than a few classes received a B- or lower. That is,
whether or not there is an attendance requirement, missing 2 or more classes is the perfect path for
students looking to maintain a GPA well below 3.0.
This small portion of the grade represents your contributions to the professional learning environment
inside the classroom. A student who asks good questions; proposes wrong, but relevant, answers;
provides correct responses; or offers points related to the class discussion on a consistent basis, such as
once a class, and refrains from missing class or disruptive behavior will score well on this component.
In addition, good questions, answers or relevant points posted to the Discussion Board will be
considered in this component of the grade, but the main emphasis is on classroom participation.
Quizzes – In addition, to give you an incentive to complete the assigned readings and pay attention to
the discussions in each session, numerous short quizzes will be given on an unannounced basis
throughout the course. Quiz material will cover the basic concepts from these readings and should not
be used as a guide for the tests. In-class quizzes may occur at the beginning of class, so arrive on time
                                                        -2-


ACC 356                                                                                       Fall 2019
if you want to take the quiz. No makeup quizzes will be given, but I will consider allowing all
students to drop a quiz at the end of the semester. You must attend your official section to get credit for
a quiz.
Homework Questions – We will also have several homework questions throughout the semester. The
due dates for these assignments will be announced in class and on Canvas. Any written documents
should be professional by all normal standards and will be analyzed with plagiarism software. Each
homework problem set may have different requirements so it is important you read the instructions on
each assignment clearly.
Some homework questions will be due before class to encourage you to think about the issues we will
discuss in class the next day. Your grade for the homework problems that are due before class will be
based on the completeness, consistency, and thoughtfulness of your responses. These problems will
require you to think about issues that may not have a clear answer.
Other homework questions will require to apply the material learned in class to a fact set, and thus will
be due after class. As you might reasonably expect, the grading benchmark for these questions is much
higher.
Tests – There will be two tests. The dates and times are provided in the course schedule provided
within the syllabus. These dates are set and will not change, except if the University officially closes
on one of these days (which is an extremely unlikely event). You must notify me of any University of
Texas at Austin exam or class conflicts before Friday, September 6th. Work, club, organization,
interviews or other conflicts are not sufficient reasons to miss the regularly scheduled test. You are
required by the MPA program to tell potential employers that they will need to reschedule dinners or
interviews around tests and inform the program of any issues.
Cases – There will be two cases during the semester. The due dates are listed at the end of the syllabus.
These cases will involve some group work. To help reinforce concepts presented in the course, the case
will involve a degree of independent research on your part. Learning is doing, and thus you may have
to “dig” a little to answer the questions posed in the case assignments. No specific questions as to
the application of the material on the cases will be answered during office hours or via
email. Questions that clarify case questions may be posted on Canvas Discussion Board (questions
should not be emailed, but posted to ensure access is granted to all students). Your discussions and
conclusions for the case should be limited to your group members only. No late submissions will be
accepted.
Grading
We will use plus/minus grading (A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, etc.) for this class. Consistent with the MPA
Program GPA guidelines, we will strive for an average GPA across all ACC 356 students of 3.2-3.4.
To be clear, this is only a general guide and lower grades such as Cs, Ds, and Fs are possible for
underperformance and/or any academic integrity issues.
The final distribution of letter grades is determined at the end of the semester. This means that
numerical scores on specific assignments do not correspond to a particular letter grade prior to the end
of the semester. Final grades are determined by summing up all pieces, then ranking all students and
then following the class distribution. Some areas of the distribution may be very tight. This means that
it is mathematically unavoidable that some students with similar grades do not get the exact same final
letter grades. Ultimately, someone must fall at each “break point” that means that someone gets the
lowest of one grade (for example, the lowest A-) and someone else, with similar grades, gets the
highest of the next letter grade (for example, the highest B+). The class’s distribution dictates the
                                                     -3-


ACC 356                                                                                       Fall 2019
percentage of each of the letter grades. That is, you and your classmates’ performance, more than I,
determine your final letter grade.
Grading Questions or Appeals – If you feel a grading error exists on any of the above grade
components, you will have 72 hours from the date the grade is posted on Canvas to take such action
and have the matter resolved. After this time there will be no adjustments to your grade for any
reason whatsoever. Students may not ask for exclusive extra credit or grade changes at the end of the
semester. This is unprofessional and requesting specific treatment violates our University’s academic
goals. Moreover, challenging the grades, points, allocation or policies after the semester has begun is
unprofessional and may result in a lower final grade as it signifies a departure from the expectations of
the class. Constructive comments are warmly welcomed as long as they are made by the first day of
class.
Guidelines – A main benefit of being accepted into a top-ranked MPA program like ours is that you
are surrounded by excellent students. The fact that there are many top-quality students means it could
be harder to achieve the same grades as you did in high school, in your first years at UT or even in
your previous accounting classes, which are much easier than this one. This class offers a great
opportunity to focus on mastering the material and away from a myopic focus on a GPA. The reason
for this is that the knowledge will stick with you and assist you in your careers long after anyone cares
about your GPA. In addition, true mastery will enable you to perform well on tests without wasting
your time cramming. On this, here are some general guidelines on the grades in the class:
    A:
        •    An A student always reads the course packet and any conceptual statements or accounting
             standards before class. When reading, the student takes an active approach, summarizes the
             points and notes his or her comments. The A student discusses the reading with another
             classmate before class and works on both explaining the material and listening to the
             classmate’s explanation.
        •    The A student always comes to class prepared and both asks questions and provides
             answers as needed. The A student takes accountability for his or her learning, approaches
             learning like an adult and knows that active learning, including putting forth answers that
             he or she is not entirely sure of, is a great way to master the material.
        •    The A student always does the practice questions the day of or right after class. The student
             discusses these with another student and works on talking about the why behind his or her
             response. The student makes use the of the Discussion Board to address any questions that
             he or she has.
        •    The A student always completes any required assignments before they are due, offers
             constructive feedback in his or her Discussion Question pairs, and is a responsible team
             leader who works very well with others on the cases.
        •    An A student generally relaxes before the test, gets a good night of sleep as he or she knows
             that learning cannot occur at the last minute, but that EVERYTHING meaningful that
             humans have ever excelled at (whether sports, business, relationships, art, performance,
             music, hobbies, fitness, etc.) required a commitment over time. For example, the A student
             knows that ignoring the day-to-day and only cramming for a test is as silly as trying to do a
             marathon by never running until he or she runs 5 marathons two days before the big race.
             An A student completely understands that there is little to no relationship between
             cramming and solid performance in any class that involves real learning.
    B: A B student follows most of the steps noted above on most days, but occasionally misses.
                                                        -4-


ACC 356                                                                                      Fall 2019
    C: A C student only occasionally follows the steps above. Using historical data as a predictor,
    students who miss two or more classes should expect to receive a C or lower.
    D: A D student basically ignores these steps or is otherwise unprofessional and uninterested in the
    McCombs community or his or her learning.
Canvas and E-mail
Canvas. I will use Canvas to post important course materials, lecture notes, and announcements. You
can log on to Canvas at http://canvas.utexas.edu/. I will post the syllabus on Canvas. I will also post
solutions to practice questions for each class session. I will make course announcements periodically
through Canvas, so it is important that you have an active e-mail address with the University.
E-mail. I encourage you to communicate with me on personal matters by e-mail
(sara.toynbee@mccombs.utexas.edu). You are responsible for addressing any issues you have during
the semester. Non-personal questions must be posted on the Canvas Discussion Board.
Professional Conduct
The MPA program at Texas is one of the most highly regarded accounting programs in the country. In
order to preserve our reputation, our students must maintain a high standard of professionalism at all
times. Professional conduct, as it relates to this class, involves:
    1. Arriving to class on time and displaying your name cards every day. I will call on students to
        maximize engagement.
    2. Attending only the sections for which you are registered
    3. Preparing for class in advance
    4. Turning off and not using cell phones
    5. Not using laptops during class
    6. Keeping personal breaks during class to an absolute minimum
    7. Attending class to learn
    8. Refraining from side conversations or other disruptive behavior
    9. Being respectful toward your fellow peers and the McCombs Faculty
I expect you to behave professionally. In return, you can expect that the TAs and I will strive to
provide you with the best accounting education possible.
Research on classroom bias
By instructors:
Soraya Chemaly, Time, 12 February 2015
“The impact of unconscious teacher bias is long understood and well-documented. This new research
confirms decades of work done by Myra and David Sadker and Karen R. Zittleman. Through
thousands of hours of classroom observations, the Sadkers and Zittleman identified specific ways in
which implicit and stereotypical ideas about gender govern classroom dynamics. They, as others have,
found that teachers spend up to two thirds of their time talking to male students; they also are more
likely to interrupt girls but allow boys to talk over them.”
Katherine Taylor, New York Times, 8 September 2013:
“The country’s premier business training ground was trying to solve a seemingly intractable problem.
Year after year, women who had arrived with the same test scores and grades as men fell behind.
                                                      -5-


ACC 356                                                                                       Fall 2019
Attracting and retaining female professors was a losing battle; from 2006 to 2007, a third of the female
junior faculty left.”
By students:
Economist, 23 January 2016
“Teachers could also benefit from a bit more of the scrupulous attention paid on modern campuses to
sexual equality. Earlier analysis by Ben Schmidt of Northeastern University showed the that language
used to describe professors was heavily gender-dependent. Men were more likely than women to be
described as ‘intelligent’ or ‘funny’, but less likely to be described as ‘nice’ or ‘mean’.”
Economist, 23 September 2017 – Business School experiment
“…evaluations place female instructors an average of 37 slots below male ones. Students taught by
women gave lower ratings even to teaching materials that were the same for all course instructors…
[despite the fact that] female instructors added the same amount of value to students’ learnings as did
male instructors.… the bias was particularly pronounced in the case of junior instructors.”
Departmental Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities
of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the
department’s Policy Scholastic Dishonesty. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all of the
faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
observe all of the student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that Policy
Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial
Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the General Information Catalog to access
the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration
on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Application of Departmental Policy to this Course
One of the faculty responsibilities is “to communicate clearly in writing the instructions for each
assignment.” Following are the instructions for each type of assignment in this course. Any
instructions on the specific assignment take priority over what is listed below.
Quizzes – The quizzes are closed book and closed notes. The only materials that are permitted are
blank paper, pen or pencil, and a calculator (when necessary). Students are prohibited from using
words or formulas that are stored in programmable calculators without the express permission of the
instructor. Students who have taken a quiz are prohibited from discussing the quiz with other students.
This prohibition applies to any students in any sections of this course. Violation of this policy will be
treated as an act of scholastic dishonestly.
Homework Questions – Unless specified in the assignment instructions, homework questions can be
discussed with classmates or study partners. However, each student must turn in his/her original
answers and these should not be copy/pasted versions. I may call on you unexpectedly in class to
discuss or explain your responses, so simply copying answers from another student is not wise.
                                                      -6-


ACC 356                                                                                             Fall 2019
Tests – The tests are closed book and closed notes, although I may consider allowing a single A4 piece
of paper with handwritten notes to be used in the test. Students are prohibited from using words or
formulas that are stored in programmable calculators without the express permission of the instructor.
Students who have taken a test are prohibited from discussing the test with students who have not yet
taken the test. This prohibition applies to any students in any sections of this course. Violation of this
policy will be treated as an act of scholastic dishonestly.
Cases – The cases will involve group work and may include individual components also. Instructions
will be clearly stated within each case and its section. Individual parts must be completed individually.
For the parts of the project that are group submissions, you are allowed to consult with fellow group
members and NO ONE ELSE. Discussion of the material to classmates in other groups is prohibited.
Copying solutions from any source is not permitted nor is copying and then editing another’s work.
Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of scholastic dishonestly. [On a related note, I am
willing to discuss course material with you, but I will not directly apply that material to the cases for
you in or out of class. The whole point of these cases are for you to practice applying your knowledge
without my help.]
     Under no circumstances should you use any materials (course packets, notes, etc.)
     obtained from students who have already completed this course. Such usage will
     constitute scholastic dishonesty for both borrower and lender.
     Evidence of any act of scholastic dishonesty will be forwarded to the Dean of Students
     with a recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the course.
Additional Disclosures
 Website Privacy Disclosure required by the University: Password-protected class sites are available for
 all accredited courses taught at The University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types
 of information that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
 engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters are a
 component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must
 restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on
 restricting directory information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-
 01/app/appc09.html
 Privacy in Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that I will use
 a merged Canvas site for all sections of the course that I am teaching this semester. This will allow students
 in other sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However,
 they will not actually learn your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through
 Canvas. If you have any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your
 name from view of other students.
Religious Holy Day procedures: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
 Commitment to students with disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
 appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
 the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
 http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
                                                          -7-


ACC 356                                                                                           Fall 2019
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
• Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
    when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
    nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
    class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
• Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
    University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
• Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
    www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                        -8-


ACC 356                                                                        Fall 2019
  ACC 356 COURSE SCHEDULE AND ASSESSMENT DUE DATES
          Week                        Topic                         Assessments due
  Part I   1             Session 1 (8/29): Introduction
           2   Session 2 (9/3): Overview of financial reporting
               Session 3 (9/5): Objective of financial reporting
                         and qualitative characteristics
           3      Session 4 (9/10): Definition of assets and
                                    liabilities
                   Session 5 (9/12): Performance reporting
           4   Session 6 (9/17): Recognition and measurement
                        of financial statement elements
               Session 7 (9/19): Subsequent measurement and
                        financial statement articulation
           5   Session 8 (9/24): Subsequent measurement and
                              cash flow reporting
                     Session 9 (9/26): Catch up / Review         9/29: Part 1 of accounting
                                                                            case
           6          Session 10 (10/1): No class today            Test 1 (6.30-8.30pm)
           6     Session 11 (10/3): Test 1 review / Revenue
                     recognition – the basics of ASC 606
           7       Session 12 (10/8): Revenue recognition
                  Session 13 (10/10): Revenue recognition
           8      Session 14 (10/15): Revenue recognition
                  Session 15 (10/17): Revenue recognition
           9            Session 16 (10/22): Fair value
                  Session 17 (10/24): Investment securities
Part II
           10   Session 18 (10/29): Impairment of long-lived
                                      assets
                Session 19 (10/31): Restructuring obligations
           11   Session 20 (11/5): Research and development
                         and acquired intangible assets
                     Session 21 (11/7): Catch up / review        11/10: Part of accounting
                                                                            case
           12         Session 22 (11/12): No class today           Test 2 (6.30-8.30pm)
           12    Session 23 (11/14): Test 2 review / Beyond
                              financial statements
           13    Session 24 (11/19): Significant accounting
                                     policies
 Part III         Session 25 (11/21): Non-GAAP reporting
           14    Session 26 (11/26): Sustainability reporting
           15   Session 27 (12/3): Current accounting issues
                       Session 28 (12/5): Catch-up day              12/8: Reporting case
                                            -9-
