                                               ACC 310F
           Foundations of Accounting – Web-Based (02175)
                                            Spring 2020
Instructor            Gretchen Charrier
Email                 Gretchen.Charrier@mccombs.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants:
                      Ally Gamble allison.gamble@utexas.edu
                      Helen Yang leiyang@utexas.edu
Office Hours:         CBA 4.304 A
                      To be Announced on Canvas
       Post questions any time on the Discussions Forum on Canvas
A Discussions Forum is set up for each UNIT. Please post your questions to the forum related to the
Unit. Additionally, please provide the following information related to your question:
   • Lesson # and Title (example U2L1 Practice Exercise: Cost Estimation Using Account
       Classification); OR
   • Title of the Reading Materials (example Reading: Understanding Cost Structure)
Each forum provides an opportunity for students to post questions regarding course materials. You are also
encouraged to respond to other student's questions and help each other. I will monitor the discussion board
and will provide feedback.
Please do not post questions on the Discussions link relating to a UNIT QUIZ. Questions can be asked
about a unit quiz only after the due date of the unit quiz has passed for course. Questions about a Unit quiz
can be emailed to the course instructor or one of the course TA's (last name ending in A through L, your
TA contact is Ally Gamble at allison.gamble@utexas.edu and last name ending in M through Z, your TA
contact is Helen Yang at leiyang@utexas.edu). Please reference the Unit Quiz number and question
number in the email subject line.
                                                       1


                                              Course Materials
How to Access the Course Materials?
This is an entirely web-based course, and the course materials (readings, exercises, practice problems and
quizzes, etc.) have been embedded electronically within the UT Canvas learning management system. To
access the course materials on Canvas, students must pay for the course materials embedded on the
Canvas via a portal named as “Course Materials Fee” in “Modules” section on Canvas. Upon payment,
students will be able to access the course materials throughout the semester. No additional bookstore
fees/payments are required.
Course Materials Purchase Support: If you run into any problem paying for the course materials on the
Canvas site, you should contact execed@mccombs.utexas.edu for help or call at 512-471-5893. Note that
neither the instructor nor TAs will be able to address any questions about the purchase of the course
materials.
Computer set-up for remote proctoring of Final Exam (ProctorU):
 -    High speed Internet (.7 mb download and .3 mb upload)
 -    Web camera (built in or external) with microphone
 -    Laptop or desktop (smartphone/tablet insufficient)
 -    Government issued photo ID
      (UT student ID, driver’s license, passport, military ID)
                                           Flagged Course Statement:
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed to equip
you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly
encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
                                            Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                             Diversity and Inclusion
 It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course,
that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me
at any time with any concerns.
                                              Religious Holy Days
This is a flexible-paced course. Each student is responsible for managing her or his time to avoid conflicts
between coursework and religious holidays of individual relevance. Accordingly, assignment due dates will
not be modified for religious holidays.
                                                        2


                            Course Objectives, Description & Routine
Course Objectives: Upon successful completion of this course, each student will be able to:
     • Demonstrate an understanding of the role of accounting and its importance in making effective and
         informed business decisions
     • Demonstrate an understanding of debit and credit rules and the accounting cycle
     • Demonstrate an understanding of the main financial statements
     • Demonstrate an understanding of the basics of accrual accounting
     • Apply forecasted financial statements to a business plan in order to help secure funding for a
         business venture
     • Demonstrate an understanding of basic decisions that management must make to run an effective
         and successful business.
Course Description:
This course provides an introduction to financial and managerial accounting, with emphasis on the content,
interpretation, and uses of accounting reports. It discusses the determination and reporting of net income
and financial position, and the theories underlying business financial statements; and consideration of
managerial accounting topics designed to extend the student's knowledge to the planning and controlling of
the operations of the firm. There are no course prerequisites for this class. The course is taught as a web-
based course and conducted entirely through the Canvas course site. Accounting is a system of providing
quantitative information about a company's financial performance and position to enable interested parties
to make decisions. In this course we approach fundamental concepts in accounting from two key
perspectives:
1. "insiders" who are employees/managers who need to make informed decisions about running the
     company and
2. "outsiders", such as investors or lenders, who want to decide whether to invest in the company or
     whether to maintain or increase previous investments they have made.
The course materials consist of 13 units which must be completed in order. Each unit is made up of
lessons comprised of short videos in which we introduce important concepts in accounting followed by
other resources such as readings, slideshows and case studies that enable you to further explore each
topic.
                                            Course Communication
Primary Communication - Canvas
It is each student’s responsibility to keep up with the course communication on Canvas throughout of
semester. Please notice that under the default setting on your Canvas site, you will receive email
notifications of all announcements posted by the instructor. Please make sure that your Canvas email
notification switch is “on” so you do not miss any announcements about the course.
Communication through Email
The use of e-mail is required for the course, and your email address registered with the University will be
used for the course communication. Please make sure that you have access to your email address, and you
are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with both University-
related communications and with the course related communications. Please recognize that such
communications may be time-critical.
                                                        3


Course Routine:
                                           Date Unit              Due Date for
                                            Materials               All Unit
                                            Available  Date Unit   Materials
                                           (excluding    Quiz      (including
 Unit                   Topic              Unit Quiz)  Available   Unit Quiz)
   1    Identifying and Measuring Cost     January 21 January 29   January 31
        Benefits                              8am        8am          10pm
   2    Short-Horizon Decisions I          January 21 February 5   February 7
                                              8am        8am          10pm
   3    Short-Horizon Decisions II         January 21 February 12 February 21
                                              8am        8am          10pm
   4    Overview of Financial Accounting   January 21 February 26 February 28
                                              8am        8am          10pm
   5    The Recording Process              January 21   March 4      March 6
                                              8am        8am          10pm
   6    Adjusting Entries                  January 21  March 11     March 13
                                              8am        8am          10pm
   7    Completing the Accounting Cycle    January 21  March 11     March 27
                                              8am        8am          10pm
   8    Long-Term Assets & Liabilities     January 21   April 1      April 3
                                              8am        8am          10pm
   9    Cost Flows                         January 21   April 8      April 10
                                              8am        8am          10pm
  10    Budgeting & Forecasting            January 21   April 15     April 17
                                              8am        8am          10pm
  11    Long Horizon Decisions             January 21   April 22     April 24
                                              8am         8am         10pm
  12    Statement of Cash Flows            January 21   April 29      May 1
                                              8am         8am         10pm
  13    Performance Evaluation             January 21    May 6        May 8
                                              8am        8am          10pm
                                         4


Practice Exercises
Practice Exercises will provide opportunities for you to reinforce and evaluate your understanding of the
material and test your understanding of the concepts. Think of them like homework, which counts as 5%
of your final grade. You are encouraged to retry the problems (i.e., practice!) until you are comfortable
with the concepts presented and ready to move on.
For each practice exercise:
• Availability: Practice exercises for each unit will be available as each unit is published on Canvas. For
    each unit, you will have approximately 10 days to study the unit materials and complete practice
    exercises.
• Due date: Practice exercises for each unit are due on the following Friday before 10:00 pm.
• Time limitation for each practice exercise: None
• Number of attempts: You have unlimited attempts to submit each practice exercise. The highest score
    will be factored into your final grade.
• Availability of correct answers: You will be able to view correct answers after each attempt.
• If you miss submitting a practice exercise by its due date, you will receive “zero” for that practice
    exercise. No late work will be accepted under any circumstance, and NO make-up attempts are offered
    for any missing assignment.
• Accurate and independent completion of the practice exercise is critical to your success on subsequent
    assignments and to your overall performance for the course.
• Your performance on Practice exercises is worth 5% of your final grade.
Ribs on the Run Exercise
Each Unit includes a Ribs on the Run Exercise and this exercise in nature is also homework, which
provides you with an opportunity to apply the content presented in each unit. Your grade for each Ribs on
the Run exercise is based on accuracy and timely submission, and you receive points for each correct
answer. The following is the policy for Ribs on the Run exercise.
• Availability: Ribs on the Run exercise for each unit will be available as each unit is published on
    Canvas. For each unit, you will have about 10 days to complete the Ribs on the Run exercise.
• Due Date: The Ribs on the Run exercise for each unit is due on the following Friday before 10:00 pm.
• Time limitation for each exercise: None
• Number of attempts: You will have two attempts to submit each Ribs on the run exercise. Of these two
    attempts, the highest score will be factored into your final grade.
• Availability of correct answers: You will be able to view correct answers after the last attempt.
• If you miss submitting a Ribs on the Run exercise by its due date, you will receive “zero” for the
    exercise. No late work will be accepted under any circumstance, and NO make-up attempts are offered
    for any missing assignment.
• Accurate and independent completion of the Ribs on the Run exercise is critical to your success on
    subsequent assignments and to your overall performance for course.
• Your performance on Ribs on the Run exercises are worth 10% of your final grade.
                                                       5


Unit Quizzes
Each unit has a unit quiz to test your understanding of the materials. Each unit quiz may consist of
multiple-choice questions or true or false questions on concepts covered in the unit. Unlike the homework
assignments, you are only allowed one attempt for each unit quiz. So, be sure to start it only after you have
thoroughly completed and reviewed all of the unit content and are comfortable with the concepts. Once you
submit your answers, you will not be able to edit them. Your grade for each unit quiz is based on accuracy
and timely submission, and you receive points for each correct answer. Please read the following policy
carefully regarding taking a unit quiz:
• Availability: The unit quiz for each unit will be available on each Wednesday at 8:00 am, and you will
    have a whole day on each Thursday to complete the unit quiz.
• Due Date: The Unit Quiz is due on each Friday before 10:00 pm
• Time limitation: Time for each unit quiz is limited and varies depending on materials tested and
    difficulty level of each unit quiz, approximately from 20 minutes to 25 minutes.
• Number of attempts allowed: Only one attempt is allowed for taking a unit quiz. Once you submit your
    answers, you will not be able to edit them. Remember, this is a test for each unit, and it tests whether
    you understand the materials covered for each unit.
• Availability of correct answers: You will be able to view correct answers after the due date for all
    students and only for a limited amount of time. Available at 10:30pm Friday to noon on Saturday.
• Resources you may use: Written and digital materials, a calculator, and a self-created note sheet.
    Warning: Direct or indirect assistance from any individual is STRICTLY PROHIBITED and is an
    unequivocal violation of the McCombs School of Business Code of Ethics and University’s policy on
    Academic Dishonesty and Cheating.
• Warning: Your ability to use the allowed resources is constrained by the time limit, and you are only
    allowed one attempt for each Unit Quiz. Therefore, it is strongly RECOMMENDED that, in addition to
    diligent review and practice before taking each Unit Quiz, you make your own notes for use during the
    time you take each Unit Quiz—it is an excellent aid for reviewing the material, taking the quizzes,
    enhancing your performance.
• If you miss submitting a unit quiz by its due date, you will receive “zero” for the unit quiz. No late work
    will be accepted under any circumstance and NO make-ups for any missing unit quiz.
• No questions answered policy: During a unit quiz time (Wednesday 8:00 am to Friday 10:00 pm), any
    questions related to a unit quiz will not be answered.
• I will automatically drop your lowest Unit quiz score.
• Your performance on Unit Quizzes is worth 35% of your final grade.
Warning: A reliable internet connection is required and critical to completing the unit quiz. It is your
responsibility, please use a long-standing proven connection and test it before starting a unit quiz. Time
begins the moment you start a unit quiz and runs continuously; the quiz time cannot be paused, including
loss of connectivity or logging out, and there are no make-ups if you missed a unit quiz due to any issues
related to the internet connection. A late submission or a missing unit quiz due to a connection failure are
not an excuse for retaking a unit quiz. So, it is critical to plan accordingly.
Final Exam: After you have completed the requirements for each of the 13 Units you will be required to
take a final exam. The exam will be comprised of 40 multiple-choice questions and will count for 50% of
your final grade. The final exam must be completed no later than the last day of UT Austin final exams
for the spring 2020 semester, May 19th.
                                                          6


You may use your textbook and notes for the practice quizzes, Ribs on the Run exercises and the Unit
quizzes, but the Final Exam is closed‐book, closed‐note. You are to follow all university policies
regarding academic honesty.
                                   Course Work & Percentage Allocation
           Course Work                               Points                     Weighted Percentage
 Set up Requirements                                    3*                                 -
 Practice Exercises                                    100                                5%
 Ribs on the Run Exercises                             100                               10%
 Unit Quizzes                                          400                               35%
 Comprehensive Final Exam                              100                               50%
 Total Points and Percentage                           700                               100%
        *Not included in final grade calculation
                                          Academic Grading Scale
 A     93 - 100%       B+    87 - 89%      C+    77 - 79%     D+    67 - 69%     F    < 59%
 A-    90 - 92%        B     83 - 86%      C     73 - 76%     D     63 - 66%
                       B-    80 - 82%      C-    70 - 72%     D-    60 - 62%
Grading Criteria and Due Dates
Although this is a flexible-paced course, there are due dates for key assignments. If you miss the due
date, you will not be able to submit the assignment and will receive no credit. All due date
times are Central Standard Time (CST).
Final Exam
The final exam is closed-book, closed-note, closed-material; you are not to access any materials during the
exam. The exam has 40 questions and you are allowed 2 hours. Exams will be taken online through
Canvas and monitored via a proctoring service, ProctorU. It is required that you complete a test of the
proctoring software before beginning the class, so you can contact technical support if needed (see the
Getting Started module on Canvas). Note the final exam includes units 1-13 and is cumulative.
ProctorU is the remote proctoring service used to monitor exams. It is a live, online proctoring service that
allows you to take your exam from the comfort of your home or office. ProctorU is available 24/7, however
there are two important rules to remember:
    1. You will need to schedule your exam proctoring session at least 72 hours in advance to avoid any
        on-demand scheduling fees.
    2. The last available exam appointment will be at 8:00pm (CST) on the due date – you will NOT be
        allowed to start the exam later as the exam must be completed by 10pm.
In order to use ProctorU you will need to use Chrome as your browser, have a high-speed internet
connection, along with a webcam (internal or external) with a microphone, a windows or apple Operating
                                                         7


System, and a government issued photo id. You will set up a ProctorU account and test your equipment
before starting the course (see the Getting Started module on Canvas).
ProctorU also provides free technical support to ensure you have the best testing situation possible. You
can access the “How It Works” ProctorU manual on Canvas (see About This Course module). Support is
also available at www.proctoru.com/testitout . On this page you will also be able to learn about what to
expect during your proctoring session and ask any questions you may have about the proctoring process
with a ProctorU representative. For additional technical services needed before your exam, you can click on
the button that says “connect to a live person.” Test Taker Walk Through Video url:
https://vimeo.com/107066503
Please make sure you follow these ProctorU exam proctor policies:
 • Make sure your phone or other digital device (including smart watch) is not on your person or out in
     the room where you are taking the exam (a desk drawer or backpack is a good storage place)
 • Keep your eyes on the monitor/screen, don't stare to your right/left since that can generate an exam
     proctor violation
 • No headphones, earphones, radio, or TV
 • Do not leave the room or stand up from your chair during the exam
 • Take the exam where you will not be disturbed - no other people can be in the room with you during
     the exam
 • Work at a desk where the webcam can see your head and torso and the room behind you (avoid using a
     laptop while sitting on a bed or on the floor since the webcam can't see enough to verify the
     environment)
For any technical issues with the proctoring software, consult access the “How It Works” ProctorU manual
on Canvas (see About This Course module). You may also contact Proctor U at
www.proctoru.com/testitout. On this page you will also be able to learn about what to expect during your
proctoring session and ask any questions you may have about the proctoring process with a ProctorU
representative. For additional technical services needed before your exam, you can click on the button that
says “connect to a live person.”
Since Proctor U is a live proctor system, you will have access to a ProctorU support person during your
final exam. They will contact me with any technical or academic integrity issues/questions.
Code of Ethics – McCombs School of Business
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics
                                                        8


Academic Integrity – University of Texas at Austin
The McCombs School of Business strives to uphold high standards of scholastic integrity and has no
tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The University defines scholastic dishonesty as cheating,
plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to,
providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on an exam or other
assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two different courses without
the permission of faculty members. Access, use, or sharing of course materials from hard copy or
online sources (e.g. course hero, etc) not expressly allowed in class syllabi is forbidden.
The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail
in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the McCombs School of Business.
By teaching this course, each instructor agrees to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that
document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of this Policy Statement to any class assignments is unclear in any way, it
is your responsibility to ask the instructor for clarification.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will
be strictly enforced.
Please note that it is in violation of University policy to download material from a course an upload it to
course hero or any other exam/course material sharing website.
You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ or the
General Information Catalog to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty. For more on the
University of Texas policy of Academic Dishonesty and Cheating, follow the link at
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/
Campus Safety and Security
 Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
 Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
        o Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
            buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
            assembling outside.
        o Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
            that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
        o Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during the first
            week of class.
        o In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
        o Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
            University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
        o Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
        o Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
            www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                           9
