HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                               SPRING 2020
                                                                 ACC 358C / ACC 380K.4
                                                              Auditing & Assurance Services
Time and Location:
MW 11:00 – 12:15, UTC 4.124 (unique 02350 for ACC 358C or 02470 for ACC 380K.4)
MW 2:00 - 3:15, GSB 3.138 (unique 02360 for ACC 358C or 02480 for ACC 380K.4)
MW 3:30 - 4:45, GSB 3.138 (unique 02365 for ACC 358C or 02485 for ACC 380K.4)
Professor
Nicholas Hallman, CPA Ph.D.
Office: CBA 4M.228; Phone: 471-3517; E-mail: Nicholas.Hallman@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office hours: Tuesday 9:00am – 12:00 pm, or as announced, and by appointment.
Teaching Assistants
Brock Miller
Email: brock.miller89@gmail.com
Office: CBA 4.304A
Office hours: Monday 1:00pm – 4:00pm
Ryan Ballestero
Email: Ryan.Ballestero@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office: CBA 5.334W
Office hours: Wednesday 8am – 11am
Canvas
I will use the Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu) discussion board to make announcements, post
documents, and answer questions. So that you do not miss anything important, please get in the
habit of checking the course Canvas site before every class.
The discussion board benefits you and me. You can use it to post questions, comments, and
responses to others’ posts. In turn, I will use it to offer clarifications to the entire class, not just
the person who asked the question. If you have a question of general interest, please use the
discussion board, not email. That way everyone can benefit.
Required Course Materials:
Course Files: I will not distribute paper copies of most course materials. I will upload to Canvas
the PowerPoint files and other materials that we will use in class discussion.
Textbook: Auditing & Assurance Services A Systematic Approach, 11th ed., by Messier, Glover,
and Prawitt (McGraw Hill, 2019).
                                                                                                         1


HALLMAN                            AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                         SPRING 2020
Course Objectives
At the end of the semester, you should have a better and deeper understanding of the following:
    -    The role of auditing in a market economy.
    -    U.S. and international regulation of auditing.
    -    Auditor independence and ethical responsibilities.
    -    Dealing with the potential for fraud.
    -    Internal controls and the integrated audit.
    -    Risk assessment.
    -    Audit sampling.
    -    Audit reporting.
    -    Evaluating and correcting errors.
    -    Fundamental issues arising in recent accounting and auditing scandals.
    -    Academic research in the field of auditing.
Course Schedule
The schedule for this course is subject to considerable change as we proceed through the
semester. An initial outline of the expected schedule is posted on Canvas. I will keep the canvas
version of the schedule updated, and post announcements whenever I make changes.
Attendance Policy
I hated attendance policies when I was a student and I do not enforce them now. Not enforcing
an attendance policy keeps me honest and forces me to make attending class worth your time.
With that said, impromptu in-class discussions are an important part of the course. The content
of all such discussions are “fair game” for exams. If you believe that you can achieve the grade
you desire without attending class, you are welcome to try. But you probably can’t.
A Few Miscellaneous Notes:
    - This course is not just another requirement to graduate. Rather, given that the vast majority
       of you will either become auditors or will deal with auditors, the primary objective of this
       course is to help you to succeed after graduation.
    - Your primary objective for this course should be to learn the skills required to be a good
       auditor or, at least, to understand auditing, not to get a good grade. But I know that
       probably seems trite, and that your grade matters a great deal to you. I will do my best to
       make sure that the distributions of learning and grades are as congruent (and transparent) as
       possible. However, like most evaluation systems, grading is inherently noisy.
                                                                                                    2


HALLMAN                            AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                          SPRING 2020
Grading
Course grades will be based on a 500-point scale, as follows:
                                                                                Points
                                                                               Possible
              In-class examination 1: Monday, February 24th                       100
              In-class examination 2: Monday, March 30th                          100
              Final examination, Date TBD                                         120
              Cases                                                                80
              End-of-semester group presentation                                  100
              Total points before extra credit (see details below)                500
In awarding final grades, I start by considering the traditional 90%=A, 80%=B, 70%=C cutoffs
based on the 500 nominal points listed above. I sometimes award grades that are more (but never
less) generous than these cutoffs, depending upon the end-of-semester point distribution, to
reflect the following interpretations:
     “A” or “A-” = Exceptional performance, exceeding my expectations. An “A” in this course
         is a sign of distinguishing oneself with particularly strong performance.
     “B+” or “B” = Fine performance, meeting my expectations. The ability to distinguish
         outstanding from very good performance is undermined if everyone gets an “A,” so I
         anticipate that a “B” will be the grade most frequently assigned.
     “B-,” “C+,” or “C” = Performance that falls short of expectations. These grades should be
         infrequent, but that being said, there is no such thing as an “automatic B” in the MPA
         program. If you do not put in the effort necessary to attain a reasonable degree of
         proficiency in attaining the course objectives, I cannot award you a “B.”
     “C-,” “D,” or “F” = Performance that falls far short of expectations, usually reflecting lack
         of sufficient effort. A failing grade can also result from severe cases of scholastic
         dishonesty.
Plus/Minus Grading
I award +/- grades in an approximately “GPA neutral” manner. What this means is that I award
plus or minus grades for borderline cases at each grade cutoff (primarily the A/B cutoff), but I
strive to do so in a way that does not significantly alter the grade-point average for the class as a
whole. Thus, the number of students who get an A- instead of an A will be approximately equal
to the number of students who get a B+ instead of a B.
                                                                                                      3


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                            SPRING 2020
Examinations (two midterms worth 100 points each; final exam worth 120 points)
Examinations will emphasize issues and concepts from the assigned readings, cases, lectures,
and class discussion. I will post practice questions from previous semesters’ exams, although
these these may not be representative of the current year exams (either in terms of subject matter
or difficulty). Exams may involve a mixture of objective and written-answer formats.
The two midterm examinations emphasize the material covered since the previous examination.
The final examination is cumulative, emphasizing material covered after the second midterm
along with reinforcing key concepts from earlier in the semester, as reflected on the midterm
exams.
Cases and Research Exercises (80 points)
To refine written communication skills as well as judgment skills in dealing with a more realistic
and less structured variety of auditing problems than can be found in a textbook, we will cover a
few case exercises based on current policy issues and real-world applications.
I value the interchange of ideas. Thus, you will work on cases in randomly assigned groups (a
different group for each case). That being said, I also value individual accountability. Peer
evaluations will be collected for each case, and individuals with consistently low peer
evaluations will have their case grades penalized.
The materials required to complete each case will be posted to Canvas on the due date of the
previous case. The materials required to complete the first will be posted on the first day of class.
All cases will be graded for depth of analysis, originality, quality of writing (if applicable), and
professional impression. Some of these cases involve subjective issues for which multiple views
can be defended. As in an accounting career, it is important to be both complete and concise.
Each case submission will be graded by two TAs. The TAs’ job will be to order the cases and
assign grades based on a distribution which I dictate. I will review cases where there is a
significant discrepancy in the grades provided by the two TAs. If you have questions about your
case grade, your first stop should be a TA.
University Writing Center
If you experience difficulty with written assignments, consider scheduling a free appointment
with a writing consultant at the UT-Austin University Writing Center (UWC). The UWC is one
of the best student resources available, employing consultants who will work with you to
improve your written assignments in ways that preserve the integrity of your work. For further
details, see http://uwc.utexas.edu.
                                                                                                     4


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                            SPRING 2020
Group Presentation – “Pick a Scandal” (100 points)
The capstone project at the end of the semester will involve randomly assigned groups of four (or
so) students. Each group will investigate a major accounting / auditing scandal (generally from
2000 to date) to identify (1) the underlying financial reporting issue(s), (2) what the auditors
should have done differently, and (3) the consequences to management and to the auditors.
Groups will present the results from these investigations in 20-minute presentations at the end of
the semester (see course schedule later in this syllabus). Each group must also submit the
PowerPoint or similar file used to facilitate their presentation, along with a list of references.
Later in the semester, I will provide further details on this assignment and a list of suggested
scandals.
Content from these presentations is “fair game” in the final exam, so I advise you to avoid
missing class when your classmates are presenting.
Extra Credit for Participation and Effort
To reward your attentiveness and participation, I reserve the right to award extra credit points
based on my subjective (but honest) assessment of your performance. We will discuss the extra
credit policy in more detail on the first day of class.
Policy on Notifications via Email and via Canvas
I will frequently post important announcements on our course Canvas site, so it is critical for you
to monitor this resource before every class.
In addition, when necessary, I will contact you by email, consistent with the UT-Austin policy on
email as an authorized vehicle for official University communication. I may use your McCombs
School of Business email address on the School’s “Address Book,” or I may use the email
address registered on our course Canvas site, so if these accounts are different, please monitor
both addresses.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
My general policy is that medical emergencies, family emergencies, religious holidays, and
university-sponsored conflicts are the only valid reasons for missing an examination or the due
date of an assignment. For each such case, I require some form of supporting documentation,
such as a signed note from a physician. At that point I will determine the best make-up
alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a make-up exam or recalculating the
semester grade to omit the missed component, depending on circumstances. Examinations or
assignments that are missed for other reasons will generally not be accepted. In the case of a
conflict due to a university-sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of the
conflict and before the examination date or assignment due date.
                                                                                                    5


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                         SPRING 2020
Religious Holidays: Consistent with the UT-Austin policy on Observation of Religious
Holidays, I will work with students on a case-by-case basis to find a suitable make-up alternative
in the event that a religious holiday conflicts with a scheduled examination or assignment due
date. By policy, students must provide at least 14 days of advance notice.
Policy on Students with Disabilities
I do my best to accommodate students with disabilities. For more information, contact the UT-
Austin Office of Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 471-6259, or go to
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/current-students/. If you have an SSD-registered
accommodation letter, please see me with your letter to discuss the accommodations you need
for this course. For SSD accommodations requiring additional examination time, students must
provide a suggested block for the time authorized in the SSD letter between the scheduled
business hours for the McCombs Testing Center of 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on the date of the
exam, or, if necessary, within one day of the scheduled exam. Students must make SSD-related
requests well in advance in order to ensure that accommodations can be made. Please note that
the McCombs Testing Center can fill up during peak examination periods, so reservations at the
requested date/time may not be possible without sufficient notice. SSD-related requests for exam
accommodations must be made via email before each exam! If I don’t hear from you before a
scheduled exam, I will assume that you do not wish an accommodation.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Course Assignments
The Master in Professional Accounting Program has adopted a Code of Conduct, a Career
Services Code of Ethics, and a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty. It is important for you
to be familiar with all three documents, which are available on the web at the following link:
https://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-Codes-of-Ethics
The following statement applies to each class in the UT-Austin Department of Accounting:
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the department’s Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the
MPA Program (which includes the integrated five-year MPA program and the traditional
MPA program). By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty
responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that
Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification.
In simple terms, integrity is a public good from which we all benefit. I view the above statement
as a commitment to integrity, not as a threat against students. It is my intent to conduct this
course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only achieve this goal if you join me in
maintaining an atmosphere of absolute ethical integrity in this course and in our MPA program.
We cannot afford to tolerate any less.
                                                                                                  6


HALLMAN                          AUDITING & ASSURANCE SERVICES                          SPRING 2020
If you have read this far, thank you! The fact that you read 6 pages of syllabus material shows
that you care about this class and want to succeed. History suggests that only about half of all
students read the entire syllabus, so I want to give you a small token of my appreciation for being
in that half. Accordingly, if you send Brock an email (his email address is listed at the top if the
syllabus) with your name, UTID, and section in the subject line by 9am on Monday, January
27th, I will award you one extra credit point.
                                                                                                     7
