                                  Jewish Folklore
                                     Fall 2018
                                  TTh 12:30 to 2:00 PM
                                         GDC 5. 304
                        GSD #38025              ANT 325L #31750
                         JS 363 #39600             RS 357 #43290
                                       REE     #43910
            *Writing flag                      *Global Cultures
                     Instructor: Dr. Itzik Gottesman
                       itzikgottesman@gmail.com
                       Office phone: 512-232-6336
                       Office hours: T Th 2 – 3:30
                            Office: Burdine 308
Course Description
Dybbuks, golems, evil eye are just some of the more well-known aspects
of Jewish folklore, but this course will also examine the folklife of the
Jews, their world view, their folk beliefs and fears. Call it folk religion if
you will; many of these practices were dismissed by the "official"
Jewish religion as unJewish, but the "folk" persisted and eventually the
practices became Judaized and accepted. We will look at the folklore of
East European Jews as well as of Middle Eastern Jews and their
development in the United States with immigration.
Using literary sources, ethnographic memoirs, historical documents,
films (among them "The Dybbuk" 1939), folklore collections and field
trips (among them - to the oldest Austin Jewish cemetery), we will focus
on what makes Jewish folklore Jewish. Among the folklore genres to be
examined -folktale, legend, folksong, folk music, custom, belief and


of course, Jewish humor. By the end of the class the student will better
grasp what is meant by folklore in general and Jewish folklore in
particular and how to compare the traditions of cultures.
Grading Policy
Attendance and class participation 20%
3 short papers 2 – 3 pages             30%
Longer final paper on subject of your choice 50%
First short paper: an interview with a Jewish senior on folklore.
Second short paper on development of a Jewish custom
Third short paper: on Jewish humor
The first two short papers will be in two stages; first a draft to be worked
on and commented on by instructor and fellow students. Then a final
version.
Required texts:
The Bible
Jewish Magic and Superstition by Joshua Trachtenberg
The Lifetime of the Jew by Hayyim Schauss
The Jewish Festivals by Hayyim Schauss


Recommended: Great Tales of Jewish Fantasy and Occult by Joachim
Neugroschel
On reserve in PCL – Jewish Folklore: An Annotated Bibliography Eli
Yassif
*7) On-line reference at UT-library – Encyclopedia of Jewish Folklore
and Traditions
http://site.ebrary.com/lib/utexas/detail.action?docID=10674760
*8) Jewish Encyclopedia on line (1906)
http://jewishencyclopedia.com/
9) YIVO Encyclopedia on line http://www.yivoencyclopedia.org/
Weekly assignments.
Thursday August 31
Definitions
 What is Folklore?
What's Jewish about Jewish Folklore?
In class video: “Gefilte Fish”.
Tuesday Sept. 4
Jewish Folk Narrative – Bible/Midrash


Read: All of “Genesis” in Bible
Read: “Midrash” entry in Jewish Encyclopedia 1906.
Read: “Eve” in Encyclopedia of Jewish Folklore and Traditions
Begin to find a senior to interview for first paper.
Thursday Sept. 6
Rosh-Hashonah: Jewish New Year.
Read: entry “Rosh Ha Shana” in Encyclopedia of Jewish Folklore and
Traditions
Read: “New Year” in Jewish Encyclopedia 1906.
Read: “New Year/Rosh-Hashonah” in Schauss The Jewish Festivals.
Tuesday Sept 11
The oral tradition in the Medieval Period
Read: On Canvas “Jewish Folk Literature pages 171 – 192. The
development of “midrash”. Handout from Tsene-Rene: the Woman’s
Bible
Classic Jewish Legend: The Ten Lost Tribes
Read: On Canvas: Abraham Gross “The Expulsion and the Search for
the Ten Lost Tribes”.


Thursday Sept. 13
Classic Jewish Legends
Read on Canvas:: “The Story of the Jerusalemite”, “The Enduring
Legend of the Jewish Pope”
Tuesday Sept. 18
Yom-Kippur: The holiest day of the Jewish Calendar
Read: “Shofar” and “Yom-kippur” in Jewish Encyclopedia 1906. And in
in Encyclopedia of Jewish Folklore and Traditions
Read: “Yom-kippur” in Schauss Jewish Festivals
Thursday Sept. 20
The Golem: “Jewish Frankenstein”
See before class:
 German expressionist silent film on Youtube - "Golem 1920" in Canvas
, article “Golem! The Making of a Modern Myth”.
First short paper – interview- is due.
Tuesday Sept. 25
Sukkoth Festival
Read: Sukkoth” in Schauss Jewish Festivals, Jewish Encyclopedia, and
Encyclopedia of Jewish Folklore.


Thursday Sept. 27
Class to be held in Sukkah
Field trip to Sukkah in UT-Hillel. Meet there.
Tuesday Oct 2
Discussion of interviews and papers looked at in class.
Folklore in life history, storytelling.
Final draft of 1st short paper is due.
Thursday Oct. 4
Jewish Folktales
What is a folktale? How do scholars analyze folktales.
Read on Canvas: “Tale-types and Motifs”
Read: (Handout) Four tales from Great Tales of Jewish Occult and
Fantasy :The Rabbi Who Was Turned into a Werewolf" "Conversation
of Two Ghosts" "King Solomon and Asmedai" "Haninah and the Frog".
Tuesday, Oct 9
Themes in Jewish Folklore: Messianism


Canvas: “Messiah Ben Joseph in the Babylonian Talmud”. “Messiah” in
Encyclopedia of Jewish Folklore and Jewish Encyclopedia
Hand in topic for paper on Jewish custom
Thursday, Oct 11,
Messianism continued: In Jewish Custom
Canvas: “Apocalyptic Messianism”.
Tuesday, Oct 16
Themes in Jewish Folklore: Mysticism/Kabbalah
Read: Jewish Magic and Superstition pages 1 – 104
Handout: Introduction to main Kabbalah concepts.
Thursday Oct 18
Mysticism/Kabbalah part 2
Read: Jewish Magic and Superstition 105 – 208
2ND short paper – Jewish custom – is due
Tuesday Oct. 23
Jewish Mysticism/Magic


Read: Jewish Magic and Superstition 209 – 268
Thursday Oct 25
Jewish Amulets
Read Amulets in Jewish Encyclopedia, and Encyclopedia of Jewish
Folklore
Choose topic for 2nd paper on Jewish Humor
Analysis of Jewish humor; each student will look at a collection of
Jewish jokes or a comedian
Tuesday Oct 30
Evil Eye
Canvas articles: “The Jewish Evil Eye”
Final draft of final short paper due.
Thursday Nov. 1 Jewish Humor
In Canvas: articles on Jewish Humor
Choose a topic for Jewish humor.


Tuesday Nov. 6
Jewish Life Cycle: Birth
Read: Schauss The Lifetime of a Jew pages 1 – 76
In Canvas: articles on naming
Thursday Nov. 8
Jewish Life Cycle Marriage
Read Schauss: pages 77 – 219
3rd short paper is due on Jewish Humor.
Tuesday Nov. 13
Jewish Life Cycle: Death and Burial
Read: Schauss: 220 - 300
Thursday Nov. 15
Folk Art and Material Culture
Canvas articles on gravestones, paper cuts, ritual objects.
Topic for final long paper due.


Tuesday Nov 20
Visit to Austin Jewish Cemetery
Thursday Nov 22th Thanksgiving NO CLASS
Tuesday Nov. 27
Folk Traditions revived: Klezmer music
Read: Canvas articles on Klezmer revival.
Klezmer Music Film: “Dancing in the Garden of Eden”
In class visit from Klezmer musician.
Thursday Nov. 29
Presentation discussion of research on final papers..
Tuesday Dec. 4 The Holiday of Hannukah
Read: “Hanukkah” in Encyclopedia of Jewish Folklore
“Hanukkah” and “Games” in Jewish Encyclopedia
“Hannukah” in Schauss Jewish Feasts


Thursday Dec. 6th
   Jewish folk games – dreydl, nuts etc.
Final Papers Due Friday Dec. 14 midnight.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www. utexas.ed u/di versity /ddce/ssd
