                               BLACK FREEDOM MOVEMENT
                   AFR 372C (30520)/AMS 321 (31055)/LAS 322 (39545)
                        MEZ 1.120: Tues. & Thurs. 2:00 pm - 3:30 pm
Dr. Minkah Makalani
Office Hours: GWB 2.202: TTH 11:30-1, and by appointment
Phone: 512-471-4745
Email: makalani@austin.utexas.edu
Introduction
It can be said that black people have engaged in a centuries-long, global struggle for freedom.
For many, the high tide of this struggle occurred in the United States from the 1950s into the
1970s. Others might look to the national liberation movements in Africa and the Caribbean,
which created a series of autonomous black nations, as the watermark of black freedom. More
recent commentaries have pointed to the global currency of Black Lives Matter to suggest that
the quest for freedom by black people continues. This course explores the history of black
people’s twentieth century struggles for freedom, taking as its focus the U.S. Civil Rights and
Black Power movements, and anticolonial movements in Africa and the Caribbean. This course
will ask and seek to answer several questions, including: What is freedom? Is there a difference
between liberation and freedom? How have black people thought about these concepts? Why
have the arts (music, literature, visual arts, film, sports, etc.) been so central to how black people
have thought about the possibility of freedom? This course will examine key historical events and
figures in the U.S., Africa, Caribbean, and to a lesser extent Europe, with particular attention to
intellectual currents, organizational formations, the arts, and mass mobilization. We will also
consider how culture, religion, and social deviance inform how we might think about Black
freedom.
Learning Goals
While this course covers several key themes, students will also become familiar with a general
chronological structure that will help them think about the struggles of various black peoples for
freedom that spanned the 20th century. Rather than rote memorization, however, students will
gain a sense of the historical processes of change over time, how black people’s intellectual
activities have shaped conceptualizations of freedom, and be introduced to a methodology for
assessing how an array of events and experiences influence the choices that people make, what
they believe possible, and how these inform human activity. There are two broad learning goals
in this course.
1) Conceptually, we examine different approaches to understanding and analyzing:
    — how individuals and groups are shaped by the past and shape the contemporary world
    — how people interact with and change society and social institutions
    — the role of large-scale political, economic, and ideological forces in human history
    — how the activities of African descended peoples in one location (say, Africa or the
         Caribbean) offer insights on the histories of African diasporic peoples elsewhere
                                                         1


2) Practically, students will develop and/or sharpen skills essential to their academic and
professional growth. These include:
     — how to read and engage a variety of sources, documents, and literatures (newspaper
        accounts, memoirs, pamphlets, novels, scholarly works)
     — develop arguments based on analyzing such source materials
     — write in a way that effectively communicates your ideas
To this end, students are expected to complete the assigned readings and arrive to class prepared
to engage lectures and to participate in discussions. As such, excessive absences will negatively
affect your grade in this course. You are allowed three (3) unexcused absences; four or more
absences will lower your final course grade.
Classroom Policies
Laptops are not permitted for any reason in this course unless there is a legitimate, documented
reason for a student’s use of a laptop for note taking. Further, cell phones are not permitted in
the classroom. If you are found using a cell phone during class for any reason, you will be asked
to leave the class. Additionally, leaving during lecture or discussion is disruptive for both the class
and the professor, and is not allowed.
Flags: Cultural Diversity
The Cultural Diversity requirement increases your familiarity with the variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. Courses carrying this flag ask you to explore the beliefs, practices,
and histories of at least one cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization. Many
of these courses also encourage you to reflect on your own cultural experiences.
Academic Integrity
Students are advised to familiarize themselves with the University of Texas’ policies on academic
integrity, and the penalty for plagiarism and other forms of cheating. Please note, any instance of
plagiarism in this course will result in an automatic “F” for the assignment; the final disposition of
a penalty will follow the University’s guidelines. Please follow the links below for more
information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/for_students.php
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
Required Books
• Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Half of a Yellow Sun.
• Ashley Farmer, Remaking Black Power: How Black Women Transformed an Era.
• Catherine Morris & Rujeko Hockley, We Wanted a Revolution: Black Radical Women, 1965-1985: A
        Sourcebook.
***All other readings will be available as PDFs on Canvas.
                                                       2


   Grades
   Document Assignment 1 & 2: 10% (5% each)
   Three Quizzes: 30% (10% each)
   Response Paper: 10%
   Mid-Term: 20%
   Final Exam: 30%
   • Guidelines for all assignments, including the mid-term and final exam, will be distributed
   during the semester.
   Grading Scale
                            Excellent                     Good                   Satisfactory       Poor  Fail
Letter                 A+         A       A-       B+       B         B-     C+        C       C-     D    F
Percent Range        100-97 96-94 93-91           90-87   86-84 83-81       80-77 76-74 73-71       70-60 59-0
No Value               100       95       92       88      85         82      78       75      72     65  35-0
   Your grade is determined based on this scale. For example, if you receive a “B” on the Essay, the
   corresponding numerical score would be 85. As 20% of your grade, this will translate into (85 x
   .20) 17. When adding all your grades together, the final score is grouped with the appropriate
   letter grade. A cumulative score of 83 translates into a B- on the scale. In calculating “F” grades,
   the possible numeric value will range between 35-0. Failure to submit or complete an assignment
   will result in “0” points.
   Course Schedule
   Introduction: What is Freedom?
   Jan 22           Introduction: What is Freedom?
   Jan 24           Reading: Angela Davis, “Lectures on Liberation.”
   Empire, Self-Government, & the Black World
   Jan 29           Reading: C.L.R. James, The Case for West-Indian Self-Government.
                    Documents: “Manifesto of the Second Pan-African Congress”; “Declaration of the
                    Rights of the Negro Peoples of the World”; Marcus Garvey, “African for the
                    Africans.”
   Jan 31           Readings: Marable, Race, Reform, and Rebellion, 12-37.
                    Documents: Jacques Roumain, “A Preliminary Analysis of the Years 1932-1934”;
                    Langston Hughes, “White Shadows in a Black Land”; Suzanne Césaire, “The
                    Malaise of a Civilization.”
   World War, Fascism, and Black Internationalism
   Feb 5            Reading: Kevin Yelvington, “The War in Ethiopia and Trinidad, 1935-36.”
                    Documents: W. E. B. Du Bois, “Marxism and the Negro Problem.”
   Feb 7            Reading: Marc Matera, Black London, 62-99.
                    Documents: Aimé Césaire, Discourse on Colonialism (excerpt); 5th Pan-African
                    Congress, 1945.
                                                          3


We Charge Genocide
Feb 12           Reading: Civil Rights Congress, We Charge Genocide.
                 Quiz #1
Feb 14           Readings: Ashley Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Ch. 1.
                 Documents: Claudia Jones, “An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the Negro
                 Woman.”
We Return Fighting
Feb 19           Film: Ousmane Sembène, Camp de Thiaroye.
                 Reading: Myron Echenberg, “Tragedy at Thiaroye.”
Feb 21           Film: Ousmane Sembène, Camp de Thiaroye.
                 Discussion of Camp de Thiaroye.
Building a Movement
Feb 26           Readings: We Wanted a Revolution, Sources 1-4.
                 Class meets in Christian-Greene Gallery (Jester Hall)
Feb 28           Reading: Aldon Morris, The Origins of the Civil Rights Movement, 17-39; Marable, Race,
                 Reform, and Rebellion, 38-58.
                 Documents: JoAnn Robinson, “The Origin of the Trouble.”
                 Class meets in Idea Lab (GWB 2.204)
                 Document Assignment #1 Due
Race and Democracy
March 5          Readings: Jeffries, “Organizing More than a Vote.”
                 Documents: Martin Luther King, Jr., “Letter from a Birmingham Jail”; “Student
                 Nonviolent Coordinating Committee Statement of Purpose.”
March 7          MID-TERM
African Independence, Caribbean Federation, Black Power
March 12         Reading: Mahmood Mamdani, “Indirect Rule, Civil Society, and Ethnicity.”
                 Documents: Arusha Declaration, 1967.
March 14         Reading: Colin Palmer, Eric Williams and the Making of the Modern Caribbean, 40-75.
                 Documents: Frantz Fanon, “Are We Seeing the Birth of a Nation in the West
                 Indies”; Eric Williams, “The Political Leader Considered as a Man of Culture.”
         ***ATTEND SESSION OF BLACK STUDIES CONFERENCE***
March 18-23      SPRING BREAK
                 Begin Reading Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, Half of a Yellow Sun
Black Power and Black Women’s Liberation
March 26         Reading: Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Ch. 2.
                 Documents: Fannie Lou Hamer, “Fannie Lou Hamer’s Initiation into the Civil
                 Rights Movement, 1962”; Civil Rights Act, 1964; Martin Luther King, Jr., “The
                 American Dream.”
                                                        4


March 28        Reading: We Wanted a Revolution, Sources 5-9.
                Documents: Malcolm X, “The Ballot or the Bullet”; Stokely Carmichael, “Black
                Power”; Black Panther Party Platform; Amiri Baraka, “Black Art.”
                Quiz #2
Ghana, Nigeria, & the African Postcolony
April 2         Reading: Amílcar Cabral, “National Liberation and Culture”; Addison Gayle,
                “The Black Aesthetic.”
April 4         Discussion: Chimamanda Adichie, Half of a Yellow Sun.
                Response Paper Due
Freedom, Independence, & Coloniality
April 9         Reading: Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Ch. 4.
                Walter Rodney, “Black Power—Its Relevance to the West Indies”; George
                Lamming, “Politics and Culture.”
April 11        Reading: We Wanted a Revolution, Sources 17-20, 23-25; Judith Byfield, “From
                Ladies to Women.”
Gender, Art, & Black Liberation
April 16        Reading: Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Chs. 4.
                Documents: Frances Beal, “Double Jeopardy”; George Jackson, Soledad Brother
                (selection).
April 18        Reading: Larry Neal, “Black Arts Movement”; LeRoi Jones, “1960: Cuba Libre.”
                Quiz #3
Black Feminism & Third World Women
April 23        Reading: Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Chs. 5 & Epilogue.
                Documents: Combahee River Collective, “A Black Feminist Statement”; Audre
                Lorde, “The Uses of the Erotic.”
April 25        Readings: We Wanted a Revolution, Sources 33-38.
                Film: Wattstax (Watch on YouTube)
Decolonizing Black Power
April 30        Readings: Anthony Bogues, “The Abeng Newspaper and the Radical Politics of
                Postcolonial Blackness”; Walter Rodney, “African History in the Service of Black
                Liberation”; Barbara Jones, “A Black Woman Speaks Out”; “You Don’t Play
                with Revolution: An Interview with C. L. R. James.”
May 2           Film: Free Angela Davis and All Political Prisoners.
May 7           Document Assignment #2
May 17: Final Exam, 2:00 pm - 5:00 pm
                                                          5


Student Services
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the office
of Services for Students with Disabilities: phone: 512-471-6259; Videophone: 512-410-6644;
email ssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Policy on Concealed Guns
Pursuant to SB11 (http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/84R/billtext/pdf/SB00011F.pdf) and
UT Austin Campus Carry Policy (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/) and
(https://www.policies.utexas.edu/ policies/campus-concealed-carry), persons with a current
legally valid Concealed Carry License may carry a concealed legal handgun on or about their
person in this class. Please take note of several provisions:
    1. All legal provisions associated with concealed carry on campus must be followed without
        fail at all times. In addition to SB11 and UT-Austin Campus Carry policy, please review
        at least the 84 pages of applicable law curated by TX DPS
        (http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/InternetForms/Forms/CHL-16.pdf). Please take special
        note of two of the many legal provisions:
             a. Holstering requirements: “A license holder who carries a handgun on campus
                 must carry it in a holster that completely covers the trigger and entire trigger
                 guard area. The holster must have sufficient tension or grip on the handgun to
                 retain it in the holster even when subjected to unexpected jostling” (UT-Austin
                 HOP 8-1060, VII-A-2).
             b. “On or about your person means a person licensed to carry a handgun must carry
                 a handgun in a manner that the handgun is close enough to the license holder that
                 he or she can reach it without materially changing position” at all times (UT-
                 Austin HOP 8-1060, IV).
    2. Open carry, including partially or wholly visible guns, is not permitted on campus at any
        time except “under circumstances in which the actor would have been justified in the use
        of force or deadly force” (SB11, Section 4 and Texas Penal Code, Section 46.035(a-1)).
        Violation is a Class A misdemeanor or a third degree felony. If any legal requirement is
        violated at any moment, the person who witnesses the violation should leave the
        classroom and call 911 immediately without waiting to ask me for permission. Police will
        respond. This will disrupt the class and may create a dangerous situation for all of us.
        Violations may result in criminal penalties and sanction by the university, up to and
        including expulsion.
    3. Office visits: You must ask me about my policy regarding concealed carry before entering
        my office and wait for my instructions before entering. Pursuant to UT-Austin policy
        (HOP 8-1060, VII-C), I must give oral notice of my prohibition on concealed handguns
        in my office. I mention this policy here for your convenience; however, oral notice must
        be given upon your first visit to my office. Following instructions from Campus Safety and
        Security, once you have been informed orally the first time, my prohibition stands until I
        revoke it. If my instructions are violated, I will call 911 and the police will respond.
        Violations may result in criminal penalties and sanction by the university, up to and
        including expulsion.
                                                       6
