GSD f331C (80582)/CL f323 (79929)/EUS f347 (35520)                                 Prof. Lynn Wilkinson
Summer 2020
                                     The Films of Ingmar Bergman
Ingmar Bergman (1918-2007) was arguably the greatest filmmaker of the twentieth century.
His career spanned over sixty years and includes such works as the sophisticated comedy
Smiles of a Summer Night (1955), the allegorical Seventh Seal (1957), the avant-garde
Persona (1966), the masterful television adaptation of Mozart’s The Magic Flute (1975),
and the television miniseries Fanny and Alexander (1982). He also wrote scripts for many
other filmmakers, including Bille August and Liv Ullmann. In 2003, he directed the
television film Saraband, and in recent years many of his films have been adapted for the
stage both in Sweden and elsewhere.
This course is intended as an introduction both to the films of Ingmar Bergman and to the
viewing of films in general. We will look at representative films by this prolific and gifted
filmmaker, considering them in the contexts of the director's life, Scandinavian culture, and
issues of film theory and aesthetics.
         This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
         students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can
         expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
         projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your
         writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments,
         and to read and discuss your peers' work. You should therefore expect a
         substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work.
         This course carries the Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are
         designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United
         States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
         from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-
         U.S. cultural group, past or present.
ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING: One two-page paper which may be rewritten (5%);
one five-page paper which may be rewritten (25%); one storyboard (10%) accompanied by
a five-page essay (25%), and five quizzes (25%; you may drop the lowest grade). Class
participation will count 10%.
ATTENDANCE: This is a small class and your attendance and participation are important.
If you are absent for more than three classes, your grade will go down by 1/3 of a grade for
every subsequent absence – i.e. from B to B-, etc. More than five absences may result in a
failing grade. It is also important that you come on time. If you are more than 15 minutes
late, you will be counted absent for half of that class.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES: Please let me know by the third day of class at the
                                                1


latest if you have a disability that has been certified by SSD, Services for Students with
Disabilities. See http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/resp_fac.php or the SSD website
for more information.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS: I will make accommodations for students who wish to observe
religious holidays. Please let me know at least one class day in advance if you need such
accommodation.
Late papers will not be accepted unless you have made arrangements with me in advance.
REQUIRED TEXT:
          Bordwell and Thompson: Film Art: An Introduction.12th ed.; available as an ebook
                  on Amazon
          In addition, you will need a subscription to Criterion Channel:
                  criterionchannel.com. Almost all of the films we will be viewing and
                  discussing in this class are available through the channel, as well as many
                  more. You may wish to purchase a DVD of the film you choose to
                  storyboard for your final assignment, but this is not required.
RECOMMENDED:
          Peter Cowie: Ingmar Bergman, PN 1998 A3 B46147 1982
          Ingmar Bergman. The Magic Lantern. Trans. Joan Tate.
                  Viking. PN1998.3 B47 A3 1988 or
                  Penguin PN1998.3 B47 A3 1989
          Birgitta Steene: Ingmar Bergman: A Reference Guide. U of Amsterdam Press.
                  PN1998 A3 B46829 2005
          French and French: Wild Strawberries (BFI Film Classics): PN 1997 S63 F74 1995
          Tytti Soila et al.: Nordic National Cinemas. Routledge : PN 1993.5 S2 S65 1998
                  Also available online.
          Mary Hilson: The Nordic Model: Scandinavia Since 1945. Reaktion.
                  JN 7042 H55 2008
                  Also available online.
          Lars G.Warme, ed. A History of Swedish Literature. U of Nebraska Press.
          `       PT 9263 H57 1996
          Thomas R. Flynn. Existentialism: A Very Short Introduction. Oxford UP
                  B819F55 200
FILMS:
Port of Call, Prison, Monika, Sawdust and Tinsel, Smiles of a Summer Night, Wild
Strawberries, The Seventh Seal, Through a Glass Darkly, Persona, A Passion/The Passion
of Anna, Cries and Whispers, Scenes from a Marriage; Fanny and Alexander, Saraband
                                                  2


Useful websites:
For background information concerning films and filmmakers:
        http://www.imdb.com
On Ingmar Bergman and his films:
        http://www.ingmarbergman.se
The Swedish Film Institute:
        http://sfi.se
The Danish Film Institute:
        http://www.dfi.dk/english or http://www.dfi.dk
For information about Sweden:
The Swedish Institute: http://www.si.se
The Swedish Institute’s Information Page – in English: https://presentingsweden.si.se/
The Swedish Institute’s Fact Sheets:
        https://presentingsweden.si.se/material-by-product/faktablad/
                                             SYLLABUS
Week One:
FILMS: Fanny and Alexander, The Making of Fanny and Alexander
READING: Bordwell and Thompson: 4: “The Shot: Mise-en-Scène”; 5: “The Shot:
                          Cinematography”
                 Recommended: Ingmar Bergman: The Making of Fanny and Alexander
                 Jörn Donner: The Bergman File
                 Strindberg: A Dream Play; Bergman: Ett drömspel/A Dream Play (on YouTube)
                 Strindberg: The Ghost Sonata; Bergman: Spöksonaten/The Ghost Sonata (on YouTube)
                 Peter Cowie: Chapter 1
June 4           Introduction to the course and Ingmar Bergman; Fanny and Alexander
June 5           Fanny and Alexander; Bordwell and Thompson: Chapters 4 & 5
Week Two:
FILMS: Port of Call; Prison; Monika
READING: Bordwell and Thompson: 2: “The Significance of Film Form”; 3:
                          “Narrative Form”; 6: “The Relation of Shot to Shot: Editing”
                 Lacan: “The Mirror Stage”; Mulvey: “Visual Pleasure and Narrative
                 Cinema”
                 Recommended: Ingmar Bergman: The Magic Lantern;
                 Jean-Paul Sartre: Huis clos, English No Exit;
                 Robert Wiene: The Cabinet of Doctor Caligari
                 Peter Cowie: Chapters 2-6
June 8           Port of Call
June 9           Port of Call, Prison; Lacan
June 10          Prison; Mulvey
                                                    3


June 11     Prison, Monika Quiz 1
June 12     Monika
June 13     2-PAGE PAPER (frame analysis) DUE ON CANVAS 9 PM
Week Three:
FILMS: Sawdust and Tinsel, Smiles of a Summer Night, The Seventh Seal,
READING: Bordwell and Thompson: Chapter 7: “Sound in the Cinema,” and 8:
                     Summary: Style as a Formal System”;
            Film Language (1-8); Pudovkin and Eisenstein
            Recommended: Eisenstein: The Battleship Potemkin; Ingmar Bergman: “We Are the
            Circus” ; Mauritz Stiller: Erotikon; Jean Renoir: The Rules of the Game; Woody Allen:
            A Midsummer Night’s Sex Comedy; Woody Allen: Love and Death, Scoop
            Peter Cowie: Chapters 7-9
June 15     Sawdust and Tinsel, Pudovkin and Eisenstein
June 16     Sawdust and Tinsel
June 17     Smiles of a Summer Night
June 18     Smiles of a Summer Night, The Seventh Seal Quiz 2
June 19     The Seventh Seal
Week Four:
FILMS: Wild Strawberries, Through a Glass Darkly, Persona
READING: Bordwell and Thompson 1: “Film as Art: Creativity, Technology, and
                     Business”;
            Balázs: “The Close-up” and “The Face of Man”; Barthes: “The Face of
                     Garbo”
            Recommended: Victor Sjöström: The Phantom Carriage; Woody Allen: Another Woman;
            Charlotte Perkins Gilman: “The Yellow Wallpaper”; Olivier Assayas: The Clouds of Sils
            Maria; Darren Aronofsky: The Black Swan
            Peter Cowie: Chapters 10-12
June 22     Wild Strawberries, Balázs, Barthes
June 23     Wild Strawberries, Through a Glass Darkly
June 24     Through a Glass Darkly
June 25     Persona Quiz 3
June 26     Persona
June 27     FIRST FIVE-PAGE PAPER DUE ON CANVAS, 9 PM
Week Five:
FILMS: A Passion/The Passion of Anna, Cries and Whispers Scenes from a Marriage,
READING: Bordwell and Thompson: Chapter 11: “Film Criticism: Sample Analyses,”
                                               4


                   and Appendix (CREATE): “Writing a Critical Analysis of a Film”
           Recommended: Michelangelo Antonioni: The Red Desert, Blow-Up; Francis Ford
           Coppola: The Conversation; Woody Allen: Blue Jasmine, Interiors, Husbands and
           Wives
           Peter Cowie: Chapters 13-14
June 29    A Passion/The Passion of Anna
June 30    A Passion/The Passion of Anna
July 1     Cries and Whispers
July 2     Cries and Whispers Quiz 4
July 3     Scenes from a Marriage
July 5     PRELIMINARY STORYBOARDS DUE ON CANVAS, 9 PM
Week Six:
FILMS: Scenes from a Marriage, Saraband
READING: Bordwell and Thompson: Chapter 12: “Film Art and Film History”
           Recommended: Peter Cowie: Chapters 15-16
July 6     Scenes from a Marriage
           LAST DAY TO TURN IN REWRITES
July 7     Scenes from a Marriage, Saraband
July 8     Saraband
July 9     Saraband Quiz 5
July 10    STORYBOARD AND SECOND 5-PAGE PAPER DUE ON
                   CANVAS, 9 PM
                                          5
