David (D.S.) Cohen          ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu        Office: DFA 4.112 Thursday 2-4p          Fall 2018
AET 336 Game History and Theory
Course Sections
 Instructor                  TA                     UID              Meeting Times           Room
 David (D.S.) Cohen          Samantha Brown         20944            M/W 12:30 - 2P          DFA 4.106
Abstract
        From the catalogue: Introduction to critical and historical approaches to video games and game
        design, including video game histories and archives, critical media theory in game development
        and contemporary social issues in gaming.
Objective
        Through historical examination, identify how game design and player engagement was innovated
        through the origins and progression of game technology; where mechanics that continue to be
        used today began, and how they have changed through decades of iteration and evolution.
Assessment
        This course is project and journal based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on successful
        completion of project, and journal objectives. Assignments are worth 60%, the final project is
        worth 30%, and the remaining 10% of the final grade is based on professionalism which is earned
        by attending class during the scheduled meeting times and conducting oneself in a professional
        manner.
        No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
        complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before the
        deadline for doing so passes.
        Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send an
        email and attach any class work as needed.
        Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
        fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
        will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
        grade of A+.
        Letter grade equivalents:
          A = 94-100                         C+ = 77-79                          D+ = 67-69
          A- = 90-93                         C = 74-76                           D = 64-66
          B+ = 87-89                         C- = 70-73                          D- = 60-63
          B = 84-86                                                              F = 0-60
          B- = 80-83
                                                                                                               1


        File Format:
        Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, concept art, etc. File Format: PDF;
        Game Builds – File Format: Executable file (.exe)
        File Naming Convention: ​If submitting as an individual…
        Firstname_Lastname_AssignmentName_Numeric DateSubmitted
        Example: davidc_conceptpitch_07042018
        If submitting as a team…​TeamName_AssignmentName_DateSubmitted
        Example: davidc_conceptpitch_07042018
        IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it may not
        read correctly.
Classroom Policy
        Devices
              ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
                   this with me prior to class).
              ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media (unless related to
                   class activities)
        Food/Drink
              ●    Food is not allowed in class.
              ●    Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
                   when not in use.
Required Equipment
        All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running Unity, GameMaker
        Pro, or Construct game Engine(s), and Twine. Either Mac or PC is fine.
Calendar
Note – This is outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
 1          8/29                                                                  Journal 1
            Course Intro
            What is play?
            The Player loop
            Journal 1​: Research a pre-video/digital coin-op arcade game.
            Analyze the game design, and player loop
 2          9/3
            Labor Day - No Class
            9/5                                                                   Journal 2
            Age of Discovery
            - Electronic Games
            - First Computer Games
                                                                                                           2


  - First AI Game
  - Brown Box Project
   Journal 2:​ Research one of the first electronic (non-video) games.
  Analyze the game design, mechanics, and user interface.
3 9/10                                                                      Project 1
  The First Generation
  Project 1:​ Design a game using just the capabilities of this first
  generation of game technology. Don't recreate an existing game; create
  new gameplay opportunities.
  9/12
  The First Generation (Cont.)
  Continue Project 1
4 9/17                                                                      Project 2 - Part 1
  Adventure Games (Text/Graphical/Point-and-click/Serialized)
  Project 2 - Part 1: ​Design a game map, and two puzzles for a text
  adventure game.
  Familiarize yourself with Twine. A tool for making text adventure games.
  http://twinery.org/
  9/19
  Adventure Games (Cont.)
  Continue Project 2 - Part 1
5 9/24                                                                      Project 2 - Part 2
  Rom Cartridge Revolution                                                  Journal 3
  Journal 3:​ Select an Atari 2600, ColecoVision, Intellivision or pre-1984
  arcade game that you feel innovated in some way. Examine the
  gameplay mechanics and player interaction. Where was it successful?
  Where did it fail?
  Project 2- Part 2: ​Using Twine, create a text adventure game based on
  the map and puzzles you created in Part 1
  9/26
  Rom Cartridge Revolution (Part 2)
  Project 2 - Part 2​ Continued
6 10/1                                                                      Journal 4
  Industry Crash (1983)
  Journal 4:​ Compare Atari 2600 game to an NES game
  10/3
  Industry Rebirth (1884)
7 10/8                                                                      Journal 5
  Home Computer Gaming
  Journal 5:​ Compare NES game with PC games the period/generation.
  10/10
  Computer Gaming (Cont)
8 10/15                                                                     Journal 6
  Handheld Gaming
  Journal 6:​ Identify and compare a game from the First or Second
  generation of handheld systems, with a modern mobile (iOS/Androud)
  game in the same genre. Outline and examine the differences between
  the player loop, and interface.
                                                                                               3


   10/17
   Handheld Gaming (Cont.)
9  10/22                                                                  Project 3 (Team Based
   16-bit gaming The Console Wars Begin                                   Final Project)
   Project 3 - Team Based Project - ​Design and build a game for a first  Journal 7
   through third generation game platform
   -
   10/24
   64-bit - Games Move to Disc (Except Nintendo)
   Journal 7:​ Examine and explain how the transition from 2D to 3D games
   impacted game mechanics and experience.
10 10/29                                                                  Project 3 (Cont.)
   3D Games                                                               Journal 8
   -
   10/31
   Experimental Games
   Journal 8: ​Identify and research a pre-2000 experimental art game.
   Break down the user experience and why it was a significant artistic
   statement.
11 11/5                                                                   Project 3 (Cont.)
   Online Gaming
   -
   11/7
   Online Gaming (Cont.)
12 11/12
   History of Game Development
   -
   11/14
   History of Game Development
13 11/19
   History of Game Audio
   -
   11/21
   Thanksgiving - No Class
14 11/26                                                                  Project 3 (Cont.)
   VR/AR Gaming                                                           Journal 9
   Journal 9 ​- Compare VR/AR user experience to that of the early
   first-person games. Examine design considerations that need to be
   made between these different experiences.
   -
   11/28
   VR/AR Gaming
15 12/3                                                                   Project 3 (Cont.)
   Looking at the Future though the Past                                  Journal 10
   Journal 10 -​ Select a currently used game mechanic and research its
   origins. Examine how the mechanic has evolved.
   -
   12/5
   LAB/Check-In
16 12/10 (Last day before finals)
                                                                                                4


         FINAL DUE
Units of Study
   1. Game Design Evolution
           ○ Using research and exploration to identify how game design and development has
               evolved through the progression of technology.
   2. Innovation through limitations
           ○ Readings and discussion of how early game design had to innovate through the tools that
               were available.
           ○ Designing and building games within the confines of these limitations.
   3. Understanding through the past how we play today
           ○ Understanding the gameplay loop (Compulsion loop, core loop, experience loop) and
               how it changes based on platform.
Process
      Students will maintain a journal as a record of their research on platform specific game design
      and comparing games, technology, and mechanics.
      Individually and in teams, students will design, and build games using the mechanics and
      limitations of platforms from specific time periods.
      Journals 1-3 - Due 10/1
           ●   Journal 1: ​Research a pre-video/digital coin-op arcade game. Analyze the game design,
               and player loop
           ●   Journal 2:​ Research one of the first electronic (non-video) games. Analyze the game
               design, mechanics, and user interface.
           ●   Journal 3: ​Select an Atari 2600, ColecoVision, Intellivision or pre-1984 arcade game that
               you feel innovated in some way. Examine the gameplay mechanics and player interaction.
               Where was it successful? Where did it fail?
      Journals 4-6 - Due 10/26
           ●   Journal 4:​ Compare Atari 2600 game to an NES game
           ●   Journal 5: ​Compare NES game with PC games the period/generation.
           ●   Journal 6: ​Identify and compare a game from the First or Second generation of handheld
               systems, with a modern mobile (iOS/Android) game in the same genre. Outline and
               examine the differences between the player loop, and interface.
      Journals 7-8 - Due 11/26
           ●   Journal 7:​ Examine and explain how the transition from 2D to 3D games impacted game
               mechanics and experience.
           ●   Journal 8:​ Identify and research a pre-2000 experimental art game. Break down the user
               experience and why it was a significant artistic statement.
      Journals 9-10 - Due 12/10
           ●   Journal 9: ​Compare VR/AR user experience to that of the early first-person games.
               Examine design considerations that need to be made between these different
               experiences.
           ●   Journal 10​ Select a currently used game mechanic and research its origins. Examine how
               the mechanic has evolved.
                                                                                                          5


         Projects
         Project 1 Individual Project - Due 9/17
         Building within design limitations of the first generation. Design a game using just the capabilities
         of this first generation of game technology. Don't recreate an existing game; create new
         gameplay opportunities.
         Project 2 Individual Project - Part 1 Due 9/21 , Part 2 Due 10/8
         Exploring how environmental navigation, puzzle mechanics, and decision trees can be
         experienced through text-only gameplay.
         Part 1: Design a game map, and two puzzles for a text adventure game.
         Part 2: Using Twine, create a text adventure game based on the map and puzzles you created in
         Part 1
         Project 3 Team Based - Weekly Progress Reports Due Each Tuesday - Final Project Due 12/10
         I​dentifying and building gameplay opportunities within the confines of graphical, mechanical, and
         interfaces of early game technology.
         As a team, select a platform from the first through third generation of video game consoles.
         Design and build a game that would be able to operate on that platform using Unity, Construct
         GameMake Pro. Games must exhibit a core loop/experience loop that is indicative of the period,
         and include at least one new concept in mechanics. Games can be Single or multi-screen. Single
         screen games can have multiple stages, however multi-screen (3 or more) games should be
         limited to a single level.
         While the final project will be due on 12/10, weekly reports from the team need to be submitted
         every Tuesday starting 10/29. Weekly reports must include progress updates, learnings, and a
         breakdown of the work accomplished by each team member.
Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns professionalism credit.
Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to attend class meetings. If attending a
scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are expected to promptly notify the instructor of
extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher
education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including
                                                                                                             6


any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
academic honesty University of Texas Honor Code The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. • If you require
assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. • In the event of an
evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re
given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
Services office.
                                                                                                           7
