                                 Sociology of Race and Work
                      AAS 330 (31550) / SOC 321R (43510) / WGS 322 (44750)
Instructor: Dr. Aarti Bhalodia
Email: bhalodia@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description
Work is a central activity in the lives of most people. Along with providing an income, the type
of work one does shapes the worker’s sense of personal identity. Social interaction in the work
place provides workers with a set of skills, values, and mindset that influences how the work is
done. Structure of a society determines the kind of work it does, who does what type of work,
and how much people are paid for their efforts. In the United States, individuals’ racial and
gender characteristics deeply shape how labor markets emerge and how skills are evaluated. Jobs
are often gender segregated and men and women are remunerated differently. This course is a
critical examination of work through a gendered and racial lens. The purpose of this course is to
examine concepts such as labor markets, globalization, racial segregation, and gendering of the
work place. This course is cross-listed with Asian American Studies and Women’s Studies.
This course carries the Cultural Diversity in the United States Flag. The purpose of the Cultural
Diversity in the United States Flag is for students to explore in depth the shared practices and
beliefs of one or more underrepresented cultural groups subject to persistent marginalization. In
addition to learning about these diverse groups in relation to their specific contexts, students
should engage in an active process of critical reflection. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one underrepresented cultural group in the U.S.
https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about
Course Objectives
Students will be able to sociologically identify concepts such as global markets, transnational
labor, care work, service industry, gendered work, and racial segregation in the work place. A
majority of the readings, films, and class meetings will focus on contemporary work
environment. Students will examine workers in the retail industry, care workers such as nannies,
maids, and nurses, transnational workers in the STEM fields, and migrant labor. We will start the
class with a survey of different forms of labor throughout the United States’ history. Students
will be able to make connections between American citizenship, work, and value of one’s labor.
Required Reading
Articles on Canvas
                                                  1


Skhlar. Judith. American Citizenship: The Quest for Inclusion. Harvard University Press. Any
Edition. – On reserve at PCL.
The following books are available in a digital format (“electronic resource”) through the
UT libraries. You can download relevant chapters in PDF format. Use the following link to
do a title search.
http://catalog.lib.utexas.edu/search/t
Ngai, Mae. Impossible Subjects: Illegal Aliens and the Making of Modern America. Princeton
University Press. 2013.
Thistle, Susan. From Marriage to the Market: The Transformation of Women’s Lives and Work.
University of California Press. 2006.
Wharton, Amy edited. Working in America: Continuity, Conflict, and Change in a New
Economic Era. Routledge. 2016.
Wright, Melissa. Disposable Women and Other Myths of Global Capitalism. Taylor and Francis.
2013.
Assignments and Grading
Attendance and Class Participation: 5%
Written assignments: 15%
Two Exams: 50% (2x25)
Research Essay: 20%
Research essay proposal and bibliography: 5%
Research presentation: 5%
Class participation: Attendance is mandatory. You are responsible for completing all the
assigned readings before each class meeting. Participation in class activities is crucial and a
component of your final grade. We will have regular class discussions based on required
readings in which you are expected to participate. If I am not satisfied with class participation I
will give a pop quiz.
Class etiquette: During lectures you should be listening attentively to the instructor and taking
notes. All PowerPoint slides will be posted on Canvas. During class discussions all students are
required to treat each other with respect. Students who are repeatedly disruptive will receive a
poor class participation grade. Disruptive behavior includes showing up to class late, leaving
early, talking to a neighbor while class is in session, talking/texting on a phone, checking
email/playing computer games and sleeping. I strongly encourage you to use pen/pencil and
paper to take notes and put away your electronic devices.
Written assignments: Take-home written assignments will be based on assigned reading, films
and other relevant course material.
                                                   2


Films: We will watch documentaries through the course of the semester. You will be tested on
film content and themes that come up in class discussions. You should treat the films as visual
texts.
Exams: You are responsible for completing two non-cumulative exams, each worth 25% of the
final grade. Exams will consist of short essay and short answer questions. Bring an unused blue
book and pen to class on the day of the scheduled exams.
Research Paper: The essay is an 8 page (double spaced) research paper due on the last day of
class. I will discuss ways in which one researches and writes a successful paper. You can also
find research essay guides on Canvas. A research description (350 words) along with a
preliminary bibliography is due in class on the assigned date. This assignment will help you
improve your research, analytical, organizational and writing skills.
You will also get an opportunity to share your work with the rest of the class. In the final weeks
of the semester all students will give an 8 minute oral presentation. You need to present on the
day you signed up for. If you are absent on your chosen date, you will lose all the points for this
assignment.
Deadlines: Hardcopy of written assignments are due at the beginning of class on the due date.
For every day that your assignment is late you will lose one letter grade on that assignment.
If you are having trouble in class or are dissatisfied with your assignment grade/s come see me
promptly. Don’t wait until the end of the semester to seek my guidance on how to improve your
standing in the course.
          Grade          Cutoff
          A              94%
          A-             90%
          B+             87%
          B              83%
          B-             80%
          C+             77%
          C              73%
          C-             70%
          D+             67%
          D              63%
          D-             60%
          F              <60%
Academic Integrity
As per University policy, those who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Refer to http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php for more
information on academic integrity, plagiarism, and consequences of academic dishonesty.
                                                   3


Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone).
http://sites.utexas.edu/disability/
If you have a disability you need to notify me during the first two weeks of the semester and
provide appropriate documentation from SSD (Services for Students with Disabilities).
Emergency Situation
Please familiarize yourself with recommendations from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security (512-471-5767) on what to do in the event of an emergency.
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: utexas.edu/emergency.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-
concerns-advice-line
The instructor reserves the right to change the syllabus. All changes will be announced in
class and on Canvas.
                                        Class Schedule
Part I           Immigrant Labor
Aug 28 W         Introduction to the course
Aug 30 F         Ngai, Impossible Subjects, p. 227-48. (Liberal Critique and Reform of
                 Immigration Policy)
Sept 2 M         No Class – Labor Day
Sept 4 W         Delano Manongs – Documentary Screening in Class.
Sept 6 F         Ngai, Impossible Subjects, p. 248-70.
Part II          Global Markets and Transnational Labor
Sept 9 M         Sharmila Rudrappa, “Braceros and Techno-Braceros: Guest Workers in the
                 United States and the Commodification of Low-Wage and High-Wage Labor,” p.
                 291-324. Canvas.
Written Assignment # 1 due at the beginning of class on September 11.
Sept 11 W        Trân Ngoc Angie, “Transnational Assembly Work: Vietnamese American
                 Electronic and Vietnamese Garment Workers,” p. 4-28. Canvas.
                                                  4


Sept 13 F     Melissa Wright, Disposable Women and Other Myths of Global Capitalism, p. 1-
              16 and 93-121.
Sept 16 M     Wright, Disposable Women, p.123-150.
Sept 18 W      Made in LA – Documentary Screening in Class
Sept 20 F      Made in LA – Documentary Screening in Class
Part III      Labor and Citizenship
Sept 23 M     Judith N. Shklar, American Citizenship: The Quest for Inclusion, p. 1-23.
Written Assignment # 2 due at the beginning of class on September 25.
Sept 25 W     Slavery By Another Name – Documentary Screening in Class.
              Shklar, American Citizenship, p. 24-50.
Sept 27 F     Shklar, American Citizenship, p. 51-75.
Sept 30 M     Shklar, American Citizenship, p. 76-101.
Oct 2 W       Exam Review
Oct 4 F       First Exam – In Class
Oct 7 M       Black Gold – Documentary Screening in Class.
Oct 9 W       Black Gold – Documentary Screening in Class.
Part IV       Service Industry
Oct 11 F      Amy Wharton ed. Working in America, “Division of Labor,” p. 25-28 and “Over
              the Counter,” p. 37-47.
Oct 14 M      No Class
Oct 16 W      Wharton ed. Working in America, “Hiring as Cultural Matching,” p. 157-168 and
              “Looking Good and Sounding Right,” p. 169-179.
Oct 18 F      Wharton ed. Working in America, “The Managed Heart,” p. 29-36 and “The
              Managed Hand,” p. 133-142.
Written Assignment # 3 due at the beginning of class on October 21.
                                               5


Oct 21 M      Dish: Women, Waitressing, and the Art of Service – Documentary Screening in
              Class
Oct 23 W      Dish: Women, Waitressing, and the Art of Service – Documentary Screening in
              Class
Part V        Gender and Work
Oct 25 F      Susan Thistle, From Marriage to the Market: The Transformation of Women’s
              Lives and Work, p. 1-11 and 54-78.
Oct 28 M      Thistle, Marriage to the Market, p. 99-132.
Written Assignment # 4 due at the beginning of class on October 30.
Oct 30 W      Christine L. Williams, “The Glass Escalator, Revisited: Gender Inequality in
              Neoliberal Times,” p. 609-629. Canvas.
Part VI       Care Work
Nov 1 F       Rhacel Salazar Parrenas, “Migrant Filipina Domestic Workers and the
              International Division of Reproductive Labor,” p. 560-80. Canvas.
Nov 4 M       Research paper description and bibliography due at the beginning of class.
              Print Copy.
              Maid in America – Documentary Screening in Class.
Nov 6 W       Maid in America – Documentary Screening in Class
              Wharton ed., Working in America, “Nannies on the Market,” p. 103-120.
Nov 8 F       Lisa Isaksen, Sambasivan U. Devi, and Arlie Hochschild, “Global Care Crisis: A
              Problem of Capital, Care Chain, or Commons?,” p. 405-425. Canvas.
Nov 11 M      Exam Review
Nov 13 W      Second Exam – In Class
Nov 15 – 22 Research Paper Presentations
Nov 25 – 29    Thanksgiving Holiday – No Class
Dec 2 – 6     Research Paper Presentations
Dec 9 M       Evaluations and Semester Wrap up
Print copy of research paper due at the beginning of class on December 9
                                               6
