                                  Psychology of Advertising
                                            Spring 2020
                             ADV 319|Unique Number: 06410
                                 M/W 9 - 10:15 BMC 2.106
Professor: Dr. Kathrynn (Kate) Pounders
Pronouns: she, her, hers
Email: kate.pounders@utexas.edu (Please use this email address instead of Canvas)
Office: BMC 4.388
Office Hours: Wednesday 2-3 and by appointment
Phone: 636-675-5831 (Cell)
TA: Marta Izarra (Last Name A-J)                        TA: Sabitha Sudarshan (Last Name: K-Z)
Pronouns: she, her, hers                                Pronouns: she, her, hers
Email: m3deluna@utexas.edu                              Email: sabitha.sudarshan@utexas.edu
Office: BMC Cubicle #17 (4th floor)                     Office: BMC Cubicle #3 (4th floor)
Office Hours: Monday 11-1                               Office Hours: Monday 12-2
IMPORTANT NOTE: Please only contact the respective TA you have been assigned, i.e, if your
last name starts from A-J, please contact Marta, and if your last name starts from K-Z, contact
Sabitha. This would ensure that your concerns are addressed as soon as possible, and as
efficiently.
Required Reading: Solomon, Michael, Consumer Behavior, Buying, Having, and Being (12th
edition), New Jersey: Pearson-Prentice Hall. This book is available as an ebook, value edition, or
bound hardcover. You can find it at the Co-op, Amazon, the Pearson website, and other venues
but it is critical that you buy the correct edition as chapter content will match the material on
weekly quizzes. Get the book ASAP!


Course Description: This course provides an overview of psychology as it pertains to consumer
behavior, particularly in the domain of persuasion, advertising, and more generally, marketing.
Students will become familiar with psychological perceptions such as motivation, perception,
learning, and memory. Additionally, the course introduces concepts related to consumer-
behavior, such as consumer demographics, psychographics, and the decision-making process to
understand both intended and unintended consequences that advertising has on consumers.
Course Objectives:
    1. Illustrate an understanding of psychological concepts as they relate to consumer
        behavior in the domains of persuasion, advertising, and marketing.
    2. Think creatively to solve problems that brands and the advertising industry face.
    3. Dissect how advertising impacts consumers at the individual, group, and cultural levels.
Student Responsibilities
Class Attendance: It is your responsibility to attend class. To reward attendance, exams will
include material: presented in class, from in-class assignments, and examples shared by
students, guest speakers and Dr. Pounders during class.
I encourage you to find a section of the lecture hall that you like and to sit in that section
throughout the semester. Get to know your neighbor – they may be the person you start a
successful company with someday – and it is also good to have a friend to study with. Getting
to know other students in class will also make the class feel a lot smaller.
Email: As email has become a favored way to communicate, you must learn to use it
appropriately. Keep your emails formal; write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss
at work, not to your friend. The TA is your first point of contact for your queries about grades.
I am your first contact about any questions regarding the course material. The TA and I will try
to return your email within 24 hours of receiving it on Monday through Friday, or by Monday
evening if we receive it on the weekend. E-mail is an excellent way to communicate if done
appropriately.
Canvas: In this class, you will use Canvas to monitor class announcements, access assigned
readings (in addition to the required books) and check grades. It is your responsibility to check
Canvas regularly. The Canvas page is: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1268093
My Responsibilities
Although this is a large class, my goal is to make it as interactive and participatory as possible.
While there will be days when I have to devote much of the class time lecturing, I will set aside
ample opportunities for discussion and participation.
I will make myself readily available if you have questions, concerns or just want to chat about


the material. The best way to get a hold of me is to stop by during office hours or to contact me
via email. I am always happy to set up a time to talk outside of office hours.
I recognize that individuals learn in different ways and will use teaching and testing methods
that acknowledge this. Lectures will draw on multiple media formats, including video, still
images and audio, in addition to written texts. Quizzes and assignments will be structured in a
variety of ways, including multiple choice, true/false, and short answer. Please contact me ASAP
if you are not performing as well as you would like in class.
Course Requirements and Learning Assessments
  Learning Assessment                   Percentage
  Exams (3)                             65%
  Weekly quizzes                        10%
  Assignments and Participation         15%
  Attendance and Professionalism        10%
  Total                                 100%
Exams: A total of 3 exams will be given during the regular semester. The exam dates are on the
course schedule and will not change. If you miss an exam (regardless of the reason) you will
receive a grade of zero (0) for that exam. There are no make-up exams. The only make-up
option is a cumulative optional final exam given during our scheduled final exam time.
This is for anyone who has missed one of the in-class exams or for anyone who wants to try and
replace the lowest in-class examination. Thus, if you do not miss any of the exams during the
semester and are happy with your grade the final exam is optional. The final exam will be held
on May 18th 2-5 PM, and you would be informed of the venue later on in the semester.
Exam Policy: Exams will not be administered after the first student has completed and
submitted his or her exam. This means that if you are late and another student has completed
their exam you will not be allowed to take the exam. Please be on time!
Exams will cover material from assigned readings, lectures, and videos shown in class. The
format is multiple choice and T/F questions. After the exams are graded and the grades are
posted, students will be given ONE WEEK to look over the exam during office hours. Any
concerns about the grading of each test must be resolved during this one-week period.
Quizzes: There will be weekly quizzes administered. Quizzes will be posted on Canvas and taken
on your own time. Each quiz consists of 10 multiple choice and/or /TF questions and will be
opened each Thursday morning and will close each Sunday at 11:59 PM. There is only one
chance to complete the quiz – once you begin you must finish. The quiz is due each week no
later than Sunday at 11: 59 PM. The quiz must be completed in 10 minutes. Your lowest quiz
grade (including a missed quiz) will be dropped.


It is your responsibility to ensure that your computer is charged, notifications are turned off,
and that have a good Wi-Fi connection (I recommend campus if you are unsure). The quiz
settings will not be restored due to computer or WiFi errors.
Attendance: You are expected to attend each class. Attendance will be tracked using the
Instapoll feature in Canvas. You must either have a laptop, a tablet, or a smartphone to use this
app. If you do not own any of these devices please let me know.
I will administer a total of 8 Instapolls during class. Only 7 will count toward your grade,
meaning that you can miss 1 “check-in” without penalty. On the days chosen to administer
attendance, the check-in may occur at any time during the class meeting (e.g., at the beginning
of class, in the middle of class, or right before the end of class). The TA or myself will let you
know when it is time to log in. If you have an issue with Instapoll you MUST see the TA after
class and provide them your EID to get credit. No credit will be issued otherwise.
Note: It is considered a breach of academic honesty to answer the Instapoll if you are not in
class.
Assignments and Participation: Although this is a large class, I would like the environment to
be as dynamic as possible. You are encouraged to participate in class – you will learn more.
There will be many in-class assignments throughout the semester– some of which will be
counted toward your attendance and participation grade. Some will be carried out individually
and others will be group assignments. In-class assignments will not always be announced ahead
of time – and so it is very important to attend class. You must be present in the classroom to
receive credit.
There will also be a total of three individual written assignments throughout the semester.
These assignments should be submitted via Canvas and should have your first name, last name,
and EID. No late work will be accepted; no exceptions.
Facebook Page: There is a FB page for this class. The name of the page is ADV 319 Spring 2020.
https://www.facebook.com/groups/3208747675820964/ Please join the course FB page no
later than Friday, 24th January, 2020.
The purpose of the FB page is to share interesting and current events related to course material
– as well as to keep each other updated on course deadlines, assignments, etc. Some students
do not always feel comfortable speaking in large classes, and so this is another outlet to express
viewpoints and opinions, which I think some of you will be more comfortable with. You are
expected to post/comment on current events related to the course.
Although you are not expected to post each week, your online presence should be consistent
throughout the semester in the form of both original content and replies to other posts. At a


minimum you are expected to turn in at least 1 original content (in the form of posts or replies
to an existing post) every four weeks beginning the week of January 27.
Professionalism: Arrive on time, do not pack up early, and stay the duration of the lass period.
Arriving late and packing up early causes disruption to everyone in the classroom, including
myself. People who do this aggravate me and may be contacted by the TA. If you must leave
class early, please tell me prior to class. You are responsible for any information missed during
an absence.
The PPT deck will be posted to Canvas after class. Be prepared to take notes during class.
Laptops may be used for class referencing and note-taking purposes. All other electronic
devices (including phones) should be put away. Any student caught surfing the Internet,
texting, checking email etc. for non-class purposes will be asked to leave immediately. If the
behavior persists, points will be deducted from the student’s final course grade each
subsequent time this occurs. In addition, talking and other distracting behavior may result in
students being asked to leave the classroom.
Policy on Lecture Slides: I will post slides on Canvas after class; these slides are my intellectual
property. Students who post them online are infringing on my intellectual property. This
activity is prohibited. By accepting this syllabus you must adhere to this policy.
Final Grades: Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric.
Additionally, I do not round. I do not respond the way you hope when you email me at the
end of the semester about your need for an extra .1 point to get a certain grade. Cutoffs are
listed so you can work from day 1 to ensure you are not on the edge by the end.
  A                  94-100
  A-                 90-93.9
  B+                 87-89.9
  B                  84-86.9
  B-                 80-83.9
  C+                 77-79.9
  C                  74-76.9
  C-                 70-73.9
  D+                 67-69.9
  D                  64-66.9
  D-                 60-63.9
  F                  < 60
Additional Words on Grading:
     ● When your work is graded you start with zero points. You earn points based on the
        quality of the work and the accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You


        do not start with 100 points and then lose them based on mistakes you might make.
        Your final points represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the
        number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
    ● Any disagreements about grades MUST be submitted in writing within seven days of
        when the grade is posted on Canvas.
Policy on Recommendation Letters: As you begin your college career, which might eventually
involve asking professors to recommend you for graduate programs, jobs, or internships, please
be aware that professors are not obligated to write references for any student who asks us. I do
not serve as a reference for a student unless I know the student well and can be positive about
his/her accomplishments and potential. Therefore, your job as a college student is to become
the kind of student professors can celebrate in recommendations — hardworking, inquisitive,
kind, and honest. Consider maintaining relationships with professors, so that they know you
well enough to write for you. Many juniors and seniors tell me they wish they had thought
about this during their first year.
Struggling? Know your resources.
    ● Your teaching team! Kate, Sabitha and Marta!
    ● UT’s Sanger Learning Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
    ● Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
    ● UT resources for health and wellness: http://www.utexas.edu/campus-life/health-and-
        wellness
Important Safety Information
In partnership with the Office of the Executive Vice President and Provost, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center’s Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) program has placed CARE
counselors in 13 colleges and departments to provide accessible mental health support for
students are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated
or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
    - Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
        | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
    - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
 CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
    - M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
 FREE Services at CMHC:
    - Brief assessments and referral services
    - Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
    - MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html


     -    Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/group
     -
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that
provides The University of Texas at Austin’s faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). An
individual can either call the line at 512-232-5050 or report their concerns using the online
submission form available at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/b
  Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
       harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at f
       ederally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning a
       nd working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduc
       t occurs in our community, the university can:
            1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
                2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have expe
                rienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
            3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
       Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
       “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title
       IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any and
       all Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-
       onone. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX relat
       ed incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to spea
       k with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the universi
       ty, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options a
       nd resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexa
       s.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to
report such misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status,
genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can be reported
to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
        ●   Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
            The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints
            of sexual misconduct and discrimination.
                o File a report of discrimination via online form


                o    Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
       ●    Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
            The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for
            enforcing federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and
            activities that receive federal financial assistance from the Department of Education,
            including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-
            661-9600.
       ●    Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
            The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing
            federal laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on
            the basis of a protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the
            Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy: The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution
of higher education shall excuse a student from attending classes or other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for
that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from
which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who misses
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day.
Documented Disability Statement: Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512)
471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
         Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
         accessible (e.g. instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for
         proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for
field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on
the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
         Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986
         (video phone) of reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
         Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as


         cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any
         act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
         dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information
         to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
         submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
         permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the
future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University.
Drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007
academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a
total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping
more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors
of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not
be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation
shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an
evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire
Department.
