                                             ANTH/LAS/ 391
                             Neoliberalism, Indigenous Peoples and the State
                                               SPRING 2020
                                            Wednesdays 1-4PM
                                                WCP 5.120
Professor Paola Canova
E-mail: pcanova@utexas.edu
OFFICE HOURS: Mondays 13:00-14:30 p.m. (or by appointment)
Location: WCP: 5.144
Phone: (512) 471 2762
CLASS DESCRIPTION
This seminar examines theoretical and ethnographic approaches to understanding the ways in which the
neoliberal State is constructed and experienced in different contemporary contexts. Challenging
conceptualizations of the State as bounded and homogenous we will critically engage key themes such as
governmentality, bureaucracy, sovereignty, multiculturalism, and citizenship to reflect on the multilayered
and oftentimes contradictory nature of the State. The course will provide students with analytical tools to
understand the State as a set of processes, discourses, practices and representations embedded in unequal
power dynamics that are in constant flux and that respond to particular historical and cultural contexts.
While readings will cover a different range of case studies, particular attention will be given to the
experiences of indigenous peoples and the State in Latin America.
Required Books
    • Auyero, Javier. Patients of the State: The Politics of Waiting in Argentina. Durham: Duke
         University Press.
    • De la Cadena, Marisol. 2015. Earth Beings, Ecologies of Practice Across Andean World.
         Durham: Duke University Press.
    • De León, Jason. 2015. The Land of the Open Graves: Living and Dying in the Migrant Trail.
         Berkeley: University of California Press.
    • Gago, Veronica. 2017. Neoliberalism from Below. Popular Pragmatics and Baroque Economics.
         Durham: Duke University Press.
    • Jackson, Jean. Managing Multiculturalism. Indigeneity and the Struggle for Rights in Colombia.
         Sandford University Press.
    • Mora, Mariana. 2018. Kuxlejal Politics: Indigenous Autonomy, Race and Decolonizing Research
         in Zapatista Communities. Austin: UT Press.
    • Postero, Nancy. 2017. The Indigenous State: Race, Politics, and Performance in Plurinacional
         Bolivia. Berkeley: University of California Press.
    • Simpson, Audra. 2014. Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life Across the Borders of Settler States.
         Durham: Duke University Press.
    • Tsing, Anna, 2017. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in
         Capitalist Ruins. Princeton University Press.
Additional required readings for the course will be available on the Canvas course website at
http://courses.utexas.edu/. I will use Canvas to distribute course materials, and to communicate and
collaborate online. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday
through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
REQUIREMENTS


1. Attendance and Participation (10%) Attending and actively participating in class is vital to the
     learning process. Your active participation in class is required. You demonstrate your commitment to
     the class by contributing respectfully to discussions and engaging enthusiastically in learning activities.
     Attendance will be checked randomly. Students who miss class due to illness or emergency are required
     to bring documentation from their healthcare provider or other relevant, professional third party. Failure
     to submit third-party documentation will result in unexcused absences. Four (4) unexcused class
     absences will result in forfeiture of all attendance points.
2. Weekly Memos (20%)
Weekly memos are to be no more than one doubled-spaced page long (excluding bibliography). They
should be analytical as well as synthetic to demonstrate mastery of the week’s reading. Note: Weekly
Memos should be uploaded to CANVAS by Tuesday 7PM. Please note, no late Memos will be accepted,
no exceptions.
3. Class presentation/Leading discussion (20%)
Students will be assigned to lead at least one class discussion, which will begin with a formal, oral
presentation of the reading accompanied by a one-page written handout summarizing key issues.
Presentations should cover key issues and concepts, convey and assess the authors’ arguments as well as
make connections to related issues. The student in charge of presenting should come prepared with a set of
the questions based on the readings to help facilitate class discussion. The idea is to involve the whole class
in the conversation.
4. Final Research Paper (50%)
A final research paper of between is due by the last day of class. See details in Guideline for Final Paper.
GRADES
Final grades will be assigned as follows:
(of 500 possible points)
A = 94-100 % A- = 90-93
B+ = 87-89         B = 84-86       B- = 80-83
C+ = 77-7        C = 74-76       C- = 70-73
D+ = 67-69       D = 64-66       D- = 60-63
F = 0-60
Note on Incompletes
Incomplete (I) grades are given only in documented emergency cases (usually only for a death in the family,
major illness or injury, or birth of your child), and if the student has completed the majority of the
coursework (usually everything but the final paper). If you encounter any difficulty that might prevent you
completing the coursework, please do not wait until the end of the term; contact the instructor immediately.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY AND OTHER UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will
be strictly enforced. In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines
academic dishonesty as basically all conduct that violates this standard, including any act designed to give
an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
• Cheating
• Plagiarism (Links to an external site.)
• Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion (Links to an external site.)
• Falsifying Academic Records


•    Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended
     deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
•    Multiple submissions (Links to an external site.) (e.g., submitting essentially the same written
     assignment for two courses without authorization to do so)
•    Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
NOTE: For the University's official definition of academic dishonesty, see Section 11-402 (Links to an
external site.), Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities at http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/
Documented Disability Statement: Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities      at    512-471-6259      (voice)     or    512-410-6644       (video     phone)     or    e-
mail ssd@austin.utexas.edu orhttp://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/ (Links to an external site.)
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
     exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
• If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Class Technology Policy: Cell phones must be silenced and put away. If I notice otherwise, you will be
marked absent. You may use a laptop to take notes. However, it should not be used for anything else during
class.
Please note: I reserve the right to change or amend the course syllabus as necessary.
COURSE SCHEDULE
01/22 Week 1: Introduction to Class
01/29 Week 2: Genealogies of the State
     • Foucault, Michel. 1991. Governmentality. In The Foucault Effect: Studies in Governmentality,
         edited by G. Burchell et al. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
     • Mitchell, Timothy. Society, Economy and the State Effect. In The Anthropology of the State, A
         Reader. Aradhana Sharma and Akhil Gupta editors. Wiley Blackwell.
     • Rose, Nikolas. 1999. Powers of Freedom. Reframing Political Thought. Cambridge University
         Press [Excerpts].
     • Brown, Wendy. 1992. Finding the Man in the State. Feminist Studies 18(1): 7-34.
02/05 Week 3: The State and Power
     • Agamben, Giorgio. 1998. Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life. Stanford: Stanford
         University Press [excerpts].
     • Clastres, Pierre. 1989. Society Against the State: Essays in Political Anthropology. New York:
         Zone Books [Excerpts].


    • Abu-Lughod, L. 1990. “The Romance of Resistance: Tracing Transformations of Power Through
      Bedouin Women.” American Ethnologist, 17(1): 41-55.
    • Trouillot Michel. 2001. The Anthropology of the State in the Age of Globalization: Close
      Encounters of the Deceptive Kind. In Current Anthropology 42(1):125-138
    • Das, Veena and Deborah Poole. 2004. Anthropology in the Margins of the State. Santa Fe: School
      of American Research Press [excerpts].
02/12 Week 4: Decolonizing the State
    • Rivera Cusicanqui, S. 2002. “Ch’ixinakax utxiwa: A Reflection on the Practices and Discourses
      of Decolonization.” South Atlantic Quarterly 111, no. 1: 95–109.
    • Cattelino, Jessica. 2010. The Double Bind of American Indian Need-Based Sovereignty. Cultural
      Anthropology 25(2): 235-263
    • Gupta, Akhil. 1995. Blurred Boundaries: The Discourse of Corruption, the Culture of Politics and
      the Imagined State. American Ethnologist 22(2): 375-402.
    • Sturm, Circe. 2014. Race, Sovereignty and Civil Rights: Understanding the Cherokee Freedmen
      Controversy. Cultural Anthropology 29(3):575-59.
    • Diaz Polanco, Indigenous Peoples in L.A. The Quest for Self Determination. Diaz Polanco.
      Chapter 6
02/19 Week 5: Neoliberal Politics
    • Harvey, David. 2007. A Brief History of Neoliberalism. Oxford University Press [excerpts].
    • Ong, Aihwa. 2006. Neoliberalism as Exception: Mutations in Citizenship and Sovereignty.
      Durham: Duke University Press. [Excerpts].
    • Bear, Laura, Karen Ho, Anna Tsing and Sylvia Yanagisako. 2015. A Feminist Manifesto for the
      Study of Capitalism. In Theorizing the Contemporary. Cultural Anthropology.
02/26 Week 6: State Violence
    • De León, Jason. 2015. The Land of the Open Graves: Living and Dying in the Migrant Trail.
      Berkeley: University of California Press.
03/04 Week 7: Borders and Sovereignty
    • Simpson, Audra. 2014. Mohawk Interruptus: Political Life Across the Borders of Settler States.
      Durham: Duke University Press
DUE: Title and one-page statement on your paper topic with an initial bibliography
03/11 Week 8: Bureaucracy
    • Auyero, Javier. Patients of the State: The Politics of Waiting in Argentina. Durham: Duke
      University Press.
03/18 Week 9: SPRING BREAK
03/25 Week 10: Multiculturalism
    • Jackson, Jean. Managing Multiculturalism. Indigeneity and the Struggle for Rights in Colombia.
      Sandford University Press.
04/01 Week 11: The Indigenous State
    • Postero, Nancy. 2017. The Indigenous State: Race, Politics, and Performance in Plurinacional
      Bolivia. Berkeley: University of California Press.


04/08 Week 12: Autonomy
    • Mora, Mariana. 2018. Kuxlejal Politics: Indigenous Autonomy, Race and Decolonizing Research
       in Zapatista Communities. Austin: UT Press.
04/15 Week 13: Cosmopolitics
    • De la Cadena, Marisol. 2015. Earth Beings, Ecologies of Practice Across Andean World.
       Durham: Duke University Press.
       Recommended Reading:
    • Blaser, M. 2014. “Ontology and Indigeneity: on the Political Ontology of Heterogeneous
       Assemblages.” Cultural Geographies, Vol 21(1) 49–58.
04/22 Week 14: Neoliberal Citizenship
    • Gago, Veronica. 2017. Neoliberalism from Below. Popular Pragmatics and Baroque Economics.
       Durham: Duke University Press.
04/29: Week 15: Salvage Capitalism
    • Tsing, Anna, 2015. The Mushroom at the End of the World: On the Possibility of Life in
       Capitalist Ruins. Princeton University Press.
05/06 Week 16: Conclusions
    • DUE: Final research paper.
