                 Anthropology 301 WB Fall 2019 (unique no. 30855)
           Introduction to Biological Anthropology (Web Based and Self-Paced)
                      COURSE WEBSITE: UT’s Canvas Course Website
PLEASE READ THIS SYLLABUS CAREFULLY AND ENTIRELY. YOUR SUCCESSFUL
COMPLETION OF THIS COURSE DEPENDS UPON YOUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE
INFORMATION CONTAINED IN THE SYLLABUS.
CONTACT INFORMATION                          Contact us through the course site on Canvas. Include your last name and
your UT EID in the "Subject" line of the email message.
PROFESSOR: Dr. John Kappelman. Office Hours: M W 12-1 pm in SAC 5.160, or by appointment. Since this course
does not have a formal lecture time, it is anticipated that some students will have scheduling conflicts with the official
office hours. Students are encouraged to contact the professor to set up an alternative meeting time by appointment.
Office telephone: 512-471-0055; email jkappelman@austin.utexas.edu – put your last name and UTEID in the subject
line.
TEACHING ASSISTANTS: Ana María Navas Méndez, Ingrid Lundeen, Allison McNamara, Ben Rodwell, and
Rachel Voyt. TA office hours are held in SAC 5.112 during review hours (see page 6 of this syllabus). Testing and
review hours are scheduled Monday-Thursday during mornings, afternoons, and evenings, but Fridays are for testing
only.
INTRODUCTION                This course is designed as an introduction to the field of biological (also called physical)
anthropology. During the semester you will investigate numerous and diverse subjects including modern evolutionary
theory, sexual reproduction, human genetics, biological variation in populations of modern humans, mammalian
phylogeny, primate diversity, behavior, biology, and ecology; the fossil record of primate and human evolution, and
archaeology. The diversity of these topics will illustrate how the topics of biological anthropology are integrated and
offer you an understanding of the place of humans in the world. All exams and labs are completed in the Computer
Testing Lab in SAC 5.112.
COURSE POLICY ON ACADEMIC HONESTY                                       Students who cheat not only cheat themselves but
also cheat other students and harm the reputation of the University. Any student found cheating (see below) will
receive an automatic F in the course, and their case will be directed to the appropriate University authorities for
additional sanctions that may include dismissal from the University. Please see the UT Honor Code.
Students ARE NOT permitted to copy or reproduce by any means (e.g., photograph, etc.) the exam questions,
ARE NOT permitted to copy or reproduce by any means the answers to the exam questions, and ARE NOT
permitted to share with or ask other students any information about the exams. Students ARE NOT permitted to
discuss the content of the exams with each other, and this includes all possible venues (informal hallway chat,
websites, forums, Facebook, TM, etc.).
Students ARE NOT permitted to discuss or share laboratory assignments and answers with another student(s) or
ask other students for answers, ARE NOT permitted to collaborate on the completion of lab assignments, and
ARE NOT permitted to submit lab assignments for each another.
A student(s) who requests any exam or lab information from another student puts the other student(s) in the
course at risk and s/he will receive an F in the course even if no information is supplied by other student(s).
                                                              1


This course has a ZERO TOLERANCE policy for cheating. Any questions
about the lab assignments and exams should be directed to the professor and
teaching assistants, NOT to your fellow students.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS                             To successfully complete this course, the student must be able to learn
the material without the benefit of lectures and formal laboratories. An introductory pdf provides an orientation to
the course (available on Canvas). Students are responsible for setting their own proper study pace for the course, but
must comply with due dates for the exams and lab assignments. This class is not less time consuming than other
classes, but it provides the student with broad latitude in arranging their study and testing schedule. The course may be
completed before the end of the semester by working in a more concentrated manner and testing before the due dates.
Any student who does not complete an exam(s) and lab assignment(s) by the due date will receive a grade of zero.
All of the work submitted in this course must be that of each individual student. Students ARE NOT permitted to
collaborate in the completion of laboratory assignments by discussing questions or sharing answers, nor are they
permitted to assist each other by discussing questions or sharing questions and answers from the examinations. Any
violation of this policy will be treated as cheating and the offender will receive an F in the course. The offender will be
referred to UT’s office of student judicial services for investigation and further disciplinary action.
Students will be required to sign an Academic Honesty Policy Compliance statement at the beginning of the semester
which states that they agree to follow these rules and that they understand that any violation of the Policy will result in
an F for the course and additional academic sanctions including possible dismissal from the University.
REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS                          The following materials are required for the course and are supplied as a
shrink-wrapped bundle in order to reduce the overall costs of the materials:
•Essentials of Physical Anthropology, Jurmain, Kilgore, & Trevathan, 2017, 10th edition (ISBN-13: 978-1305633810).
NOTE: the title and cover of the 3-ring binder version of the book for this course are different from the book that is
sometimes used for the lecture version of Ant 301. Be sure to purchase the correct book!
•Virtual Laboratories for Physical Anthropology, Kappelman, 2007, Version 4. Labs are on-line from UT’s TXShop
website, and the instructions are available on the Canvas course website. VLabs can be used with these browers:
Firefox, Safari, or Internet Explorer (but not Google Chrome). For purchase, go to the TXShop website: Virtual
Laboratories for Physical Anthropology
COURSE WEBSITE                     Go to UT’s Canvas Course Website. The website will aid you in completing the course.
It is strongly suggested that you visit the site frequently and at least weekly to view any announcements posted to the
bulletin board. In addition to the complete syllabus, the website contains links to interesting sites related to biological
anthropology. Most importantly, the class website provides the Virtual Lab assignments.
EXAM AND LAB REQUIREMENTS                                 The requirements for this class include:
1) You must present your UT ID card before you can test. No other ID is accepted (e.g., electronic ID), and you
      will not be permitted to test without your valid UT ID card. This is the ID for all exams and labs.
2) All students are required to take a compliance exam that evaluates their understanding of course policies as
      presented in the syllabus. You must earn a score of 100% before you are permitted to continue with the course.
3) Ten computer-generated exams based on readings from the textbook, Essentials of Physical Anthropology. You
      are permitted two attempts on each of the ten exams, with the higher of the two scores counting as the grade. All
      exams are completed in the SAC Computer Testing Lab (SAC 5.112). Sign-up sheets for reserving testing times
      are available on a bulletin board outside the testing lab (SAC 5.112). You must present your UT ID card before you
      can test. There are DEADLINE DUE DATES for these exams. Please see page 3 of this syllabus for exam
      deadlines.
4) Twelve lab assignments are based on the Virtual Laboratories for Physical Anthropology. Again, these
      assignments have DEADLINE DUE DATES. Deadline dates are staged on Tu and Wed according to the
                                                                2


     student’s last name in order to reduce lab congestion. You download each of 12 lab assignments from the
     Canvas course website, go online to the labs, work through each lab, answer the questions, and then bring your
     completed lab assignment to the SAC Computer Testing Lab (SAC 5.112) and enter your answers during REVIEW
     HOURS only. You must present your UT ID card before you can enter your answers. Please see page 3 of this
     syllabus for lab deadline dates, and page 5 for detailed lab submission instructions.
5) Students must complete a “Check Status” four times during the semester. Check Status is completed in the
     computer testing lab and shows your progress and grade(s) in the course up to that date. You can Check Status
     during lab hours as frequently as you like, but you are required to Check Status on at least four dates (see table
     below).
                                The testing lab opens on 3 September 2019
DEADLINE DATES: EXAMS, LABS, and CHECK STATUS
                        EXAM, LAB, & CHECK STATUS                           DEADLINE DATE
                             Syllabus Compliance Exam                             11 Sept
                      Exam 1                                                      13 Sept
                      Exam 2                                                      20 Sept
                                                                          24 Sept last name A-L
                                   Labs 1, 2, and 3
                                                                          25 Sept last name M-Z
                                                   Check Status                   27 Sept
                      Exam 3                                                       4 Oct
                      Exam 4                                                       11 Oct
                                                                           15 Oct last name M-Z
                                   Labs 4, 5, and 6
                                                                           16 Oct last name A-L
                                                   Check Status                    18 Oct
                      Exam 5                                                       25 Oct
                      Exam 6                                                       1 Nov
                      Exam 7                                                       8 Nov
                                                                           12 Nov last name A-L
                                   Labs 7, 8, and 9
                                                                          13 Nov last name M-Z
                                                   Check Status                   15 Nov
                      Exam 8                                                      22 Nov
                                           Thanksgiving Break             27-30 Nov (lab closed)
                      Exam 9                                                       2 Dec
                                                                           3 Dec last name M-Z
                                 Labs 10, 11, and 12
                                                                            4 Dec last name A-L
                                                   Check Status               6 Dec (Monday)
                      Exam 10                                                 9 Dec (Monday)
Be sure to note the “DEADLINE DATE” column in the above table. It is NOT possible to take an exam or submit a
lab assignment after the deadline other than in exceptional cases documented by an approved extension request (see
pages 7-8). The extension request form and documentation must be received no later than 1 week after the missed exam
or lab assignment; if the request is received after 1 week, it will not be accepted. For example, if a Friday exam deadline
is missed, the extension request form and documentation must be received no later than the following Thursday.
EXAMS
Exams are based on information from the Jurmain et al. textbook. Be sure to read all of the material carefully,
including figures and the “boxes” which highlight certain important historical and scientific events. In order to answer
                                                               3


some of the multiple-choice questions, you may be required to work Punnett squares (Mendelian genetics), complete
phylogenies and timelines, and identify bones and features in figures and plots.
A WORD OF CAUTION: exam deadlines are Fridays. Whenever possible, it is best to complete testing early in the week
before the Friday deadline because of potential overcrowding on Fridays. To take an exam on FRIDAY, you must
reserve a time slot in advance of when the testing lab opens by signing the sign-up sheet. Only ONE exam attempt is
permitted on Friday; if you wait until the deadline day of Friday to test for your first attempt, you will not be allowed a
second attempt to complete the exam.
                                EXAMS MUST BE TAKEN IN NUMERICAL ORDER!
                      Exam 1 = chapters 1 and 2                  Exam 6 = chapter 9
                      Exam 2 = chapters 3 and 4                  Exam 7 = chapter 10
                      Exam 3 = chapter 5                         Exam 8 = chapter 11
                      Exam 4 = chapters 6 and 7                  Exam 9 = chapters 12 and 13
                      Exam 5 = chapter 8                         Exam 10 = chapter 14
                 Chapter numbers are from the Jurmain et al. textbook (2017) 10th edition as noted above.
You must have your UT student ID card to test, and no exams will be given to students without a UT ID card.
You must sign in, and your ID card will be checked and left with the TA during the exam. Studying is not allowed in
the testing room. Books, notebooks, and electronic devices are not permitted in the testing area (cell phones have to
remain in pockets, backpacks or purses), and students are not permitted to copy down any questions or answers from the
exams. The TA will provide scratch paper if needed to work any problems, but the scratch paper must be returned to the
TA when the student finishes the exam. Exams are taken on computers in SAC 5.112 during posted testing hours only.
You should sign-up for a testing slot on the sheets posted on the bulletin board outside SAC 5.112 if you wish to reserve
a computer for a specific testing time. A second test is permitted on the same day but must be separated from the
first attempt by an exam review period. Students who reserve a testing slot receive priority for that testing time over
walk-in students. This is an especially important distinction on deadline days because no walk-ins are allowed on
Friday. Only students who sign up in advance before the testing lab opens on Friday will be seated on Fridays. In
order to expedite your time, it is also strongly recommended that you sign up for testing times on other days of the
week. You can also sign up for testing times in future weeks.
Since exams take approximately 10-15 minutes to complete, the last login time for an exam is fifteen minutes
before the end of each testing period. There are NO EXCEPTIONS to this rule; do not come by 5 minutes
before the end of the testing period and expect to test – you will not be seated for an exam. It is in your best
interest to plan out a weekly schedule and stick to it. We cannot reschedule testing times if the testing periods
conflict with your classes. If you have scheduling conflicts with the testing times given on page 6, you need to 1) drop
the course that conflicts with this course, 2) drop this course, or 3) rearrange your work/course schedule.
BEGIN TESTING EARLY in the week and keep a cushion of time between the deadlines if you want to take
advantage of testing flexibility. You will receive a grade of zero for any exam that you have not taken.
EXAM SCORING: Each exam consists of 15 questions worth 1 point each for a maximum score of 15. You may
retake each exam once, and the higher of the two scores will be counted toward your grade. No two exams are
identical because the questions in each exam are randomly selected from a large pool of possible questions. There is,
therefore, no advantage to taking an exam without studying with the intention of previewing the questions before trying
a second “serious” attempt. Exams are scored and the results are reported to you and recorded by the computer
immediately upon completion of each exam. You are strongly encouraged to record your exam scores in the
"Record Keeping" section at the end of this syllabus for your own information.
EXAM SECOND ATTEMPT: If you choose to take an exam twice, both attempts must be completed by the exam
deadline, and the highest score of the two attempts will be counted as the grade. Both attempts of the exam must be
completed before you can move on to the next exam because all exams must be completed in numerical order. If you
                                                               4


wait until the deadline day to complete the second attempt, be sure to sign up for a testing slot. You can check the
reservation sheets posted outside SAC 5.112 for computer availability. SIGN UP EARLY!
EXAM REVIEW PROGRAM: You can use the exam review program to review the results of your exam. It is
strongly recommended that you review your first exam before you take the second attempt, and you can only do this
during Review Hours. You are permitted to review one time only and the review is limited to 15 minutes.
HOW TO COMPLETE AN EXAM.
1. Bring your UT ID card to the SAC Computer Lab (SAC 5.112) during TESTING HOURS only. You must arrive
     at least 15 minutes prior to the end of a testing block in order to be seated (see page 4).
2. Sign into the testing lab with your name and the number of the exam that you wish to take. Only one exam can be
     cued at one time. Give your UT ID to the TA and they will log you into the system.
3. After the TA has logged you in, you will be directed to go to a computer station. Enter your UTEID at the prompt
     and you can begin your exam. You can navigate anywhere at any time though the exam, and should answer all of
     the questions. You can also review your answers before you “submit” the exam. The last screen shows you your
     score. You have 15 minutes to complete the exam.
4. When you have received your score, log off, and alert the TA with a wave of your hand that you are done. Once the
     TA recognizes you (usually a wave of their hand), you can leave the testing station.
5. Be sure to collect your ID card from the TA before you leave the testing lab.
6. If you want to review your answers, you need to come back during REVIEW HOURS (see above).
VIRTUAL LABS                The Virtual Laboratories are accessed at the TXShop Virtual Laboratories for Physical
Anthropology website and can be used with these browers: Firefox, Safari, or Internet Explorer (but not Google
Chrome). Each lab requires about 30-60 minutes to complete and can be worked through as many times as you wish.
You are encouraged to take notes while working on the Virtual Labs. Exact instructions for logging onto the Virtual
Labs website are given on the Canvas course website. All lab assignments are subject to a calendar of deadline dates
and must be completed in numerical order. Lab Assignments total 12 in number and are worth 5 points each, for a total
of 60 points.
The due dates for the Lab Assignments are listed on page 3. They are staged across Tu and Wed in alphabetical
order, and alternate by last name. Students are, however, strongly encouraged to submit their answers to their
completed lab assignments well before the due date. If a student waits until the due date, it is possible that s/he will
experience difficulties accessing the testing lab. Assignments not completed by their due date will receive a grade of
zero.
HOW TO COMPLETE VIRTUAL LAB ASSIGNMENTS. The lab assignments are downloaded from the Canvas
course website, and consist of a series of 10 questions that can be answered as you work through the different sections
of each of the 12 Virtual Labs. These exercises should be treated as open book assignments, but you must complete the
work on your own without assistance from other students. The labs are completed in the following manner:
1. Go to the Canvas course website and download the lab assignments. The assignments for each lab are in the “pdf”
     file format. It is probably easiest to simply print out a copy of the assignment and use this hardcopy to record your
     answers to the questions as you work through the lab.
2. As you work through each Virtual Lab, be sure to read all the various sections, navigate through all of the pages,
     view the video clips and animations, and complete the Virtual Lab exercises and brief quizzes. While working
     through each Virtual Lab, you will encounter information regarding the questions on the lab assignment that you
     have downloaded from the course website (item #1 above), and you can answer them at this time. You will find all
     of the answers to the questions in the Virtual Lab. Once you have completed the lab and answered all of the
     questions on the downloaded hardcopy assignment, you should double-check all of your answers for correctness.
3. Be sure to save the hard copy of your completed assignment for each particular Virtual Lab.
HOW TO SUBMIT VIRTUAL LAB ASSIGNMENTS: You are permitted ONE submission only for each lab. If
you submit answers for a lab more than once, you will receive an F in the course.
1. Bring your UT ID card and the hardcopy of your completed lab assignment to the SAC Computer Lab (SAC 5.112)
     during REVIEW HOURS only. You must arrive at least 15 minutes prior to the end of a review block in order to
     be seated (see page 4).
                                                                5


2.  Sign into the testing lab with your name and the number of the lab that you wish to complete. Only one lab can be
    cued at one time. Give your UT ID to the TA and they will log you into the system.
3.  After the TA has logged you in, you will be directed to go to a computer station. Take the hardcopy of your Virtual
    Lab completed assignment to the computer station (your answer sheet is the only thing you are permitted to take
    with you), enter your UTEID at the prompt, and enter your answers. You can navigate anywhere at any time though
    the lab, and should enter your answers to all of the questions. You can also review your answers before you
    “submit” the lab. The last screen shows you your score. You have 15 minutes to complete the lab. but in most cases
    you will finish answer entry in less than 5 minutes. Be sure to read the answers carefully because the computer
    program can randomize their order.
4.  When you have completed the answer entry and received your score, log off, and alert the TA with a wave of your
    hand that you are done. Once they recognize you (usually a nod of the head or wave of their hand), you can leave
    the testing station.
5.  Make sure that your name and UTEID are on your hardcopy lab assignment and give it to the TA. Be sure to collect
    your ID card from the TA before you leave the testing lab.
7.  If you wish to submit your answers for another lab (the due dates for the labs are in groups of three labs: e.g., Labs
    1, 2, and 3), the TA must re-enter you into the testing cue; if the testing lab is busy, you might have to go back into
    the sign-in line. Be sure to budget adequate time for the task.
TESTING AND REVIEW HOURS                            Exams and reviews are with 15 minute time limit in SAC 5.112. You
 are permitted to review each exam one time only, and can review each lab if you wish (but are not permitted a second
              attempt). You must log into the SAC lab at least 15 minutes before the end of review session.
                                                             6


The last page of this syllabus lists the Deadline Dates for the Exams, Labs, and Check Status
that you can post on the wall above your desk!
EXAM REVIEW AND TA CONSULTATION: Depending upon the number of questions missed in your first
attempt to pass an exam, the Exam Review program can take from 5 to 10 minutes to complete. The review is given in
SAC 5.112 during review hours only. You are permitted to review each exam one time only with a 15 minute time
limit. Any questions you have about material in the textbook or Virtual Lab can be answered by one of the TAs during
the review hours or by the professor during office hours.
CHANGES IN TEST SCHEDULE: Any changes in scheduling will be posted on the bulletin board outside SAC
5.112 and to the Bulletin Board on the course website. You will also receive an email about any changes. You are
strongly encouraged to check these two bulletin boards at least weekly. In addition, there is a sign-up sheet for testing
times on the bulletin board outside the testing room. You are encouraged to sign up for testing and lab submission
times well in advance of the day that you wish to test. If you wait until the deadline, you may find that few slots are
available. There is no online sign-up sheet.
GRADING Your course grade is determined by summing your exam and lab scores. When an exam is taken twice,
the higher of the two scores is counted toward the course grade. Grades are assigned as whole letter only (no +/-).
Grades are determined by your cumulative point total: 150 possible points for the exams, and 60 possible points for the
Virtual Lab assignments, for a total of 210 possible points. A pass/fail grade must have 125 points or more to earn a
“pass.” When calculating the letter grade, we follow this commonly used rounding rule: if the point fraction is less
than 0.5, it rounds down; if it is greater than 0.5, it rounds up; if the value is exactly 0.5, it rounds up if the preceding
digit is odd, and down if the digit is even. For example: 166.3 = 166; 166.6 = 167; 167.5 =168; 166.5 = 166.
See http://ned.ipac.caltech.edu/level5/Leo/Stats8.html
                                     GRADE                 POINTS             Percent Score
                                         A                 188-210                 > 90%
                                         B                 167-187                80-89%
                                         C                 146-166                70-79%
                                         D                 125-145                60-69%
                                         F                124 or less              < 59%
EXTRA CREDIT               There is no extra credit. Please take full advantage of the fact that you are permitted to count
the higher of two attempts on each exam toward the final grade, and that the labs are “open book” assignments.
OTHER ISSUES Disabilities, Extensions, and Drops and Incompletes
Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259.
Extensions
Requests for an extension for missed work because of a sanctioned University activity, documented illness, family-
related emergency, or death in the family will be dealt with on a case-by-case basis, but whatever the circumstance,
documentation is required. If you are unable to document your excuse, you will not be permitted to make up the missed
work. Because the labs and exams can be completed at any time, simply missing a Friday deadline does not ensure that
you will be permitted to make up missed work even if the excuse is documented. Whatever the case – sanctioned
University activity, documented illness, family-related emergency, or death in the family – full documentation is
required. If you find yourself so sick that you must miss an exam or lab submission, you should see a doctor, and if you
do, the doctor will give you a written excuse.
Permission to make up missed exams or labs requires a completed Extension Permission Request Form (available from
the TA in SAC 5.112). The extension request, consisting of a completed Extension Permission Request Form (available
                                                                 7


in SAC 5.112) along with supporting documentation must be submitted NO LATER THAN ONE WEEK
FOLLOWING THE MISSED EXAM OR LAB ASSIGNMENT WITH:
     1) If an illness, a medical excuse documented by a letter from your doctor;
     2) If a family emergency, written documentation;
     3) If a family death, an obituary or death certificate; or
     4) If a University-sanctioned activity, a letter from the director of the organization delivered to us BEFORE the
          event since these events are scheduled months in advance; and
     5) If a work-related conflict, a note from your supervisor.
If a scheduling conflict arises from work or some other issues that will cause you to miss a deadline, please inform us as
early as possible so we can assess the validity of the conflict and make any necessary arrangements. If you do not tell
us ahead of time about a scheduled event, you will not receive permission to make up the missed work.
The extension request must receive approval before any missed work can be made up. If you cannot provide
independent documentation that we can verify, the extension request will not be approved. We check on all excuses.
During the days when a completed extension request is under evaluation, you should continue to meet the exam and lab
assignment schedule.
Drops and Incompletes
If you find that you are unable to complete the course, you may obtain a drop with a “Q” if you file the appropriate
paperwork (available from your dean’s office). This request must be filed by the University deadline.
An incomplete after the deadline date can generally only be granted for a serious medical condition as documented by a
letter from your doctor. In only exceptional cases are other excuses considered legitimate grounds for an incomplete,
and these excuses generally require approval from your dean’s office.
We strongly advise you to finish the course as early as possible and thereby avoid any last-minute problems.
                 It is your responsibility to finish the course on time!
SOME IMPORTANT DATES AND DEADLINES TO REMEMBER
3 Sept               SAC 5.112 testing lab opens; first day exams and labs are available in the computer lab.
                     Last day of official add/drop period.
11 Sept              Deadline day to pass course compliance test.
13 Sept              Exam 1 deadline.
                     Twelfth Class Day. Last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare and
                     extenuating circumstances. Last day to drop a class for a possible refund.
See syllabus page 3 for all other exam, lab, and check status deadlines.
31 Oct               Last day a student may, with their dean’s approval, withdraw or drop a class, or change to
                     pass/fail basis.
27-30 Nov            Thanksgiving Break (no testing).
3 & 4 Dec            Lab assignments 10-12 due (no exceptions).
9 Dec                Exam 10 due (last day of testing: no exceptions).
For additional University dates and deadlines, see https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/18-19
                                                              8


Ant 301 WB Scores                                                        Name
_____________________________
When you check status, record your scores in the tables below so that you keep a record of your point totals:
EXAMS
       EXAM #         DATE             SCORE               DATE             SCORE          BEST SCORE
                                   1ST ATTEMPT                          2nd ATTEMPT
          1
          2
          3
          4
          5
          6
          7
          8
          9
          10
                                                                                          ________________
                                                                                         Total Exam Points
VIRTUAL LAB ASSIGNMENTS
        LAB #         DATE              SCORE               LAB #          DATE              SCORE
          1                                                    7
          2                                                    8
          3                                                    9
          4                                                   10
          5                                                   11
          6                                                   12
                                                                                       __________________
                                                                                            Total Lab Points
                                                        9


PRINT OUT THE LAST TWO PAGES AND POST WHERE YOU CAN REFER TO THEM
                  Anthropology 301 WB Spring 2019 (unique no. 30855)
Exam content from Jurmain et al. (2017) Essentials (10th edition textbook)
               Exam 1 = chapters 1 and 2                Exam 6 = chapter 9
               Exam 2 = chapters 3 and 4                Exam 7 = chapter 10
               Exam 3 = chapter 5                       Exam 8 = chapter 11
               Exam 4 = chapters 6 and 7                Exam 9 = chapters 12 and 13
               Exam 5 = chapter 8                       Exam 10 = chapter 14
Exam, Lab, and Check Status Deadline Dates
                EXAM, LAB, & CHECK STATUS                       DEADLINE DATE
                    Syllabus Compliance Exam                          11 Sept
               Exam 1                                                 13 Sept
               Exam 2                                                 20 Sept
                                                               24 Sept last name A-L
                          Labs 1, 2, and 3
                                                              25 Sept last name M-Z
                                          Check Status                27 Sept
               Exam 3                                                   4 Oct
               Exam 4                                                  11 Oct
                                                               15 Oct last name M-Z
                          Labs 4, 5, and 6
                                                               16 Oct last name A-L
                                          Check Status                 18 Oct
               Exam 5                                                  25 Oct
               Exam 6                                                  1 Nov
               Exam 7                                                  8 Nov
                                                               12 Nov last name A-L
                          Labs 7, 8, and 9
                                                              13 Nov last name M-Z
                                          Check Status                 15 Nov
               Exam 8                                                  22 Nov
                                  Thanksgiving Break          27-30 Nov (lab closed)
               Exam 9                                                   2 Dec
                                                                3 Dec last name M-Z
                        Labs 10, 11, and 12
                                                                4 Dec last name A-L
                                          Check Status            6 Dec (Monday)
               Exam 10                                            9 Dec (Monday)
                                                     10


                  Anthropology 301 WB Spring 2019 (unique no. 30855)
Testing and Review Hours: SAC 5.112
                                        11
