           University of Texas at Aus2n                    Dept. of Middle Eastern Studies
                      ‫ الفصل الدراسي الثاني‬:‫اللغة العربية‬
                      ‫دور األدب والفن في املجتمعات العربية‬
                     ARA 360L ARTS/LIT IN ARAB SOCIETIES
                                            Spring 2020
                                          ً‫أھالً وسھال‬
Unique #: 40514
Class descrip1on:
What are the messages delivered through literature and arts in socie2es where media is too
poli2cal to deliver the real opinions. How could Art and literature change the way of thinking or
lead for changes?
In this course students will explore the role of diﬀerent kinds of arts in inﬂuencing Arab socie2es
and poli2cs. Students will analyze and understand diﬀerent art and literature in Arab society by
reviewing and discussing documentaries and interviews with famous and /or controversial
ar2sts who were able to make a change in the Arab world through their ar2s2c work. Students
will study cultural and historical pieces of art and literature with using authen2c texts in which
Arabs speak about their own land, culture and people. Works by Naguib Mahfouz, Nawal El
Saadawi, Mahmoud Darwish, Sinan Antoon, Muhammad al Maghut, Nizar Qabban, Khalil Gibran
and others will be read/watched, analyzed and cri2qued.
Materials:
All course materials will be made available via Canvas. There is no required textbook. All of the
materials throughout this course are meant to be used as a tool for discussions and debates in
Arabic and all material and classes will be conducted en2rely in Arabic. Every week the students
will have an assignment which is a combina2on of reading excerpts and and some media
content like documentaries from Aljazeera and BBC Arabic to cover all the aspects about the life
and works of the selected ar2st or author. Almost every week there will be a diﬀerent theme .
Some themes may reoccur like feminism, Pales2ne, homesickness, and Lebanese civil war as
they are the most common ones that are present in Arab literature and arts. Most of the
selected materials will be from the levant and Egypt. Addi2onally, there will be a room
dedicated for extra themes suggested by the students.
Objec1ves:
All wriWen and oral texts will be used to expose students to diﬀerent genre with con2nuing to
build on their language skills and with the aim of helping students achieve advanced-mid/
advance-high level proﬁciency in the language while working towards superior proﬁciency.


There will be a con2nued focus on building vocabulary and focusing on how word choice aﬀects
the impact on the way of thinking in the Arab world. This will improve students' reading and
cri2cal thinking skills in Arabic. All of the materials throughout this course are meant to be used
as a tool for discussions and debates in Arabic and all material and classes will be conducted
en2rely in Arabic. At the end of this class students should be able to discuss important abstract
topics in Arabic with the right use of language that is totally understandable for na2ve speakers
and loaded with an impressive high level vocabulary choice. This class will improve students'
reading, speaking and cri2cal thinking skills in Arabic.
Grading:
AWendance&par2cipa2on         20%
Homework                      15%
Class presenta2on             10%
Vocabulary quizzes            15%
Oral Submissions              10%
Wri2ngs                       10%
Final                         20%
A<endance and par1cipa1on 20 %
You will be graded upon your par2cipa2on in class discussions, your work in group work, arrival
on 2me, prepara2on for the class content. Using phones will deduct from your aWendance
grade if not directed by the teacher as a part of a class ac2vity. Many 2mes you will be asked to
watch some media content in class, so always be ready with your laptop and your earphones.
You have to monitor your par2cipa2on. You really have to interact with the topic in class. Always
ask ques2ons. You are expected to keep talking most of the 2me of the class, if not, then you
will be thinking in Arabic. However, try not to be the only one answering all of the ques2ons.
Work towards crea2ng a good balance with your other classmates.
while you are par2cipa2ng.
Homework 15%
You will have one homework to be submiWed every Tuesday before the class 2me. Every week
you will have a homework that is graded out of 10. Missing a homework will aﬀect your ﬁnal
grade for homework big 2me because the number of homework submissions is just as the
number of the weeks. Homework will take diﬀerent shapes from small intro or presenta2on to
wri2ngs which will reﬂect your work on the weekly assigned materials of the class.
Homework will focus on reading/watching texts. Every week you should have an outline for the
content you prepared with your choice of vocabulary list and ques2ons unless assigned another
way by the instructor.
Homework assignments (on Canvas and wriWen) should be submiWed by the start of class. Late
homework assignments will not be accepted.
 When submigng homework:


          1. Write your name in Arabic.
          2. Write the homework number (from assignment schedule).
          3. Hand-write your assignments, unless instructed otherwise on the weekly schedule.
              The reason is to work on improving handwri2ng and increase familiarity with the
              Arabic script.
          4. Staple pages together or use a paperclip
          5. Double space. This gives your instructor and TA room to provide feedback.
          Failure to do any of the above may result in points lost.
Class Presenta1on: 10%
Each student will choose an author or ar2st and research their life and how their work(s) had an
eﬀect on Arab society.
Students will work together in groups to present. Presenta2ons should have two parts :lecture
and interac2ng ac2vity with the class. Topic of the presenta2on should be discussed with the
instructor ahead of 2me.
Vocabulary quizzes 15%
 Quizzes will focus on language acquisi2on and will primarily test students' ability to use newly
acquired vocabulary through the semester.
Vocabulary lists: you will build your vocabulary lists every Tuesday be selec2ng the most
important vocabulary words from the assignments. More explana2on about the vocabulary will
be in a separate ﬁle on canvas en2tled by Vocabulary lists.
Oral submissions 10%:
You will be required at 2mes to submit a recording through canvas of your own reﬂec2on on a
piece of literature that you read or an assigned media content. The main purpose of the
recordings is to show your ability to express verbally the ideas you got from the readings.
Wri1ngs 10%
Ajer comple2ng a thorough understanding of the art/literature piece being studied, students
will be asked to write a summary that details the work, its meaning and what eﬀect it has on
society.
Wri2ngs can also be a reﬂec2on of the student’s thoughts about some topic that was already
discussed in class.
 Final      20% TBA
Important Course Policies:
Academic Honesty:
    ¬ Do your own work.
    ¬ Using any means to obtain homework answers without doing the work, gegng help from a
        ﬂuent Arabic speaker, using Google Translate, or having your work checked by anyone other
        than your instructors before submigng it are all viola2ons of the UT Honor Code and will be


      treated accordingly. These and any other academically dishonest behaviors will not be tolerated.
      If you are in doubt of whether you are breaking this policy, please ask. Your honesty will be
      appreciated.
   ¬ You are encouraged to study and work on homework assignments together; however, each
      student must par2cipate fully in doing the work and submit his/her own individual answers.
      Doing otherwise violates the UT Honor Code and may result in disciplinary ac2on.
   ¬ The UT Honor code is in eﬀect in this class. Submigng any assignment or exam that is not your
      own, or that you did not par2cipate fully in doing, is a viola2on of that code.
Language:
   ¬ Arabic is the language of our classroom; you are expected to speak only in Arabic from the :me
      you enter the classroom. If you think you need to use English, please ask permission ﬁrst.
      Controlling the urge to blurt out even a few words in English is an important part of keeping your
      brain in “Arabic-mode” and of maintaining our intensive learning environment. You will have the
      op2on of using English in oﬃce hours.
Classroom Conduct:
   ¬ Use of laptops (unless requested by the instructor) and cell phones is not permi<ed. Please
      put cell phones in silent mode (not just vibrate) and keep them in your backpack. Having your
      cell phone/laptop/ tablets out during class will result in deduc2ons from your par2cipa2on
      grade.


Final Grade Calcula1on and Grade Policies
Grade Distribution:
A        94–100            B+       87–89                     C+      77–79
A–        90–93            B       84–86                      C      74–76
                           B–       80–83                     C–      70–73
D+        67–69
D        64–66
D–        60–63
F         0-59
●    Grades on the border between two leWer grades (89.9 for instance) may or may not be rounded up
     to the next higher leWer grade, at the instructor’s discre2on.
●    You must earn a C or higher to con2nue to the next UT Arabic course. Thus, if you take this course
     pass/fail, you will not be eligible to con2nue to the next Arabic course. Audi2ng is not permiWed and
     incompletes will not be given in this course.
●    Your instructor will record your grades regularly. It is your responsibility to check your grades
     regularly. If you no2ce any grade that you have a ques2on about, you are welcome to discuss it with
     your instructor no later than one week from the date on which the grade is posted. If your ques2on
     concerns a grade you received on paper, please bring the par2cular assignment (homework,
     correc2ons, wri2ng porrolio entries, etc.) to your instructor to discuss it.
●    This syllabus is subject to change. However, any changes will be brought to the aWen2on of students
     in wri2ng via e-mail communica2on and also verbally in class.
Principles for Group Ac1vi1es
There can be no language without community. In our class community, respect for each other at all
2mes will ensure a posi2ve and fruirul learning experience. We will spend at least 75% of class 2me in
small group or pair ac2vi2es so that each one of you gets the maximum possible 2me to par2cipate and
prac2ce. During these ac2vi2es, the instructor plays the role of personal trainer. Learning a language is
a lot like going to the gym: the personal trainer guides you and pushes you to do your best, but you have
to do the work to get the beneﬁt.


Please keep in mind the following principles for group work:
− Speak in Arabic. If you need help, ask for it from your classmates, TA or instructor.
− Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them: each of you can learn with and
     from everyone else.
− Every partner in the group work will speak the same amount. Give a chance for your partner to
     talk even if you know the answer. Don’t men1on all of the answers immediately at the beginning
     of the group work. Be pa1ent with your partner so he/she can get beneﬁt from the conversa1on
     and prac1ce with you about what he read at home.
− Work with diﬀerent people on a regular basis.
− Come prepared. Don’t be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to fully par2cipate
     in the work.
− Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to ﬁnish. Most ac2vi2es are designed to elicit
     crea2ve play with vocabulary and structures on which we are working. Take advantage of class 2me
     by pushing yourself to be crea2ve and say and write as much as you can. If your group ﬁnishes a task
     before others, use your remaining 2me construc2vely with your partner and con2nue working on
     your Arabic.
− The instructor may call 2me before everyone is ﬁnished. If your group does not ﬁnish or you s2ll
     have ques2ons, ask your instructor ajer class or during oﬃce hours.
IMPORTANT POLICIES
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in eﬀect in this class. Submigng any assignment or exam that is not your own, or
that you did not par2cipate fully in doing, is a viola2on of that code. Please see here for further details
regarding the UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity: hWp://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
acint_student.php
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking
country or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to enrollment in
this course must take the departmental placement examina2on for Arabic before beginning their study
of Arabic at UT. Failure to do so cons2tutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Disabili1es
Students with disabili2es who require special accommoda2ons need to get a leWer that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabili2es area of the Oﬃce of the Dean of Students
(471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This leWer should be
presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommoda2ons
needed should be discussed at that 2me. Five business days before an exam the student should remind
the instructor of any tes2ng accommoda2ons that will be needed. See website below for more
informa2on: hWp://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Religious holy days
A student who misses classes or other required ac2vi2es, including examina2ons, for the observance of
a religious holy day MUST inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable 2me ajer the absence. The
Department of Middle Eastern Studies’ policy allows students to miss a maximum of 3 consecu2ve class
periods for religious observance.
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work
and announcements. Canvas is available at: hWp://canvas.utexas.edu Support is provided by the ITS Help
Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm.


Use of E-mail for Oﬃcial Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's oﬃcial e-mail student no2ﬁca2on policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communica2ons, recognizing that certain communica2ons may be 2me-cri2cal. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instruc2ons for upda2ng your e-mail address are available at hWp://www.utexas.edu/its/
policies/emailno2fy.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is ac2ng diﬀerently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Oﬃce of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit hWp://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
The State of Texas enacted a law limi2ng the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an ins2tu2on of higher educa2on may
not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another ins2tu2on of higher educa2on, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.”
Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault
It is the policy of the University of Texas at Aus2n to foster a campus environment that is free from
in2mida2on and one in which students may be educated to their fullest poten2al. Therefore, the
University will not tolerate any forms of harassment, physical abuse, threats of violence, physical assault,
or any form of sexual assault, including but not limited to acquaintance or date rape. Title IX makes it
clear that violence and harassment based on sex and gender is a Civil Rights oﬀense subject to the same
kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to oﬀenses against other protected
categories such as race, na2onal origin, LGBTQ iden2ty, etc. If you or someone you know has been
harassed or assaulted in any way, you can ﬁnd the appropriate resources here:
Voices Against Violence Program
(512) 471-3515 for informa2on, counseling and advocacy.
UT Aus1n Police:
hWp://www.utexas.edu/police/
Dean Of Students:
hWp://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/
hWp://www.utexas.edu/ogs/student_services/ethics/harassment.html
Student Counseling & Health Services
hWp://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Campus Carry
1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do not
aWempt to ques2on or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to handle this
situa2on.
2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited, including
some por2ons of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible for knowing the
loca2ons that exclude concealed handguns and to plan their daily ac2vi2es carefully.
3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all 2mes while on campus.
"About" the person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or
handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it
without materially changing posi2on. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have


enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
4. All license holders must think through the ac2vi2es of their day. There may be 2mes when the
consequence of your ac2vi2es may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are going to a
Rec Sports area, have a class that requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact with other
students, you might expose the handgun. Remember that there is no storage on campus except in a
privately owned vehicle.
5. Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand those
passions.
However, regardless of your opinion about the legisla2on, you are required to follow the laws laid out by
the State of Texas, and the policies of The University of Texas at Aus2n. We also ask that everyone show
respect toward other members of the university community who have diﬀerent views.
