                                       INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHISM
                                            ANS 301M / R S 312C, Spring 2019
                                          Instructor: Dr. Oliver Freiberger
                                              E-mail: of@austin.utexas.edu
This course examines the history of Buddhism by tracing the development of its various schools, doctrines, and
religious practices in Asia and beyond. We will explore the historical background against which it arose in India, and
study traditional views of the life of the Buddha, the early teachings, and the structure of the Buddhist community
of monastics and laypeople. We will examine the growth of Buddhism in India, the development of Theravāda
Buddhism and its spread into South East Asia. The emergence of Mahāyāna Buddhism in India and its spread into
Central Asia and East Asia will be covered as well as the development of Vajrayāna Buddhism in Tibet. We will then
examine the 19th century movement of Buddhist modernism in Sri Lanka and its relations to the Western world.
This will be the basis for eventually exploring the various ways Buddhism came to Europe and America and
examining the new forms and ideas it developed here.
Textbooks
1. C.S. Prebish, D. Keown. Introducing Buddhism. 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2009. [OR: C.S. Prebish, D. Keown.
Buddhism – the eBook. 4th ed. See www.jbeonlinebooks.org (or through PCL).]
2. J.S. Strong. The Experience of Buddhism. 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2008.
Grading
Attendance/participation: 20%
Three quizzes: 30% (10% each)
Oral presentation or site visit report: 20%
Final exam: 30%
Grading scale: 93–100: A. 90–92: A-. 87–89: B+. 83–86: B. 80–82: B-. 77–79: C+. 73–76: C. 70–72 C- etc.
Scholastic dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
“Scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records,
and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor, providing
false or misleading information in an effort to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other
assignment), or the attempt to commit such an act. For further information please visit the Student Judicial
Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Students with disabilities
The Faculty Council's Educational Policy Committee states, "Providing a quality educational experience for all
students includes adapting the instructional environment to accommodate the educational needs of students with
information about Services for Students with Disabilities through the course syllabus." At the beginning of the
semester, students should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) Office (phone 471-6259), which
will prepare an appropriate letter to the instructor to guide you. See also the SSD website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/
Global Cultures Flag
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with
cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or
present.
SCHEDULE


                                                2
Week 1: Introduction
Week 2: Background to Buddhism
Week 3: The Buddha
Week 4: The Dharma
Week 5: The Buddhist Saṅgha
Week 6: Buddhism in India – QUIZ 1
Week 7: Mahāyāna
Week 8: Vajrayāna
–– SPRING BREAK ––
Week 9: Buddhism in South-east Asia
Week 10: Buddhism in East Asia – QUIZ 2
Week 11: Buddhism in Tibet
Week 12: Buddhist Modernism
Week 13: Buddhism in the Western World – QUIZ 3
Week 14: Socially engaged Buddhism
Week 15: Buddhist Ethics, Conclusion
Final exam: May 16, 9:00am–12:00 noon
