                                                                                              Page !1 of !9
Syllabus, Class Policy Statement,
and Schedule
Summer 2019 – RHE 306: Rhetoric and Writing
Instructor: Tristan Hanson
Unique number: 83405
Class Time and Place: MTWThF 10:00-11:30am, SZB 422 (George I. Sanchez Building)
E-mail: hanson.tristan@utexas.edu
Course Website: Canvas - http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Office: Prufrock’s Java City (PCL)
Office hours: MTWTh 12:00-1:00pm, and by appointment
TEXTBOOKS
    •    Controversies. 40 Acres Press, 2016.
    •    The Little Longhorn Handbook. Norton, 2014.
    •    Other readings available on Canvas or by instructor.
ABOUT THE COURSE
UT’s motto is “What starts here changes the world.” In RHE 306, Rhetoric & Writing, you will take
the first step in changing the world by learning how to argue effectively in the public sphere.
In this class, you will learn how to examine a public controversy, analyze various positions that
people hold in that controversy, and effectively advocate your own position. You will also explore
the ethics of argumentation, explaining what it means to “fairly” represent someone with whom you
disagree, or how responsibly to address a community with particular values and interests. Your work
in this course will help you advance the critical writing and reading skills you will need to succeed in
courses for your major and university degree.
This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the communication component of the university
core curriculum and addresses the following four core course objectives established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and
personal responsibility.
You will learn how to:
    •    Understand a range of positions in a local controversy


                                                                                            Page !2 of !9
     •   Analyze and evaluate an argument about a local controversy using rhetorical tools
     •   Argue that the controversy needs a solution and/or argue for a particular solution
     •   Recommend a specific, implementable solution based on collaborative research
COURSEWORK AND GRADING
You will be graded on the following assignments this term:
     •   Project 1: Annotated Bibliography: 15%
     •   Project 2.1: Rhetorical Analysis: 10%
     •   Project 2.2: Rhetorical Analysis Revision: 15%
     •   Proposal Peer Review: 5%
     •   Project 3: Proposal: 25%
     •   Project 4: Infographic: 10%
     •   Short Writing Assignments: 10%
     •   Participation: 5%
     •   Attendance: 5%
Grades
Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness, all numbers
are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For example, a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
     •   A=94-100                          •  C+=77-79                       •   D-=60-63
     •   A-=90-93                          •  C=74-76                        •   F=0-59
     •   B+=87-89                          •  C-=70-73
     •   B=84-86                           •  D+=67-69
     •   B-=80-83                          •  D=64-66
Major Assignments


                                                                                              Page !3 of !9
You will write an annotated bibliography, two essays ranging from 4-7 pages each (above designated
Rhetorical Analysis and Proposal), and an infographic. You will also be graded on your revision of
the rhetorical analysis essay based on my feedback. In addition, you will compose short writing
assignments called research summaries.
In order to receive a passing mark for the course, regardless of your performance on other
assignments or total average of all your grades, all major assignments must be completed to my
satisfaction.
Nearly all of your assignments will have to be turned in to Canvas. For the most part, submissions
will be restricted to .docx files, so plan to type your assignments in a Word document or convert
before submitting.
Revision
All major assignments (and some smaller ones, see below) may be revised. There will be mandatory
revision assignments for Project 2: Rhetorical Analysis and Project 3: Proposal that will be graded
separately from the “final” versions. Project 1: Annotated Bibliography and Project 4: Infographic
will have optional revision assignments. In each of these cases your revision grade will replace
your “final” version grade, unless it is lower. On all revisions, you are required to revise based on my
feedback, peer feedback, and any other criteria set forth in class, in conference, or in consultation.
Participation
Participation is a cornerstone of this course. There are two general things I’d like to note about
course participation. First, it manifests in many forms. For our purposes, it is primarily about writing
and engaging with your classmates. Second, it is extremely difficult to evaluate the degree of
participation in an English class. So, being prepared is crucial. As a community of learners, we
expect you to complete your assignments, attend class regularly and on-time, and take responsibility
for the classroom environment. Please come ready to work. That is how you will get the most out of
this course.
Because the above “general things” are difficult to quantify, I will be basing your participation grade
on five “specific things” that are more easily counted:
• Three “discussion board posts” that will be graded on a scale of complete (2 points), partially
  complete (1 point), or incomplete (0 points) based on fulfillment of assignment criteria. Partially
  complete posts may be revised on consultation with me, but incomplete posts may not.
• A rhetorical analysis peer review assignment graded on the same scale as the discussion boards
  and completed to criteria of the assignment.
• An in-class group presentation completed to the criteria of the assignment and graded complete/
  incomplete.
• An infographic draft completed to the criteria of the assignment and graded on the same scale as
  the discussion boards.


                                                                                               Page !4 of !9
• Regular attendance: for each day you miss (excused or unexcused) your attendance grade will drop
  5%. You can make up missed class days by visiting office hours. See also “department attendance
  policy” below.
Criteria and due dates for these assignments are outlined on Canvas.
HELPFUL RESOURCES
The following websites will be helpful this semester:
    •    Department of Rhetoric and Writing - http://www.drw.utexas.edu/
    •    University Writing Center - http://uwc.utexas.edu/
    •    Digital Writing & Research Lab – http://www.dwrl.utexas.edu
    •    UT Libraries - http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
    •    University Health Services – http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu
    •    Counseling and Mental Health Centre -- https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
    •    Services for Students with Disabilities -- http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
CLASS POLICIES
Accessibility
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent
you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and course requirements.
I am committed to making all course materials as accessible as possible, and to working with
students if any of these materials are inaccessible. We will all need some accommodations in this
class, because we all learn differently. If you need specific accommodations, let me know. Any
conversations we have about accommodations are confidential. I am happy to take extra steps to
ensure accessibility for all students.
Behavior
Be respectful of your colleagues. There is zero tolerance for slurs or derogatory language. In general,
don’t discriminate based on race, gender presentation, marital status, religion, disability, age, or sexual
orientation.
Everyone in our class has the right to be addressed in accordance with their personal identity. The
university provides me with a class roster containing each student’s legal name and sex marker. I will
gladly address you by the name and gender pronoun with which you identify. Please let me


                                                                                              Page !5 of !9
know your preferred name and pronouns early in the semester, so your peers and I can address you
appropriately.
Learning requires stretching beyond comfort zones, and yet feeling safe is a prerequisite for a
good learning environment. If you are troubled by or feel unsafe in any class discussion or with
any reading or assignment, please speak with me as soon as possible so that we can work to resolve
the immediate problem and prevent future issues.
Learning procedures
It is never okay to laugh at, belittle, or harass a colleague because of their opinion or point of view.
Always think about how your comments will support our learning as a group. But safe doesn’t
mean operating in an environment where beliefs and ideas go unchallenged. Challenging colleagues
to explain their arguments in a thoughtful manner is key to creating an engaging learning
community.
     •   Make a commitment to understand unfamiliar positions from the context or point of
         view of your peers.
     •   Speak for yourself rather than for a group (use your “I” statements).
     •   Be present – really listening to your colleagues will dramatically improve your in-class
         experience and prevent most misunderstandings.
     •   Take risks in speaking honestly; this will help the learning of the group.
Late Work
The majority of missed class assignments cannot be made up, nor will I accept late projects.
This class is carefully scaffolded so that each activity/assignment/project leads us to the next;
falling too far behind can seriously undermine your ability to complete work and meet learning
objectives. If a serious and unavoidable problem arises, however, you should attempt to contact
me at least 24-hours prior to any deadline to determine if an extension is warranted.
Tardiness
Tardiness is essentially an interruption of the learning process for you and your classmates. If I
notice a pattern of tardiness, I will notify you and ask that you either show up on time or don’t
show up at all. Another note, I may ask for short writing assignments from the beginning of the
class period and if you miss those it may effect your grade.
Technology Policy
PEDs (Personal Electronic Devices) like smartphones, laptop computers, etc. are allowed in class. If
you are using a PED during class I only ask that you do not distract your colleagues and that you use
it almost exclusively to engage with coursework. There will be times when I specifically call for the
use of PEDs during in-class activities. That said, you are not required to have a PED to be
successful in this course (or in life, generally).


                                                                                               Page !6 of !9
Snacks and Drinks
You can bring drinks and snacks into our classroom. Also, be reasonable when selecting
consumables to bring to class. If it might distract a colleague, leave it.
DEPARTMENT OF RHETORIC & WRITING
RHE COURSE POLICIES STATEMENT, 2018-19
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses. Any questions or
appeals concerning this policy must be made directly to the department Associate Chair. You are
expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing, and to
participate in all in-class editing, revising, discussion, and conference sessions. Should you miss the
equivalent of six class sessions this semester, excused or not, you will fail the course. If you
find that an unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you should contact me as soon
as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let me know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, at least one week before the absence, so that alternative
arrangements can be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this
reason, provide your instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University
specifies very few other excused absences (e.g., jury duty).
When you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from a classmate
or attending office hours.
SCHOLASTIC HONESTY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University.
So, take care to read and understand the Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found
online at http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php If
you have any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the
assignment.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More


                                                                                            Page !7 of !9
information is available on the Services for Students with Disabilities website at http://
ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will use this medium
to communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email account and to
check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to the IT Services website
at https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found on the
UT emergency page at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Other important Emergency Information
You can find more information about planning for emergencies on the Emergency Preparedness site
at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. You can learn more
about the Behavior Concerns Advice Line on their site at https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/
bcal.php.
Questions about these policies
Questions about these policies should be addressed to:
                                   Department of Rhetoric & Writing
                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                          Parlin Hall, Room 3


                                                                                           Page !8 of !9
                                       rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu
                                             (512) 471-6109
SEMESTER SCHEDULE:
Please be aware that this schedule is subject to revision based on our needs. I will do my best to
highlight any revisions as soon as they become necessary. Please refer to Canvas for updates and due
dates for participation assignments.
 WEEK          DAY           LESSON                   MAJOR               YOU SHOULD HAVE
                                                      ASSIGNMENTS         PREPARED…
                                                      DUE
 1             M 7/15        Course
                             Introduction
               T 7/16        Researching a                                Controversies,
                             Controversy                                  Introduction
               W 7/17        Research Skills                              Controversies, Chap. 1
               Th            Summarizing;                                 Controversies, Chap. 2
               7/18          Synthesis
               F 7/19                                 Research            Controversies, Chap. 3
                                                      Summary 1
 2             M 7/22        Drafting
                             Annotations;
                             MLA Style
               T 7/23        Annotation               Research
                                                      Summary 2
 4             W 7/24        Peer Review or                               Annotated
                             Conferences                                  Bibliography draft
               Th            Introduction to                              Controversies, Chap. 4
               7/25          Unit 2
 5             F 7/26        Evidence                 Project 1
                                                      (Annotated
                                                      Bibliography)
 3             M 7/29        Reasons to Trust                             Controversies, Chap. 5
 6             T 7/30        Reasons to Feel;         Evaluation of a     Controversies, Chap. 5
                             Visual Rhetoric          Main Text (RS
                                                      3)
               W 7/31        Reasons to                                   Controversies, Chap. 5
                             Believe


                                                          Page !9 of !9
WEEK DAY    LESSON          MAJOR         YOU SHOULD HAVE
                            ASSIGNMENTS   PREPARED…
                            DUE
7    Th 8/1 Evidence                      Controversies, Chap. 6
            (cont’d),
            Audience
     F 8/2  Peer Review     Project 2.1   Controversies, Chap. 7
                            (Rhetorical
                            Analysis)
4    M 8/5  Revision
     T 8/6  Revision                      Rhetorical Analysis
                                          draft
9    W 8/7  Introduction to               Controversies, Chap. 8
            Unit 3
     Th 8/8                 Project 2.2
                            (Rhetorical
                            Analysis
                            Revision)
     F 8/9  Refutations /                 Controversies, Chap. 9
            Concession /
            Rebuttal
5    M 8/12 Proposal        Opposition
            Workshop        Paper (RS 4)
     T 8/13 Proposal                      Controversies, Chap. 10
            Workshop
11   W 8/14 Proposal
            Workshop
     Th     Peer Review                   Proposal Draft, Peer
     8/15   Proposal                      Review w/ Response
12   F 8/16 Infographic     Project 3     Infographic Draft
            Workshop        (Proposal),
                            Project 4
                            (Infographic)
