                     CC f302: Introduction to Ancient Rome (79865)
Course Instructor: Madeline Monk
Email: madelinemonk@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 7
Office Hours: In-Person Wednesday 4-5; Zoom Thursday 1-2 or by appointment
Teaching Assistant: Hayley Barnett
Email: hayleybarnett@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 7
Office Hours: In- Person Monday, 1-2pm; Zoom Tuesday 11am-12pm, or by
appointment.
UEX Instructor: Dr. Steve Lundy
Email: steven.lundy@utexas.edu
Online office hours: by appointment
Office: WAG 227
Course Textbook: Boatwright, et al. (2014) A Brief History of the Romans, 2nd ed.
ISBN: 9780199987559
I. Course Description
This introductory-level online course covers the cultural and political history of Ancient
Rome, from the city’s origins in the Iron Age (c. 800 BCE) to the rise of Augustus and
the rule of emperors in the 1st century CE/AD. Students will have the opportunity to
learn about Rome’s evolution from a small, hilltop settlement to the head of a world
empire. By the end of the course, students will be familiar with the most important
buildings, artistic works, events and historical figures of Ancient Rome.
The course is made up of textbook readings, primary source readings, and ten highly
interactive, multimedia content modules. Students will be able to work through the
modules at their own pace and on their own schedule, within around 3 days to complete
each module. Each module includes a practice quiz, so that students can evaluate their
progress, identify misunderstandings, and develop strategies for improvement with the
help of the course instructor, and concludes with a short, graded, multiple choice quiz. In
the first week of each midterm unit, students will closely analyze a set of texts that shed
light on the events they have been reading about. In the second week of each midterm
unit, students will similarly engage with course images.
Course grades will be determined by performance on modules, including module quizzes
(30%); review activities (20%); and two exams (50%). All exams MUST be taken on
campus at the time scheduled by the instructor (in the evenings) OR in an accredited
testing center (if you are located off campus). The instructor will be happy to work with
you to locate an appropriate venue.


There are no prerequisites for this course. This course fulfills the Visual and Performing
Arts (VAPA) requirement. This course also carries a Global Cultures (GC) flag and
fulfills the cultural expression, human experience & thought course requirement. It also
addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, teamwork, and social
responsibility.
II. Contacting the Instructional Team
We will reply within 24 hours to emails during the week. Emails sent during the weekend
may not receive an answer until Monday. We will do our best to be responsive to emails
concerning urgent matters.
II a. How and When to Contact the Instructional Team
If you have questions about course logistics (e.g. what is the homework? when is the next
module due? what is going to be covered on the midterm?):
    •    First, check the Canvas announcements page (and associated pages, like module
         instruction pages and the syllabus).
    •    If that doesn’t work, post your question on Piazza, the class discussion board
         which you will join in the Orientation module.
    •    If your question is not urgent, you can meet the instructor or TA during
         their office hours listed at the top of this document.
    •    If you still have a question after pursuing these avenues, or if the question is more
         urgent, email the instructor or the TA; if your question can be answered by
         consulting Canvas, the course syllabus, etc., the instructor will direct you to those
         resources.
Since this is a fully-online course, technology-related issues can sometimes be a problem.
We invite students who are affected by technology-related issues to report them on
Piazza, and we will create a discussion feed to troubleshoot these issues. If these issues
affect grade reporting, however, students should contact the instructor directly.
Urgent and/or sensitive matters, including issues with grade reporting, should be
addressed directly to the course instructor.
II b. Announcements from the Instructional Team
This course will use several platforms to disseminate information to students (Canvas,
Piazza, emails, etc.). However, all key information (e.g. relating to assignments,
deadlines, exams, etc.) will be sent through Canvas announcements, and students are
responsible for information contained in these announcements. The instructional
team may use other platforms to send out additional and supplementary information.


II c. Exam Pickup Policy
Students are welcome to come to office hours to pick up physical copies of exams.
However, since the course is web-based, we are also able to scan your exam and upload a
copy to your Canvas account.
III. Course Assessment
III a. Assessment Activities and Policies
Your final grade in this course will be determined by three factors:
    •   Exams (50%)
    •   Review Activities (20%)
    •   Module Quizzes (30%)
Exams (50%): There will be two exams during the semester. You will be responsible for
all material covered in the assigned readings and in the Canvas modules. Exams will have
multiple choice questions (25 questions, 2 pts each) and short answer questions, which
will ask you to write a term identification, analyze a passage of text you have already
seen, or write a slide identification. Short answer responses should be at least page long
in an average blue book. We will release the potential IDs, passages, and slide IDs before
the exam. Four IDs will appear on the exam and you will respond to two. Two passages
will appear on the exam and you will respond to one. Two slide IDs will appear on the
exam and you will respond to one.
The dates for the exams are as follows:
Exam 1: 6/24
Exam 2: 7/12-13 (TBD pending official exam scheduling)
All students must be available to take exams on campus at the assigned time and place.
Please resolve any scheduling conflicts at the beginning of the semester. In addition, you
must bring your student ID and a blank blue book to the exam. We will collect and
randomly distribute your blue books before the start of the exam and we will check your
ID when you turn in your midterm exam.
    •   If you need to take the exam off-campus, you must do so at a certified testing
        center at your own expense. In order to do so, you must contact us at least two
        weeks in advance of the midterm to arrange a place and time. (Since the first
        exam is two weeks into the semester, this means that you need to make
        arrangements for the first exam as soon as you possibly can after starting the
        course!)


    •  Make-up exams will be offered only in the event of a demonstrated medical or
       personal emergency. In the event that a make-up is requested, we will require
       sufficient documentation of the emergency (e.g. a certified note from a doctor).
Review Activities (20%):
    •  Annotations (10%): Once in each unit, we will pay particularly close attention to
       some ancient texts. Using the collaborative annotation tool Hypothesis, you and
       your classmates will highlight and analyze particular features of these texts to
       better understand the Roman world and develop skills in close reading. Your
       annotation grade comes from annotating one text in each unit, but you should read
       every text and the annotations for them, for they are all fair game for exams.
       Note: We will have a webinar explaining this process in more detail at a date to
       be announced later. You will be encouraged to watch live but can watch the video
       later if necessary.
    •  Slide IDs (10%): Once in each unit, we will engage with art, architecture, and
       other visual representations of the Roman world. Using the images from the
       module, you will select four images that you think would make good slide ID
       candidates and write a short description (1-2 sentences) for why you picked them.
       You will select one of your images and write a sample slide ID for it. You will
       post the images and your writing to the online discussion board tool Padlet and be
       able to see other students’ responses. We will select the possible slide IDs from
       the course Padlet and provide you with them before the midterm.
       There will a total of two annotation assignments and two slide ID exercises for
       you to complete. Both the annotations and slide ID exercises will be completion
       graded, but we reserve the right to give a zero for incomplete or shoddy work.
Module quizzes (30%) test your knowledge of course content from your assigned
readings and module material at regular intervals. Quizzes within each module have no
timer and may be taken twice; your final grade will be the average of your two attempts.
This encourages both paying careful attention to your first attempt and reviewing the
material afterward. The quizzes at the end of each module, on the other hand, are timed
and may only be taken once. They are multiple choice, and will reward your ability to
take good notes and to study the material before taking the quiz.
    •  Note: Twice in the semester, you can submit a late quiz without penalty within 48
       hours of its deadline. After that, quizzes become inaccessible, and you will
       receive a zero on any work within the module you have not finished.
Extra Credit Opportunities:


    •   Piazza: At the end of each module, you will find discussion questions.
        Responding thoughtfully and substantively to those discussion questions and
        respectfully commenting on other student’s responses on Piazza can result in one
        full point added to your final grade for each midterm, with a possibility to earn up
        to 2 points.
    •   Short Response Paper: You can earn another 2 points applied to your final grade
        for the course by completing a 2-3 page response paper on any form of reception
        about the Roman world. This can be a movie like Gladiator, a book like Steven
        Saylor’s Throne of Caesar, a show or episode of a show like HBO’s Rome, a play
        like Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar, or any number of other options. You do not
        have to get advance approval for your topic, but if you pick something that is not
        an example of classical reception we reserve the right to not grant you extra
        credit. If you wish to choose something that is not indisputably about reception of
        the Roman world but does have features of classical reception, i.e. Game of
        Thrones, it would be wise to consult with the instructor beforehand. If you wish to
        complete this paper, it must be turned in by the end of the fourth week of the
        semester, July 6, at 11:59 PM. Late submissions will not be accepted. You can
        find more detailed instructions for writing the paper in Modules.
    •   Surveys: In addition, there will be two surveys that you can complete at specified
        points in the semester. Completing the first survey will earn two points of extra
        credit for the first midterm, and completing the second survey will earn two points
        of extra credit for the second.
III b. Final Grade Allocations
Your final percentage grade will be translated into a letter grade according to the
following table.
100-93: A
92-90: A-
89-87: B+
86-83: B
82-80: B-
79-77: C+
76-73: C
72-70: C-
69-67: D+
66-63: D
62-60: D-
Below 60: F
If you are taking this course on a pass/fail option, you must earn at least a 60 to receive
credit for the course.


Since you all have access to the grade book and the weighted factors that determine your
grade (see above), you all should be able to determine your current standing in the
course. If at the end of the semester, you suspect there was a calculation error on your
final grade, please contact the course instructor. NB: You may only ask for a
reconsideration of your grade if you believe that your grade was miscalculated. You
may NOT ask for a higher grade for any other reason.
IV. Important Course Dates
In-person events are bolded. Non-module assignments are italicized. This section will be
updated as the semester continues. Updates will be announced on Canvas.
  6/6-                                               Due at
         Module 1: Orientation to the Course
  6/12                                               11:59pm
  6/6-                                               Due at
         Module 2: Rome’s Beginnings
  6/12                                               11:59pm
 6/12- Module 3: Rome’s Rise as a                    Due at 11:59
  6/15 Mediterranean Power                           pm
 6/12- Annotation 1: Livy and Rome's                 Due at
  6/15 Beginnings                                    11:59pm
 6/17- Module 4: The Roman Republic after the Due at
  6/19 Punic Wars                                    11.59pm
 6/20- Module 5: Populism and the Powerful           Due at
  6/22 General                                       11:59pm
 6/20-                                               Due at
         Slide ID 1: The Late Roman Republic
  6/22                                               11:59pm
  6/23   Optional Review Session                     TBD
  6/24   Midterm 1                                   6-8 PM
 6/24-                                               Due at
         Module 6: The Collapse of the Republic
  6/26                                               11:59pm
 6/27-                                               Due at
         Module 7: Julius Caesar
  6/29                                               11:59pm
 6/27-                                               Due at
         Annotation 2: The Fall of the Republic
  6/29                                               11:59pm
  7/1-
         Module 8: The Origins of the Principate     11:59pm
   7/3
  7/4-
         Module 9: Augustus                          11:59 pm
   7/6


  7/4-    Slide ID 2: The Second Triumvirate and
                                                      11:59pm
   7/6    Augustus
  7/8-
          Module 10: Family Dynasties                 11:59pm
  7/11
  7/11    Optional Review Session                     TBD
  7/12
  OR      Final Exam                                   TBD
  7/13
V. Course Etiquette
As in any other course, students are expected to abide by a code of collegial respect and
civility towards their classmates and the instructional team, including and especially in
posting to any of the online teaching platforms (Canvas, Piazza). To encourage this, we
require you to sign up to Piazza and you must post under your full name (you can make
non-discussion posts anonymous to your classmates, but not to us).
We will also require you to agree to an etiquette policy, stating your willingness to abide
by these standards and awareness of the consequences of their transgression. If you are
found to be in violation of these standards, you will receive a written warning from the
instructor. If you continue to violate these standards, we will ban you from the platform
in question (e.g. Piazza), pending a disciplinary discussion with the instructional team.
Further issues will be reported to the relevant authorities (i.e. Student Judicial Services).
If you have a specific issue with the course, you are free to discuss it privately with the
instructional team over email or in office hours.
VI. Other Course Policies
VIa. Academic Honesty
Academic dishonesty in any form will not be tolerated. Please familiarize yourself with
the University of Texas’s Honor Code:
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.”
Any student caught or facilitating cheating on any assignment will receive an F in the
course and immediately be referred to the Dean of Students. In cases where dishonesty is
strongly suspected, we reserve the right to re-examine the student(s). We will, however,


assume absolute integrity on your part until shown otherwise. If you are unsure what
constitutes academic dishonesty, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php. It
is your responsibility to be familiar with the contents of this website and to avoid any
behavior that might be interpreted as academic dishonesty.
Plagiarism: There is a substantial amount of writing in this course, so it is a good idea to
familiarize yourself with the University rules governing plagiarism
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php. In general, avoid the
following mistakes:
    •    Copying word-for-word (or “verbatim”) any amount of material from the
         textbook, Canvas instructional material, or any other source (e.g. Wikipedia)
    •    Failing to properly acknowledge borrowed material with the appropriate citation
         (usually acceptable in the form: Author, page number, e.g. “Boatwright, p. 32”)
    •    Copying material with a few words or word order changed to avoid charges
         of verbatim copying
    •    Unintentional plagiarism, through poor note-taking or forgetfulness
    •    Paraphrasing material is acceptable, although even in this case citation is
         preferred. In general, students should express their ideas using their own words
         and phrasing. Students will be contacted in cases of suspected plagiarism;
         persistent violations will be cause for referral to the Dean of Students.
VIb. Add/Drop Policies
Please familiarize yourself with the University of Texas’s official add/drop policy. Any
requests to drop the course will be handled in accordance with these rules.
VI c. Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Dean of Students at (512) 471-6259 or see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd. In order
to receive accommodations, you must be registered with the Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD). This office will document your disability, inform me of your
situation, and instruct me on the necessary accommodations. If you choose not to register
with SSD, I cannot make special accommodations for you.
VI d. Religious Holidays
According to Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code, students shall be excused
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. If you will miss
class (including exams) to celebrate a religious holiday, you must notify me AT LEAST
14 days prior to the holiday so that we can make arrangements for you to make up the
assignment. All make-up work must be completed no later than one week after the
missed class.


VIe. Other Important University Dates/Deadlines
   •   6/7: Last day of the official add/drop period for first-term, nine-week, and whole-
       session classes; after this date, changes in registration may require the approval of
       the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
   •   6/11: Last day an undergraduate student may add a first-term, nine-week, or
       whole-session class except for rare and extenuating circumstances. Last day to
       drop a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session class for a possible refund.
