                                        Department of Arts and Entertainment Technologies
                                                   School of Design and Creative Technologies
                                        College of Fine Arts | ​The University of Texas at Austin
Course           AET 333D - Video Game Production
Information      Tues. & Thurs. 9:30a - 11:00a in room DFA 4.106
                 Course website at ​http://canvas.utexas.edu
Instructor       David (D.S.) Cohen
                 ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu
                 office hours: Tues/Thurs 11:00a - 12:30p (By appointment)
Catalog          Creating and executing plans and roadmaps to strategize how game development will
Description      be executed, organized, scheduled, budgeted, and managed from the high level to
                 day-to-day development.
Prerequisites    AET 318c - Foundations of Video Game Development
                 (Formerly AET 318 - Foundations of Games and Digital Apps)
                 AET 310 - Foundations of Creative Coding
                 334C - Level Design or 334K - Video Game Prototyping
Course Overview  In-depth look at how to estimate, structure, staff, budget, organize, and execute a plan
                 that can be used to manage both high level and day-to-day development of a game.
                 Identifies the tools and techniques used to break down a game into measurable
                 components that can be scheduled, staffed, budgeted and scoped. Analyzes
                 development methodologies to determine the best approach for the project type.
                 Teaches the assembly and execution of flexible plans for multiple types of game
                 productions, from full console and mobile games, to live operations of games as a
                 service.
Objectives &     By the end of the course, students should be able to:
Learning              1. Construct and propose structured production plan for the development
Outcomes                  and release of an industry standard digital game
                      2. Compare and identify the proper production methodology and system
                          based on the need of the game, team, and market.
                      3. Formulate and Show a resource structure and budget for a multimonth game
                          production
Course materials All required readings and media will be posted to Canvas.
Required         All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running Google
Equipment        Docs and/or Microsoft Office Suite (Word, Powerpoint, Excel) Photoshop (or
                 comparable software program) and Adobe Acrobat.
                 Cell Phones and Tablets are not acceptable tools for classroom use.


UT Electronic     Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor
Mail Notification communication to students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and
Policy            regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related
                  communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
                  recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
                  It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed
                  of changes in his or her official e-mail address. Consequently, e-mail returned to the
                  University with “User Unknown” is not an acceptable excuse for missed
                  communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or
                  use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of
                  the University or instructor. For further information, go to:
                  http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-p
                  olicy​.
   Use of Class   The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and
   Materials      homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of
                  the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions
                  being taken against the student.
                  Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of
                  the instructor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of
                  academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes,
                  among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing
                  those materials with other current or future students. For more information, go to:
                  https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Management+of+Course+Materials
                  %3A+Copyrights+and+Class+Recordings
Classroom Policy  Devices
                        ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected
                            (please discuss this with me prior to class).
                        ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media
                            (unless related to class activities)
                  Food/Drink
                        ●   Food is not allowed in class.
                        ●   Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or
                            out of sight when not in use.
Attendance/       ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Regular attendance is necessary for successful
Absences          completion of the class.
                  Your professionalism grade will be impacted for each unexcused absence. After your
                  first three unexcused absences your final grade will be lowered by one letter grade,


              and continue to be lowered with each subsequent unexcused absence. Seven
              unexcused absences or more will result in a failing grade for the course.
              An excused absence is granted on a case-by-case basis as determined by your
              instructor. For an excused absence to be considered, the student must notify the
              instructor and TA that they will be absent in advance of the class, or within a
              reasonable period afterwards. Waiting until you attend the next class to ask for an
              excused absence will not be accepted.
              However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family,
              etc.) impacts your attendance, please inform your instructor and TA as soon as
              possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
              Please be on time for class. ​Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of
              class or after a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving class prior to
              dismissal for the day all count as being tardy and have an impact on your
              professionalism grade.
              Three tardies equals an absence.
              https://catalog.utexas.edu/undergraduate/fine-arts/academic-policies-and-proced
              ures/
              Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please
              send an email to your instructor and TA, attaching any class work as needed.
Religious     Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused
Holidays      from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
              observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose
              absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and
              shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
              student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
              requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the
              date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day. For
              more information, go to:
              https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/at
              tendance/​.
Q Drop Policy The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
              academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall
              2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
              undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course
              a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the
              student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”


Professionalism Each class you attend, you will receive professionalism points that equate to an A for
                the day. If professionalism is maintained by the etiquette as listed below, you will
                maintain your points. If any unprofessional behavior is exhibited, points will be
                deducted.
                Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and
                the instructor. These will have an impact on your professionalism grade, so it is
                important that you follow these guidelines...
                1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late
                at the beginning of class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and
                unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t hold up the entire class by failing to
                return promptly at the end of an announced break, since often the second part of the
                class period is when we will engage in group activities.
                If you have a class beforehand that is on the other side of campus, you must inform
                let your instructor know on the first day of class so adjustments can be made.
                2) Come to class prepared with your laptop computer with power cord and
                assignment materials. A dead laptop battery or forgetting your class materials is not
                acceptable.
                3) Turn your cell phone off or on silent, and put it away. Looking at your cell phone
                during lectures, exercises and discussions is not acceptable. Use your computer for
                taking notes, not your cell phone.
                4) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of
                distracting sights, sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook
                page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies,
                Sleep etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.
                5) Headphones and sunglasses are not allowed to be worn during lectures, exercises
                or discussions. Even if your headphones are not playing music, they should never be
                in your ears during these times.
                6) Arrive to class prepared, with your required equipment (IE: Computer),
                assignments completed, and reading/tutorials reviewed and ready to discuss.
                7) Be prepared and willing to participate in class discussions and present your work
                (in progress or completed) when called upon.
                8) Do not distract other students by socializing or being otherwise disruptive in class.
                9) No bullying or discriminatory behavior will be acceptable under any circumstances.
                10) Do not fall asleep in class.


Assessment/ This course is project based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on successful
Grading     completion of project objectives in a in a professional manner.
                 ●    Assignments are worth 40%
                 ●    Professionalism is worth 30% (​See Professionalism​)
                 ●    Final project is worth 30%.
            No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be
            able to complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or
            drop before the deadline for doing so passes (April 6, 2020)
            Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send
            an email and attach any class work as needed.
            Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to
            ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any
            stage. Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University
            does not recognize the grade of A+.
            Letter grade equivalents:
                       A = 94-100                  C+ = 77-79                D+ = 67-69
                       A- = 90-93                  C = 74-76                 D = 64-66
                       B+ = 87-89                  C- = 70-73                D- = 60-63
                       B = 84-86                                             F = 0-59
                       B- = 80-83
File Format You must use the following file formats and naming convention when submitting your
and Naming  assignment. This is a requirement. No submission will be accepted that does not
Convention: follow these guidelines...
            Required File Format
            Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, - A single PDF, one per assignment
            unless otherwise directed in the assignment details.
            Required File Naming Convention:
            FirstInitialLastname_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
            Example: dcohen_conceptpitch_02042020
            IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it
            may not read correctly.


REQUIRED:     You must keep all of your work in cloud storage (IE: UT Box, Dropbox, Google Drive).
Cloud Storage Do not keep your work on a computer hard drive, external hard drive or flash drive. If
              you keep your work offline on a hard drive or flash drive and it is lost, crashes or
              becomes corrupted, you will not have the opportunity to make up that work.
Academic      The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at
Integrity     Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
              integrity.” You are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of
              individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you
              should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the
              utmost honesty, which requires you to:
                  ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                  ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to
                       seek or obtain assistance in preparing them;
                  ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of
                       your academic discipline; and
                  ● avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or
                       another student.
              (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic      In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines
Dishonesty    academic dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved
              academic advantage, such as:
                  ● Cheating
                  ● Plagiarism
                  ● Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
                  ● Falsifying Academic Records
                  ● Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam,
                       obtain an extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned
                       financial benefit)
                  ● M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for
                       two courses without authorization to do so)
                  ● Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of
                       academic integrity
                       (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)
              Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to
              disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
              from the University.
              (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)


Plagiarism    Plagiarism is a serious crime. According to the Merriam-Webster Online
              Dictionary, to plagiarize means:
              1) to steal and pass off (the ideas or words of another) as one's own
              2) to use (another's production) without crediting the source
              3) to commit literary theft
              4) to present as new and original an idea or product derived from an
              existing source.
              “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying,
              receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any means material that is attributable
              in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas, illustrations,
              structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting
              that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
              conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
              http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/st
              udent-discipline-and-conduct/).
              "Self-plagiarism":​ it is an offense against University rules to turn in the
              same work for credit more than once unless all involved instructor's
              consent in advance. (from
              https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/ams/about/academic-integrity.php).
Copyright and Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical
Fair Use      importance to designers. Many of the uses we will make of texts, images,
              and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine of fair use.
              However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other
              copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your
              own and others’ works. We will discuss these issues during the semester
              as needed, but when you have questions about whether or when you can
              appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K. Harper’s
              Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Services for  The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
Students with academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities.
Disabilities
(SSD)         Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of
              class, if possible, so that the necessary accommodations can be made
              promptly.
              For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
              (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​,
              http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/​, or videophone 512-471-6644).


Title IX  Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based
Reporting discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct,
          dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
          institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
          environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
          misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
               1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or
                    escalating.
               2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who
                    have experienced harm or have become involved in a Title IX
                    investigation.
               3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant
                    policies.
          Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible
          Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are
          required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a
          Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that
          are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with
          me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident,
          be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to
          speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official
          report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more
          information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu
          or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Student   There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to
Support   students at UT. They include (but are not limited to) the following:
Services
               ●    Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333,
                    utexas.edu/finearts/careers​) provides a full range of services and
                    resources to support students and alumni.
               ●    The Undergraduate Writing Center (512-471-6222,
                    uwc.utexas.edu​. helps students with every phase of writing
                    assignments for their courses.
               ●    The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614,​ ​utexas.edu/ugs/slc​)
                    provides study skills, time-management, and note-taking courses.
               ●    University Health Services (512-471-4955,
                    healthyhorns.utexas.edu​) provides medical and health promotion
                    services for currently enrolled students and some non-students
                    who are officially enrolled in certain University programs.


                     ●   The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515,
                         cmhc.utexas.edu​) helps students with their personal concerns so
                         that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Behavior        If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use
Concerns Advice the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
Line (BCAL)     about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
                partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling
                and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
                (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
                512-232-5050 or visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal​.
Emergency       Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will
Procedures      be used to provide students, faculty, and staff with information regarding
                potential threats to the safety and security of the campus community.
                E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff of
                emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation.
                Emergency officials also have the ability to disseminate important
                information via text message directly to the cell phones of users
                subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
                https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
                (adapted from
                http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagem
                entPlan2013a.pdf


Overview of           Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course
Schedule              schedule may need to be altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor
                      illness, student needs/interests, and design program workshop
                      opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will
                      be announced via Canvas.
                      Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted
                      to Canvas.
Calendar
Note – This outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor,
without notification in certain cases.
 Week 1         First Day of Class
 Tues: 1/21     In Class
                     ● Course Intro
                     ● What is Game Production
                     ● Split into in-class and discussion teams
                HW:
                     ● Discussion Post​: Review a ​game postmortem on Gamasutra​. In a
                          discussion post Identify what went right, and what went wrong with the
                          production, and what lessons did the developers learned from the
                          process.
                               ○ Initial post due Thurs 1/23 at 11:59p
                               ○ Response to Team Members Due Sunday 1/27 at 11:59p
 Thurs: 1/23    In Class:
                     ● Phases of Game Development
                     ● In Class Team Exercise:​ What is involved in making a game with a
                          development team. Take an existing game (assigned) and break down by
                          what was involved to create the game (content, roles, infrastructure, etc)
 Week 2         In Class:
 Tues: 1/28          ● Creating an Executive Summary/Pitch
                     ● What is an RFP?
 Thurs: 1/30    In Class Team Exercise:​ Brainstorm an Executive Summary/Pitch
                HW:
                     ● Project 1:
                               ○ Each student will receive an RFP. This will be the basis for their
                                   course project.
                               ○ Based on that RFP, each student will create an Executive
                                   Summary/Pitch for their game production plan. (Due 2/6, 11:59p)
 Week 3         In Class:
 Tues: 2/4           ● User Analysis/User Centered Design/UX
                     ● In Class Team Exercise​: Each team brainstorms proper questions to help
                          identify users and their needs.


Thurs: 2/6  In Class Exercise​: Team members interview each other for the development of
            User Personas.
            HW:
                 ● Project 2:
                          ○ Identify the User and their needs - Create User Profiles/Persona
                              and Analysis
                          ○ Examine how your game will meet these user needs. (Due 2/13
                              11:59p)
Week 4      In Class:
Tues: 2/11       ● Game Design Document - The Producers Role
                 ● Review GDD Checklist
Thurs: 2/13 In Class Exercise​: Team brainstorms content for a mini-design brief based on their
            in-class Executive Summary Pitch.
            HW:
                 ● Project 3
                          ○ Create a Game Design Brief that identifies base design, number
                              of levels, mechanics, art, audio and tech. (Due 2/20 11:59p)
Week 5      In Class:
Tues: 2/18       ● Breaking Down Your Project: Epics, Stories, Tasks and the Backlog.
Thurs: 2/20 In Class Exercise:​ Teams identify Epics, Stories, Tasks, developing into a Backlog
            HW:
                 ● Project 4
                          ○ Break your game design into Epics and Stories, then list them in
                              priority into a backlog. (Due 2/27 11:59p).
Week 6      In Class:
Tues: 2/25       ● Production Methodologies in game development
Thurs: 2/27 In Class Exercise​: Teams identify what Methodology should be used for their team
            project, select stories from their project and walk through how the story will move
            through the process.
            HW:
                 ● Discussion Post 2​: Identify which methodology your production will
                     follow, explaining how one of your "Stories" will move through the
                     process.
                          ○ Initial Post Due Mon. 3/2 at 11:59pm
                          ○ Response to Team Members due Thurs. 3/5 at 11:59p
Week 7      In Class:
Tues: 3/3        ● Milestones and Creating a Development Schedule
Thurs: 3/5  In Class Exercise​: Teams identify key milestones for their in-class project, then
            schedule the completion dates of the Epics/Stories from their Backlog.
            HW:
                 ● Project 5
                          ○ Create a Schedule with Milestones and completion dates for your
                              game production (Due 3/12, 11:59p)


Week 8      In Class:
Tues: 3/10       ● Staffing​: Teams, Structures and Dynamics
Thurs: 3/12 In Class Exercise​: Teams break down the staffing needs for their in-class project.
            Outline what team members would be needed and when.
            HW:
                 ● Project 6
                          ○ Create a staffing plan for your game production. (Due 3/26,
                              11:59p)
Week 9      Spring Break: No Class
Tues: 3/17
Thurs: 3/19 Spring Break: No Class
Week 10     In Class:
Tues: 3/24       ● Time Estimates
Thurs: 3/26 In Class Exercise​: Teams identify size and effort of work for their in-class project's
            Backlog (Epics/Stories)
            HW:
                 ● Project 7
                          ○ Create Estimates for your projects backlog. Include explanations
                              as to the factors involved in determining each estimate. (Due 4/2,
                              11:59p)
Week 11     In Class:
Tues: 3/31       ● Tools, licenses, hardware
Thurs: 4/2  In-Class Exercise​ as a team identify the software, licenses, and hardware needs
            for your in-class project.
            HW:
                 ● Project 8
                          ○ Research what tools, licenses, and hardware needs are
                              necessary for your game production. (Due 4/9, 11:59p)
Week 12     In Class:
Tues: 4/7        ● Budgeting a game production Part 1: Development Costs
Thurs: 4/9  In-Class Exercise​, as a team research the costs of the tools, licenses, and
            hardware for your in-class game.
            HW:
                 ● Project 9
                          ○ Research and estimate costs for tools, licenses and hardware for
                              your game production (Due 4/16, 11:59p)
Week 13     In Class:
Tues: 4/14       ● Budgeting a game production Part 2: Staffing Costs and Burn Rate,
                     calculating total development budget.


Thurs: 4/16 In-Class Exercise​, based on in-class project staffing from Week 8, as a team
            research salaries, and estimate a cost per person, per month.
            HW:
                ● Project 10
                          ○ Based on your staffing plan created Project 6, research salaries
                              and calculate a cost per person, per month. Add this to your
                              project budget and calculate the total cost for the project
                              development budget.
Week 14     In Class:
Tues: 4/21      ● Final Prep​: Preparing a production bible for clients, teams and first parties
Thurs: 4/23 In-Class:
                ● Teams review best way to organize and prepare a production bible for
                     in-class project.
            HW:
                ● Final Project:
                          ○ Organize a structure for your Final Production Bible. Update and
                              organize each past project based on learnings and feedback.
                              Combine into full production bible (see assignment for
                              requirements and full details) Final due 5/7, 11:59p
Week 15     In Class:
Tues :4/28      ● Video Game Legal
Thurs: 4/30 In-Class
                ● Check-In Discussion of finalizing our production bible.
            HW:
                ● Continue preparing final production bible.
Week 16     In-Class
Tues: 5/5       ● Discussion of learnings, questions, and outcomes
Thurs: 5/7  In-Class
                ● Where do we go from here.
            HW:
                ● Final Project Due (5/7, 11:59p)
