                                       THE RIGHT TO THE CITY
                                         CRP F390/LAR F388
                                            Summer 2020
                                      MWF 11:00 am-1:30 pm
                                      Instructor: Rich Heyman
                                 Email: heyman@austin.utexas.edu
“Who is not a utopian today?”
—Henri Lefebvre, The Right to the City
Course Description
In 1967 French sociologist and philosopher Henri Lefebvre wrote a small book, Le Droit à La
Ville, to mark the centenary of Marx’s Capital. Since then, “The Right to the City” has been
invoked by activists, academics, and policymakers around the world, proliferating its meanings.
It has been used to describe and validate a variety of social justice movements in contemporary
cities, from housing & homelessness to digital rights to the city, from access to public space to
gentrification & displacement, from environmental/climate justice to transit justice, from
economic justice to food security. Academics often use it to raise questions about who the city
belongs to, who it is for, who controls urban development, how the benefits of urbanization are
and should be distributed, and who participates in planning and decision making. The concept
has even been codified in local, national, and international declarations about best practices in
urban planning, development and governance, some of which have the force of law.
This graduate seminar will engage with the variety of interpretations of The Right to the City,
starting with Lefebvre’s own and drawing on planning and urban studies literature to consider
the different claims of The Right to the City, how they are worked out in particular contexts,
applied to different issues in different cities, and what implications this suggests for planning.
The goal of the course is not to come to some definitive, “correct”, or original meaning of The
Right to the City, but to understand the potential utility of the concept in cities today; that is,
for students to develop their own interpretations of The Right to the City, theoretically rooted
in the literature, that can be useful for their work.
Course Requirements
Participation
Since this class is a seminar, your engagement and participation is crucial! Because this is a
“web-based” course, “participation” means not just actively taking part in synchronous video-


chat discussions (via Zoom), but also contributing to online, asynchronous activities, such as
online discussion threads (see below), and uploading a video introduction of yourself (see
schedule below).
Since we will be looking at The Right to the City from multiple vantage points, it is important to
share our own experiences and openly engage with others’ perspectives. This will help each of
us to develop an understanding of what “The Right to the City” is all about. It’s also important
to make sure that the virtual space of this class is a safe one in which to explore potentially
controversial issues, ideas, and arguments. To keep this class a safe place for exploring multiple
perspectives, respect for fellow students is mandatory, especially if you disagree. A best
practice for synchronous discussion in general is the “step up/step back” approach, which
encourages everyone to “step up” and contribute, but also asks those who contribute often to
“step back” sometimes to allow other, quieter students to “step up”.
Discussion Facilitation
As part of a group of three, you will be responsible for taking the lead in facilitating discussion
on one group of readings this semester. This entails two main components, one asynchronous
and one synchronous:
1) Preparing a “Discussion Paper” that will be posted to a discussion thread in Canvas
    Discussions, intended to elicit responses from fellow students and spark online discussion.
    The online discussion will then be a jumping off point for our synchronous video-chat
    discussions via Zoom.
    The Discussion Paper should do several things. First, it should outline key points and issues
    from the individual readings and from the readings taken together as a group. Second, it
    should raise questions that arise from the readings: these can be interpretive questions
    (how a particular author interprets the Right to the City; how we should interpret the
    author’s points, etc.), practical questions (what are the implications of a reading for the
    practices of planning; how might this apply in different contexts*, etc.), points of
    connection with other readings, points of disagreement (things you disagree with or where
    someone might), problems you see in the readings, etc. Remember, the goal here is to
    prompt responses from fellow students and spark engagement with the texts.
    Discussion Papers should be posted to Canvas by 11 am on the scheduled class meeting day
    before our video-chat discussion (for example, if the video-chat meeting is Friday, then the
    Discussion Paper should be posted by 11 am on the preceding Wednesday).
    The other students will then respond to the Discussion Paper online. Responses should be
    posted by 11 am the following day. Everyone should also return to the discussion thread
    and read all of the responses prior to our video-chat meeting.
    *You may link your Discussion Paper to short online material, such as a case or example that raises an
    interesting point in relation to the readings that you wish the rest of the class to consult.


2) Facilitate Video-chat discussion. Your group will then facilitate our video-chat discussion for
     about 45 minutes. The intention is that the online discussion prompted by your Discussion
     Paper will be a jumping off point for our synchronous video-chat discussion, but you should
     feel free to experiment with different approaches to group facilitation and try out “in-class”
     activities/exercises to engage the class in meaningful and lively interaction (as much as we
     can with Zoom).
Case Study Project
As a final project for this class, we’ll be developing a collection of case studies highlighting
examples of the Right to the City happening here in Austin that we’ll publish on the web using
the Scalar platform. Each student will write a short “article” that describes and analyzes an
initiative, event, group, movement, program, organization, etc. that can be understood through
the concept of the Right to the City. The article should show how the case illuminates the RTTC
concept and how the concept helps illuminate the case. The idea is to create a kind of online
special-issue journal or magazine that helps articulate and explain different interpretations of
the RTTC and how the concept might be useful in understanding urban development in Austin
today. You’ll have to do some research into your case, gather appropriate images and links, and
write about 1,000 words. (The model for this project is one that Professor Sletto uses in his
International Planning class, https://sites.utexas.edu/internationalplanning/.)
Final Reflection/Position Paper
The other “final” product for the course will be a short (about 1,500 words) paper in which you
outline your own understanding/interpretation of Lefebvre and the Right to the City and what
is useful (or not) about the concept for your own work. The goal here is for you, after having
read and thought about the concept for five weeks, to develop your own “position” on the
Right to the City, situated in the literature; that is, for you to exit the course with a statement
that sums up your personal take on it.
A Note About Summer 2020 Class
Although summer classes are only five weeks long, they are supposed to approximate the same
amount of work and learning as a full, 15-week semester and, therefore, carry the same
number of credits. This means that the class will feel compressed and accelerated, like a five-
week sprint, rather than the usual 15-week run. At the graduate level, this will be probably be
felt most acutely in the available time for reading between meetings. Additionally, this class is
being run as a “web-based” course, which means that our “class meetings” will be happening
over video chat (Zoom), which can be more cumbersome and tiring than meeting in person.
Given these circumstances, I have decided to organize the class around an every-other-day
schedule, where we “meet” via video chat on one day (say, on a Wednesday), engage in
asynchronous activity the next scheduled class day (say, a Friday), and then “meet” again
synchronously the following scheduled class day (say, a Monday). This will give us a little more


time to complete the readings between “meetings” and break up the week, so that we aren’t
on Zoom all the time.
Policies
Academic Integrity
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Student Honor Code.
        University of Texas Student Honor Code
        "As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
        University and uphold academic integrity.
        The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
        leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
        expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
        toward peers and community."
Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own
work. Plagiarism is the act of using someone else's words or ideas and passing them off as your
own. It constitutes a serious breach of academic integrity and a violation of the UT Student
Honor Code. Penalties for violating the Honor Code may include failure of this course and
University disciplinary action. It is your responsibility to be aware of university policies on
academic integrity (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php).
Students with Disabilities or Accommodation Needs
One of the goals of this course is to create an environment which encourages and allows all
students to participate in and benefit from course activities. Students with disabilities will be
reasonably accommodated in this regard, in accordance with university policy. If you have a
disability or special need, contact the Services for Students with Disabilities
(http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/) and notify me as soon as possible to arrange
accommodation.
A Note
Please communicate with me if you are having any problems or issues with the class, such as
dealing with technology/online format, negative interactions with other students, or keeping
up with the schedule. It is better to talk through problems early than to ignore them or try to
“fix” something after the fact. I am open to modifying elements of the course that aren’t
working, if there is consensus on this.


                                         Schedule
Fri 6/5  Zoom meeting. Course introduction.
         Before class: Record and post a video introduction of yourself in Canvas
         Discussions, telling us about your background, current academic/professional
         interests and goals, and how you think this class fits in to those.
Mon 6/8  By 11 am post your response to reading Lefebvre’s The Right to the City.
Wed 6/10 Zoom meeting: Lefebvre, interpretations, and context.
Fri 6/12 Online Canvas Discussion: Rights and The Right to the City
         Facilitators’ Discussion Paper due by 11 am.
         Responses due by 11 am on Sat 6/13.
Mon 6/15 Zoom meeting: Rights and The Right to the City
         Matt Russell, from the Faculty Innovation Center, joins us to talk about Scalar, the
         platform we’ll be using for our case study project.
Wed 6/17 Online Canvas Discussion: The Institutionalization of RTTC
         Facilitators’ Discussion Paper due by 11 am.
         Responses due by 11 am on Thurs 6/18.
Fri 6/19 Zoom meeting: The Institutionalization of RTTC
Mon 6/22 Online Canvas Discussion: Applications of RTTC I
         Facilitators’ Discussion Paper due by 11 am.
         Responses due by 11 am on Tues 6/23.
Wed 6/24 Zoom meeting: Applications of RTTC I
Fri 6/26 Online Canvas Discussion: Applications of RTTC II
         Facilitators’ Discussion Paper due by 11 am.
         Responses due by 11 am on Sat 6/27.
Mon 6/29 Zoom meeting. Applications of RTTC II
Wed 7/1  Online Canvas Discussion: RTTC and Planning


         Facilitators’ Discussion Paper due by 11 am.
         Responses due by 11 am on Thurs 7/2.
Fri 7/3  Zoom meeting. RTTC and Planning
Mon 7/6  Drafts of Case Studies Due
Wed 7/8  Final Zoom meeting: Reflections on Lefebvre and RTTC
Fri 7/10 Case Studies Due, Final Reflection/Position Paper Due


                                              Readings
Lefebvre, interpretations, and context
Lefebvre, Henri. 1996. [1968] The Right to the City. In Writings on Cities. Blackwell. 63-181.
Schmid, Christian. 2012. Henri Lefebvre, the right to the city, and the new metropolitan
              mainstream. In Cities for People Not Profit. Edited by Neil Brenner, Peter Marcuse
              and Margit Mayer. Routledge. 42-62.
Marcuse, Peter. 2009. From critical urban theory to the right to the city. City 13:2-3. 185-197.
Mayer, Margit. 2009. The ‘Right to the City’ in the context of shifting mottos of urban social
              movements. City 13:2-3. 362-374.
Purcell, Mark. 2014. Possible Worlds: Henri Lefebvre and the Right to the City. Journal of Urban
              Affairs 36:1. 141-154.
Marcuse, Peter. 2014. Reading the Right to the City. City 18:1. 4-9.
Rights
Attoh, Kafui. 2019. Introduction, Chapter 2, and Conclusion from Rights in Transit: Public
              Transportation and the Right to the City in California's East Bay. University of
              Georgia Press.
Villanueva, Joaquin. 2017. Rights. In Urban Theory: New Critical Perspectives. Edited by Mark
              Jayne and Kevin Ward. Routledge. 254-263.
Karyotis, Theodoros. 2019. Moving Beyond the Right to the City: Urban Commoning in Greece.
              In Social Ecology and the Right to the City. Edited by Federico Venturini, Emet
              Değirmenci, and Inés Morales. Black Rose Books. 71-85.
Institutionalization
Fricaudet, Magali. 2019. Is the Right to the City a Right or a Revolution? In Social Ecology and
              the Right to the City. Edited by Federico Venturini, Emet Değirmenci, and Inés
              Morales. Black Rose Books. 58-70.
Zárate, Lorena. 2011. Mexico City Charter: The Right to Build the City We Dream Of. In Cities for
              All: Proposals and Experiences towards the Right to the City. Edited by Ana
              Sugranyes and Charlotte Mathivet. Habitat International Coalition. 263-270.


Homes for All. 2014. Rise of the Renter Nation. The Right to the City Alliance.
               http://homesforall.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/06/RISE-OF-THE-RENTER-
               NATION_FULL-REPORT_web.pdf
United Nations Conference on Housing and Sustainable Urban Development. 2017. Habitat III
               Policy Papers: Policy Paper 1 The Right to the City and Cities for All. United Nations.
               www.habitat3.org
Habitat International Coalition. 2005. World Charter for the Right to the City. http://hic-
               gs.org/document.php?pid=2422
Global Campaign on Urban Governance. 2005. Urban Policies and the Right to the City. UN-
               HABITAT (United Nations Human Settlements Programme).
               http://www.unhabitat.org/governance
Brown, Alison and Kristiansen, Annali. 2009. Urban policies and the right to the city: rights,
               responsibilities and citizenship. Management of Social Transformations
               Programme, UNESCO. https://unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/pf0000178090
Global Platform for the Right to the City. https://www.right2city.org/
Adler, David. 2015. Do We Have a Right to the City? Jacobin. Oct 6, 2015.
               https://www.jacobinmag.com/2015/10/mexico-city-df-right-to-the-city-harvey-
               gentrification-real-estate-corruption/
Freitas, Clarissa F. Sampaio. 2019. Insurgent planning? City 23:3. 285-305.
Applications I
Vasudevan, Alexander. 2015. The autonomous city: Towards a critical geography of occupation.
               Progress in Human Geography 39:3. 316–337.
Varsanyi, Monica W. 2017. Immigration Policing Through the Backdoor: City Ordinances, The
               "Right to the City," and the Exclusion of Undocumented Day Laborers. UC San
               Diego: Center for Comparative Immigration Studies. Retrieved from
               https://escholarship.org/uc/item/88g7g2r6
Rolnik, Raquel. 2014. Afterward. Place, inhabitance and citizenship: the right to housing and the
               right to the city in the contemporary urban world. International Journal of Housing
               Policy 14:3. 293-300.
Campbell, Linda, Newman, Andrew, Safransky, Sara and Stallmann, Tim. Eds. 2020. A People’s
               Atlas of Detroit. Wayne State University Press.


Iveson, Kurt. 2013. Cities within the City: Do-It-Yourself Urbanism and the Right to the City.
              International Journal of Urban and Regional Research 37.3. 941–56.
Merker, Blaine. 2010. Taking place: Rebar’s absurd tactics in generous urbanism In Insurgent
              public space : Guerrilla urbanism and the remaking of contemporary cities. Edited
              by Jeffrey Hou. Routledge. 45-58.
Falú, Ana. 2014. Inclusion and right to the city. Exercising women’s citizen rights: The women’s
              agenda for Rosario, Argentina. City, Social Inclusion and Education. International
              Association of Educating Cities. 59-67. https://www.edcities.org/pt/wp-
              content/uploads/sites/46/2014/11/Monograph-City-Social-Inclusion-and-
              Education.pdf
Nelischer, Kate. Nd. Women’s Right to the City. The Site Magazine.
              https://www.thesitemagazine.com/read/womens-right-to-the-city
Application II
Anastasiu, Irina. 2019. Unpacking the Smart City Through the Lens of the Right to the City: A
              Taxonomy as a Way Forward in Participatory City-Making. In The Hackable City.
              Edited by Michel de Lange and Martijn de Waal. Springer. 239-260.
Shaw, Joe and Graham, Mark. 2017. An Informational Right to the City? Code, Content, Control,
              and the Urbanization of Information Antipode 49:4. 907–927.
Purcell, Mark and Tyman, Shannon K. 2015. Cultivating food as a right to the city. Local
              Environment 20: 10. 1132–1147.
Becker, Sören, Angel, James, and Naumann, Matthias. 2019. Energy democracy as the right to
              the city: Urban energy struggles in Berlin and London. Environment and Planning
              A. doi:10.1177/0308518X19881164.
Cohen, Daniel Aldana. 2018. Climate Justice And The Right To The City. Penn: Current Research
              On Sustainable Urban Development.
              https://penniur.upenn.edu/uploads/media/Cohen.pdf
Johnson, Kristen. 2013. Hacking: The Informal Transportation System in Baltimore. Berkeley
              Planning Journal.
              https://berkeleyplanningjournal.com/urbanfringe/2013/03/hacking-the-informal-
              transportation-system-in-baltimore


Fernandez, Lynne, and MacKinnon, Shauna. 2019. The right to the city as a foundation for social
              justice: A view from the streets of Winnipeg. The Monitor. Canadian Centre for
              Policy Alternatives. https://www.policyalternatives.ca/publications/monitor/right-
              city-foundation-social-justice
Lin, Jan. 2019. Protesting Displacement and the Right to the City: Anti-Gentrification Activism in
              Northeast Los Angeles. Boom California.
              https://boomcalifornia.com/2019/01/16/protesting-displacement-and-the-right-
              to-the-city/
Marcuse, Peter. 2014. Reading the right to the city. Part two: Organisational Realities. City 18:2.
              101-103.
Planning
McCann, Eugene J. 2002. Space, citizenship, and the right to the city: A brief overview.
              GeoJournal 58: 2/3. Social Transformation, Citizenship, and the Right to the City.
              77-79.
Miraftab, Faranak. 2012. Planning and Citizenship. In Oxford Handbook of Urban Planning.
              Edited by Rachel Weber and Randall Crane. Oxford University Press. 1180-1204.
Zieleniec, Andrzej. 2018. Lefebvre’s Politics of Space: Planning the Urban as Oeuvre Urban
              Planning 3: 3. 5–15.
Beebeejaun, Yasminah. 2017. Gender, urban space, and the right to everyday life. Journal of
              Urban Affairs 39:3. 323-334.
Women’s Design Service. http://www.wds.org.uk/
Spatial Agency. Women’s Design Service.
              https://www.spatialagency.net/database/why/political/womens.design.service
Reflections
Merrifield, Andy. 2011. The right to the city and beyond. City 15:3-4. 473-481.
Lefebvre, Henri. 2014 [1989]. Dissolving city, planetary metamorphosis. Environment and
              Planning D: Society and Space 32. 203 – 205.
Harvey, David. 2012. Preface: Henri Lefebvre’s Vision. Rebel Cities: From the Right to the City to
              the Urban Revolution. Verso. ix-xvii.
