VERTICAL STUDIO
ARC 694 (01211)
Instructor: Nichole Wiedemann
Time: MWF 1:00-6:00pm
Office hours: Monday 10-12pm + by appointment
Email: wiedemann@utexas.edu
Phone: 512-471-0136
NEAR + FAR: a pause in the journey
                                                                                                          I-10 Rest Stop, Sierra Blanca, TX
                                                          What is an architecture that necessitates completion by its surroundings?
                                                    Can architecture be made incomplete in order to be fulfilled through experience?
                                                     What is a theory of architecture that begins with ‘things’ rather than concepts?
                                                                                              Can ideas emerge through our senses?
The studio will embrace the notion of the peripatetic – itinerant; traveling from place to place– as a
means to engage, and reveal, the environment. Our experiences moving across (a line or ray) the
land, shape our conception of place (a point). Yet, when we engage ‘site’ as architects, or designers,
more broadly speaking, we often reduce our understanding of the environment to an abstract,
planimetric array of fixed limits, scaled dimensions and immutable positions rather than an
unfolding and variable trajectory fusing time, space and narrative.
As a transliteration of “of walking” or “given to walking about” (Greek), peripatetic is a word, derived
from the covered walkways at the Lyceum and used initially to describe Aristotle’s followers. While
we will not deeply focus on his philosophy in this studio, we should note that he engaged the world
(and thought) through induction or a posteriori (empirical) conclusions. His epistemology is based
on the study of things that exist or happen in the world. We will embrace this approach in the studio.
As Richard Serra seeks “a way of measuring oneself against the indeterminacy of the land” in his
work (Shift,1970-72), we will also empirically pursue an architecture, and landscape architecture,
that mediates between the body and the land in the near and far simultaneously.
                                                    1


                                         “No ideas but in things.” William Carlos Williams, Paterson
collaboration
The studio will collaborate with the Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, a research unit of the
School of Architecture that brings research, education and application to the design and planning
of healthy landscapes and ecosystems. The WFC will provide an ecological design perspective
throughout the semester. The Texas Department of Transportation (TxDOT) will offer valuable
insight into their vision for the Safety Rest Areas as we initiate the project and later provide feedback
on the studio work. Richter Architects will share their perspective in designing and constructing
Pecos County Safety Rest Area as well as provide insight into our proposals. The collaboration will
provide a rare underpinning to an architecture studio with access to site research and background,
diverse knowledge sets, “client” perspectives, and, moreover, design professionals.
https://www.wildflower.org
https://www.txdot.gov
http://www.richterarchitect.com
program/site
The studio will use a TxDOT proposal for a future Safety Rest Area located in Montague County,
Texas, as a basis for our studio project The selected site, which is an old highway rest area, is on
Highway 287, equidistant (about 60 miles) between Ft.Worth and Wichita Falls. TxDOT’s vision for
the Safety Rest Stop is to “reflect” the region –historically, culturally, geologically and so on– in
addition to providing the expected amenities, including bathrooms, picnic tables and parking.
approach
Dialogue, an exchange of ideas/positions (through talking and making), will be at the core of our
daily activities. Lectures, readings, site visits, critiques, precedents and field trips will help
introduce an array of information and perspectives in regard to the project. Not only will we seek
engagement with those outside the school but the ‘horizontal’ structure of the studio will provide
an open and supportive atmosphere. Like a “lab,” the studio is a space for experimentation,
observation and practice. It is a place of un-knowing.
                     “Failure is the only opportunity to more intelligently begin again.” Henry Ford
    “There is only one way to avoid criticism: do nothing, say nothing and be nothing.” Aristotle
phases + grading
The semester will begin with a series of fast exercises, with limited scope yielding a range of
outcomes, in order to provide an inductive foundation for the longer project. The majority of the
semester, will be devoted to a slower and more deliberate pursuit of a design problem.
LANDSCAPE_near + far                         [approx. 1 wk]              5%
SURFACE 1_ water                             [approx. 1 wk]              5%
SURFACE 2_ light (wind)                      [approx. 1 wk]              5%
ASSEMBLY_picnic arbor                        [approx. 1 wk]              5%
MAP | MODEL_diagram                          [approx. 1 wk]              5%
SYNTHESIS_safety rest stop                   [approx. 8 wk]             65%
Improvement/Engagement                                                  10%
Emphasis (as per the “Four Streams” model) will be in the following areas:
Ordering Systems: 20% - Human Factors: 20% - Construction: 10% - Contexts: 50%
                                                     2


grades
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in
other academic areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may
be evaluated, a significant portion of each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of
issues. Your work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the semester.
Grading for studio courses is broken into three components: 1/3 grasp (ideas combined with an
appropriate process of inquiry), 1/3 process (the consistent and rigorous development of ideas)
and 1/3 resolution (the demonstration of competence, completeness and understanding evidenced
in the representation of the project and its architectural implications).
A/ A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual
ability, conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and
techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. The work submitted surpasses required
drawings and models in depth and/or scope.
B+/ B/ B- : above average
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
The work demonstrates potential for excellence and is complete.
C+/ C/ C- : average and below
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with
dedication or rigor. The work submitted is incomplete in one or more areas.
D+/ D/ D- : poor
Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation
are not level–appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge
base. The project is incomplete.
F : failure
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is unacceptable. Note that this grade will be
assigned due to excessive unexcused absences. Project unresolved/incomplete.
X : excused incomplete
Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments are not
a cause for assigning this grade. An “X” is used only after consultation with the administration and
must include an agreement for completion of outstanding work and deadline. Resolution of the
incomplete must be prior to the commencement of the next semester.
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR UNEXCUSED ABSENCES, LATE WORK +
LATE ARRIVALS.
resources
The school and university provide an exceptional educational environment and you should attend
the lectures, exhibits, talks, symposia, etc. These experiences are invaluable and significant in
your architectural education. For a complete listing, please visit https://soa.utexas.edu/life-
work/events. Additionally, make use of the Materials Lab, Build Lab (shop) and Technology Lab. If
accessing Adobe software in SOA computer labs, you will be prompted to sign in with an Adobe ID.
To create a free Adobe ID for this purpose, got to: https://accounts.adobe.com/
Training requirements may be required prior to your engagement.
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/SoABuildLab/Build+Lab+Access+and+Training
                                                   3


attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. Please contact the
instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class. Religious holy days sometimes
conflict with class schedules. Please notify me prior (14 days) to the class dates you will be absent
to observe a religious holy day. If you miss a work assignment, or other project due to the
observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed
within a reasonable time after the absence.
academic integrity
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, visit the SJS
website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs or call 471-2841.
students with disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This
letter should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
needed should be discussed at that time.
security, safety and the studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the
careful attention to the needs of individual. Please be considerate your classmates. All spraying of
fixative, spray paint or any other substance must be done in the shop. Damages done to the
facilities will not be tolerated by the School of Architecture.
Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24
hours a day, 7 days a week. Be smart. Be safe.
                                                     4
