                     SYLLABUS FOR ALD 328: Applied Human Learning
                                       Spring 2020 – SZB 240
                                          Unique No: 09530
Instructor: Dr. Diane L. Schallert                    Office hrs: Best by appt. but also
dschallert@austin.utexas.edu                          Tuesdays 11-1 or come see if I’m free
Office: SZB 506J                                      TA:
Phone: (512) 826-4586 (cell)
                        SCHEDULE OF TOPICS AND ASSIGNMENTS
     Date                         Topic                      Assignment for this class
  Jan. 23     Introductions all around
  Jan. 30     Confidence, Emotions, and Motivation           (1 & 2) Chap. 1 & 2 in Johnston;
                                                             (3) Ebbers, S. M.
                                                             (4) Chap. 1 Bergin
  Feb. 6      Fostering social and emotional learning        (1 & 2) Chaps. 6 & 7 Johnston
              and dealing with crises                        (3) Chap 2 Bergin
          Exercise 1: Draft of First Section of Philosophy of Learning paper is due
                               by 11:59 pm Feb. 12 (a Wednesday)
  Feb. 13     The construction of meaning: Connecting        (1) Intro & Chap. 1 of Nieto
              what’s known with what’s new                   (2) Chap. 3 of Johnston
  Feb. 20     Sociocultural models of learning               (1) Chaps. 2 & 3 of Nieto;
                                                             (2) Smagorinsky, 2018
  Feb. 27     The role of language in learning and the       (1) Chap. 5 of Johnston;
              power of words                                 (2) Noddings, 1999
  Mar. 5      Applying the social approach to learning:      (1) Chap. 4 of Nieto;
              Making group work and classroom                (2) Chap. 8 of Johnston
              discussion work                                (3) Park et al.
              Applied Theory Paper is due by 11:59 pm Mar. 11 (a Wednesday)
  Mar. 12 Improvisation and the power of uncertainty (1) Sawyer 2004
                                                             (2) Jordan et al.
  Mar. 26 What it means to be a teacher and how it           (1) Chap. 6 of Nieto
              feels: The psychology of being a teacher       (2) Lee & Schallert
                                                             (3) Chap. 5 Bergin
  Apr. 2      Tools that reflect what society thinks about (1) Alexander & Singer
              learning                                       (2) Jou & Wang
  Apr. 9      High-stakes assessments: What are they         (1) Education NEXT
              and what’s the fuss; peer response to          (2) Smith
              Observation Project                            (3) Palmer & Lynch
        First draft of Observation Project is due by 11:59 pm Apr. 15 (a Wednesday)
  Apr. 16     How to make assessment useful to learners, (1) Chap. 4 of Johnston;
              their teachers, and their parents              (2) Shepard
         No class on Apr. 23 because of American Educational Research Conference
  Apr. 30 Communicating about assessment with                (1) Glazer
              parents and students                           (2) Faber & Mazlish Chap. 7
  May 7       Wrap-up and last words                         (1) Chap. 9 of Johnston
                                                             (2) Chap. 7 of Nieto
                 Final draft of Observation Project is due by 11:59 pm May 8
                    Philosophy of Learning Paper is due by 5 pm on May 14
                                                  1


                                              READINGS
There are two books assigned for this class, Peter Johnston’s Opening minds: Using language to
change lives and Nieto’s The light in their eyes: Creating multicultural learning communities.
You can get them most likely at the Co-Op but also (maybe for less money) on Amazon. Other
readings that go along with our topics are taken from all sorts of sources, magazine articles,
journals, edited volumes, etc., and will be posted in advance on Canvas under the Module tab.
                                      ATTENDANCE POLICY
It is very important that you attend all classes. In keeping with your goals for yourself, it is
important that you make a commitment to 100% attendance for the semester and that you come to
class ready to engage in the talking, thinking, and communicating that will happen. Because this
class will not involve a traditional lecture format, it will be difficult for you to make up any
missed session. Many instructors have a policy (or an unwritten rule) of allowing students to take
one or two unexcused absences before incurring any penalty. I do NOT have such a policy.
Should it happen that a very serious reason prevents you from coming to class, here is what you
must do: If possible, let me know in advance of your absence. If that is impossible, please let me
or Ning (our TA) know by email explaining the circumstances. By the start of the next class
meeting or as soon thereafter as possible, you should write and turn in a 5-page paper that
outlines the readings from the week you missed and that shows you’ve read over the written
discussion we will have had in class. Remember, the paper substitutes for 3 hours of class time
and your preparation for the class, so it should reflect that amount of work. It is up to you to
remember this policy and, unless you speak with me about an extension, to submit the paper
within one week of your absence. Failure to turn in the paper will result in a 5-point
deduction taken from the points that I reserve for Class Meeting Exercises (see below).
                                        GRADE CONTRACT
My philosophy of grading for this course is related to the purposes served by any form of
assessment: (1) to help a learner and instructor know how much has been learned and how well,
and (2) to cause the learner to synthesize and integrate information and ideas that have been
presented. I am expecting the very best work from you, and I am hoping that you will feel
encouraged always to keep striving to understand and learn.
Please note that the grading in this class will be criterion-referenced. I have no qualms in
awarding the whole class A's, or C's, depending on the performance I see. In the end, the basis of
evaluation is how much you learn and not how well you do in comparison to others in the class.
However, I am looking to award A’s when performance shows excellence, B’s when the work is
consistently of good quality, and C’s for adequate work. Just to help you understand the standards
I am using, in the past, very few students earned C’s, one-fifth to one-fourth of the students
earned B’s, and most students earned A’s.
Grades will be awarded as follows:
         91 - 100 points = A (A- = 89 or 90 points)
         81 - 87 points = B (B+ = 88; B- = 79-80)
         70 - 78 points = C
         60 - 69 points = D
                                    FORMS OF EVALUATION
Because this course is listed as having a substantial writing component, you will be doing lots of writing
in this class, some of which will be formal and some informal. There will be five assignments for you to
earn up to 100 points:
                                                    2


         1.  One PHILOSOPHY OF LEARNING PAPER                            (30 pts)
         2.  One APPLIED THEORY PAPER                                    (25 pts)
         3.  OBSERVATION PROJECT                                         (25 pts)
         4.  Several short CLASS MEETING EXERCISES                       (20 pts total)
Philosophy of Learning Paper
It is very common for people preparing to be teachers to be asked to develop their position on
teaching, their “philosophy of teaching.” In this class, however, we are focusing not so much on
teaching but on LEARNING, on the experience of students in classrooms and on all the
conditions, factors, and influences that make learning either a joy and a success or a difficult,
painful, humiliating experience (and of course, everything in between those two extremes). One
of the substantive papers for this class will be a cumulative paper, one in which you describe your
“philosophy of learning,” your manifesto as a learner, your beliefs about learning, or your theory
or model of learning.
To help you get ready for that paper, I am suggesting that you keep in mind all along as the
semester progresses, your reflections on what it means truly to LEARN and what classroom
learning is all about. Your assignment for this paper will be to take FIVE of the ideas, constructs,
or theories we will have discussed in class or you will have encountered in our readings and to
construct a principle of learning from that idea. You will explain each idea or construct in your
own words and ILLUSTRATE each one with examples from what you are seeing in your
placement. As a final section of the paper, you will then produce a statement that represents your
manifesto of learning, your answer to “This I believe about learning.” I am imagining that 8 to 10
pages should do it for this paper.
To be a bit more explicit about the paper, you’ll have a short introduction, and then you’ll have
five subsections, each of which will start with an explicit statement of a principle of learning. For
example, we will talk about motivation in this class, and one principle might be, “Learning
happens most smoothly when the learner is intrinsically motivated in what they are learning.”
Having put that out, you would explain what this means and what the theory is that supports this
principle. Then you would illustrate it with a description of something that’s happened in your
placement with the children you are getting to know there. After the fifth principle has been
stated, explained in your own words, and illustrated with a particular example from your
placement, you will have the final section that will pull everything together, a “this I believe
about learning” section.
The final version of the paper is due on May 14 and is worth 30 points.
To get you ready for producing that final paper, and to help you get a sense for what I mean by
taking an idea or construct from this class and applying it to learning, I am asking you to produce
a draft of the FIRST construct you would use in your final paper, illustrated by something you
observe or experience in your placement. This draft (about 1.5 to 2 pages altogether) will be
due by midnight on Feb. 12 (bring a hard copy to class on Feb. 13) and worth 5 points on its
own (taken out of the CLASS EXERCISE point total as a completion grade). Ning and I will give
you feedback on this draft that you can incorporate into your final version of your Philosophy of
Learning paper.
Applied Theory Paper
The Applied Theory Paper is meant for you to integrate and synthesize the information presented in class
and in the readings with your observations from your placement experience. The general format of the
paper will be to take 3 particular incidents or events and analyze them given some theory or construct we
will have discussed in class. I will give you the first situation/scenario/event and I’ll even tell you which
theoretical construct to use in its analysis. For the 2nd one, I’ll suggest a possible incident but allow you to
replace it with one of your own collected from your placement if you’d like. For the 3rd incident, you will
                                                    3


describe something you’ve observed in your placement and analyze it. By analysis is meant that you take
apart the incident, choose an appropriate theory or consruct, and show how the theory or construct
explains what is going in the example you’ve provided. Note that the third incident you describe in your
Applied Theory Paper could very well become one of the construct you use in your Philosophy of
Learning paper. The whole paper should be about 5 to 6 pages (about 1.5 to 2 pages per incident).
Because I have a strong belief in a mastery-oriented approach to assessment and because this course is
meant to help you improve your writing in your discipline, I will provide extensive feedback on the draft
of your paper that you turn in on Mar. 11, and I will assign grades to the paper at least in part based on
how well it is written and not just on what you say. (More on the scoring rubric later). The second
version of the paper, should you decide you want to improve your score, will be due within two weeks of
receiving my feedback. Be sure to attach your first version with my feedback to your second version.
The number of points and due date for the first version of the Applied Theory Paper are as
follows: (25 points) Mar. 11 (due by 11:59 pm; bring a hard copy to class Mar. 12)
Observation Project: Focus on Talk in Schools
One of the primary goals of this course is the “theory into practice” connection. Because I am very
interested in the power of TALK wherever it occurs, in the classroom as well as in the teachers’ lounge,
I’ve designed this project with a primary goal that you observe and analyze the talk that is taking place
around you in your placement school: between you and your students, your mentor teacher and the
students, your mentor teacher and you, other teachers you overhear, etc. For this project, my primary
objective is that you strive to become aware of the complexity of influences that talk can have on how
people feel and think in situations.
Here is how I am imagining you will proceed:
        1. You will begin right away by becoming aware of the kinds of phrases, messages, and
            conversations that go on around you when you are at your placement school. To help you get
            started, I would suggest that you make a point to write down some sort of observation every
            time you are at your school about the talk around you.
        2. After two or three weeks have passed, I want you to select three kinds of situations to observe
        more closely.
            (1) Talk between an adult (this could be you) and one of the children in the classroom
            (2) Talk between an adult (could be you) and a group of children, preferably the whole class
            (3) Talk among adults (e.g., you and your mentor teacher, everyone in the teachers’ lounge)
        Your job is to observe closely and report exactly what was said for a 2- to 5-minute period. An
        audio-recording might be handy for this part.
        3. You will then produce a report of what happened. The report will generally have three big
            sections:
            (1) The first section will have 3 smaller subsections in which you describe what was said, how
            people reacted, how you felt either as a participant or observer, and how you imagine other
            participants felt in each of the three situations you observed.
            (2) The second part will compare the three kinds of talk presented in Part 1 and how adults
            and children changed because of the changed interaction configuration (i.e., do adults and
            children talk differently one-on-one than in group, do adults talk differently when speaking to
            other adults than when speaking to children, how does the talk differ, etc.).
            (3) The third part will take some idea from our readings and/or discussions in class to
            explain/describe/analyze/elucidate what was going on in the talk you observed.
            Note that using a multimodal approach to presenting your ideas in this paper is
            encouraged!
        4. A DRAFT of your report is due by Apr. 15 (a WEDNESDAY) by 11:59pm. By draft I mean
            that you will have already conducted the observations and you will have made a good stab at
                                                     4


              producing the three big parts of the report. (By 11:59 pm of Apr. 15, I’d like at least a good
              idea of what you are doing so that I know how to group you with others who may be most
              useful to you).
         5. I will group you with 2-3 others who will respond to your draft. These peer-response groups
              will be charged with reading the group’s drafts and with responding with all the help they can
              to improving the drafts for the final version, both in terms of the ideas and in terms of the
              writing. Their response to your darft will be due on Apr. 30.
         6. On Apr. 30, I will allocate a portion of class time during which you can share your reactions
              to each other’s reports. Your job then will be to take your group’s feedback and to use it to
              whatever degree you deem helpful in producing your final draft.
The total number of points possible for the Observation Project will be 25. These 25 points will
be earned in the following ways: 20 determined by my evaluation of your FINAL draft, including
its writing quality, and 5 points determined by the average of your group members’ evaluation of
how helpful you were in your response to THEIR drafts. Thus, you will be earning a rather
substantial portion of your grade by acting as a peer responder to the drafts of your group. Due
date of final version: May 8.
Class Meeting Exercises
Throughout the semester, at several of the class meetings, I will give you an assignment asking
you to do some sort of analysis or application of the constructs we will be discussing. My goal for
these exercises is to encourage an application of theory into practice. These will be relatively easy
and sometimes even fun, but more importantly, I am hoping they will be thought-provoking
enough that they will encourage productive and worthwhile classroom interaction when we meet
on Thursdays. Each exercise will be worth 2 to 5 points. I am assuming that it will not be difficult
to earn these points for every exercise so long as I see that you have made a good-faith effort at
engaging the task seriously.
One of these 5-point exercises involves the following: It is special because it is a Texas legislative
REQUIREMENT for you to be allowed to teach in local schools. As such, UT’s teacher
preparation program has designated THIS class as the one to act as a gatekeeper-- You will not
get credit for ALD 328 until you have emailed an electronic copy of your certificate of
completion to our TA, Ning Fan, xuening.fan@utexas.edu. The exercise involves an online
module that deals with behavior management issues. Here is a short description and a way to
access it:
Texas Behavior Support Initiative (TBSI)
The Texas Behavior Support Initiative, or TBSI, is a legislatively mandated state level training by
Senate Bill 1196 and the Texas Administrative Code. §89.1053. The TBSI training is designed to
provide foundational knowledge for the use of Positive behavior Interventions and Supports for
students with disabilities as well as with all students. While the TBSI training meets legislative
requirements related to procedures for the use of restraint and time-out, it also provides a
framework for sharing a wide range of foundational level behavior strategies and prevention
based school wide, classroom, and individual interventions.
    •    Use the link
         k     https://www.escweb.net/tx_esc_04/catalog/session.aspx?session_id=1410108 . You
         may have to copy and paste the link into your browser to make it work.
    •    Sign in (yellow button on top left)
    •    Create a new account (or enter your email and password, if you already have an account).
                                                     5


     •    On the TBSI page, click blue Register button on top right; then select Check Out; verify
          information; select Complete Check Out.
     •    You will receive a Registration Confirmation (and #) in e-mail immediately thereafter.
     •    Select Professional Development at the top of page. Select Registration/Certificate.
     •    Select Professional Development at the top of page.
     •    Click Online Sessions tab when ready to do the course. Select Play in the Session ID
          line.
Remember to send a copy of certificate of completion to Ning (our TA).
Total points for this exercise: 5. Total points for ALL of these exercises: 20. Note that this source of
points for your course grade is the one I will dock for absences that have not been redeemed by a paper
(see above) or for obvious dereliction in being prepared or participating in all classroom activities.
                                              ADDITIONAL MISCELLANY
Course Evaluation
You should feel free throughout the semester to let me know how things are going. I will be asking you to respond to the
official course evaluation survey at the end of the semester but I AM interested as well in any interim feedback you'd like to
share with me. In some ways, it is a little late to complain about some habit, or policy, or procedure of mine when the
semester is long gone! I promise to take your comments and suggestions in the spirit that I would like you to take my
evaluation of YOU, which is as informative feedback and guidance to improvement.
Writing Flag Criteria and Interpretation
The following criteria were developed by the Faculty Council. The interpretations for each of the criteria were
developed by the faculty committee that oversees the Writing flag and were approved by the Undergraduate Studies
Advisory Committee.
          Criterion #1
          Require students to write regularly—several times during the semester—and to complete writing projects that are
substantial. It is only through the practice of writing that students improve their writing.
          Interpretation. “Substantial” writing projects will vary in purpose and scope, but their development and organization
should reflect sustained intellectual work. Substantial writing may be built from a sequence of smaller projects. Overall,
substantiality should be judged by looking at the writing projects within the context of the class.
          Criterion #2
          Structure writing assignments around the principle that good writing requires rewriting and that careful reading and
analysis of the writing of others is a valuable part of the learning process. Students must receive meaningful feedback from the
instructor (or teaching assistant) so they can improve successive drafts. Instructors are encouraged to have students read each
other’s work in order to offer constructive criticism.
          Interpretation. At least one writing project should involve revision. “Rewriting” goes beyond the correction of
grammar, mechanics, and usage. It typically involves the re-thinking of major arguments, organizational elements,
perspectives, or stylistic choices in the project. “Meaningful” feedback guides revision and improvement. It does more than
point out error or sum up overall performance. Feedback need not consist solely of written comments; student-instructor
conferences, for example, are an excellent means of providing meaningful feedback.
          Criterion #3
          Include writing assignments that constitute at least one-third of the final grade in the course. These assignments must
be graded on writing quality as well as content.
          Interpretation. Writing quality and content are often inseparable. This requirement simply holds students
accountable for both their ideas and the clarity with which they express them.
                                                               6


Student Rights & Responsibilities
     • You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     • You have a right to respect.
     • You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     • You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     • You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     • You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
           environment.
     • You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
           excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching
           team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your
           experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
           energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
     • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
     • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
           standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
       Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
       differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities.
       Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to
       address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please
       advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Academic Integrity
       Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student
       of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
       academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas
       that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise
       you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the
       course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor
       Code which can be found at the following web address:
       http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while
you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there are
aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll
develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our
learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need
specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to
maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
                                                                7


Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting
enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on
campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than
later is often helpful.
       If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
       we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
(JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right
– it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
       assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions.
       UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its
       forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
                1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
                2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
                     become involved in a Title IX investigation.
                3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
       Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
       Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am
       a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing,
       discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related
       incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support
       or remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
       information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
       titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
  • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
       nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
  • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
  • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
       unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
       Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
  • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                              8


ALD 328, Spring 2020
                            Readings (Version 1; may change slightly)
These are the references for your reading assignments. The chapters of the Johnston and the Nieto
books are also listed for your convenience. One thing you should know is that it is a strong habit
for faculty members to refer to journal articles and even textbook excerpts by the authors’ names.
So here are those names and full citation information in case you need them.
For Jan. 30: Confidence, Emotions, and Motivation
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Chapters 1 & 2. Opening minds: Using language to change lives.
    Portland, ME: Steinhouse Publishers
Ebbers, S. M. (2011). How to generate interest so reading comprehension improves.
Bergin, C. (2018). Chapter 1: What is prosocial behavior? In Designing a prosocial classroom:
    Fostering collaboration in students from Pre-K- 12 with the curriculum you already use (pp.
    13-35). New York: Norton & Company.
For Feb. 6: Fostering social and emotional learning and dealing with crises
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Chapters 6 & 7.
Bergin, C. (2018). Chapter 2: Prosocial behavior increases your students’ learning. In Designing
    a prosocial classroom: Fostering collaboration in students from Pre-K- 12 with the
    curriculum you already use (pp. 36-50). New York: Norton & Company.
For Feb. 13: The construction of meaning: Connecting what’s known with what’s new
Nieto, S. (1999, 2009). Intro and Chapter 1. The light in their eyes: Creating multicultural
    learning communities. New York: Teachers College Press.
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Chapter 3.
For Feb. 20: Sociocultural models of learning
Nieto, S. (1999, 2009). Chapter 2 & 3.
Smagorinsky, P. (2018). Literacy in teacher education: “It’s the context, stupid!” Journal of
    Literacy Research, 50(3), 281-303.
For Feb. 27: The role of language in learning and the power of words
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Chapter 5.
Noddings, N. (1999). Stories and conversation in schools. In J. Kane (Ed.), Education,
    information, and transformation: Essays on learning and thinking (p. 319-336). Upper Saddle
    River, NJ: Merrill.
For Mar. 5: Applying the social approach to learning: Making group work and classroom
    discussion work!
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Chapter 8.
Park, J., Long, P., Choe, N. H., & Schallert, D. L. (2018). The contribution of self-compassion
    and compassion to others to students’ emotions and project commitment when experiencing
    conflict in group projects. International Journal of Educational Research, 88, 20-30.
For Mar. 12: Improvisation and the power of uncertainty
Nieto, S. (1999, 2009). Chapter 4.
                                                   9


Sawyer, R. K. (2004). Improvised lessons: Collaborative discussion in the constructivist
    classroom. Teaching Education, 15, 189-201.
Jordan, M. E., Cheng, A. J., Schallert, D. L., Song, K., Lee, S., & Park, Y. (2014). “I guess my
    question is”: What is the co-occurrence of uncertainty and learning in computer-mediated
    discourse? International Journal of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning, 9(4), 451-
    475.
For Mar. 26: The psychology of being a teacher
Nieto, S. (1999, 2009). Chapter 6.
Lee, S., & Schallert, D. L. (2016). Becoming a teacher: Coordinating past, present, and future
    selves with perspectival understandings about teaching. Teaching and Teacher Education, 56,
    72-83.
Bergin, C. (2018). Chapter 5: Positive Teacher-student relationships. In Designing a prosocial
    classroom: Fostering collaboration in students from Pre-K- 12 with the curriculum you
    already use (pp. 117-145). New York: Norton & Company.
For Apr. 2: Tools that show what society thinks about learning
Alexander, P. A., & Singer, L. M. (2017). Power of print for learning in a digital world. Retrieved
    from https://theconversation.com/the-enduring-power-of-print-for-learning-in-a-digital-world-
    84352
Jou, M., & Wang, J. Y. (2019). A reflection of teaching and learning cognition and behavior in
    smart learning environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 95, 177-178.
For Apr. 9: High-stakes Assessment: What are they and what’s the fuss
Education Next. (2014). Examining high-stakes testing: Education Next talks with Joshua P. Starr
    and Margaret Spellings. Education Next. Retrieved from educationnext.org
Smith, M. L. (1991). Put to the test: The effect of external testing on teachers. Educational
    Researcher, 20(5), 8-11.
Palmer, D., & Lynch, A. W. (2008). A bilingual education for a monolingual test?: The pressure
    to prepare for AKS and its influence on choices for language of instruction in Texas
    elementary bilingual classrooms. Language Policy, 7, 217-235.
For Apr. 16: How to make assessment useful to learners, their teachers, & their parents
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Chapter 4.
Shepard, L. (1995). Using assessment to improve learning. Educational Leadership, 52(5), 38-43.
For Apr. 30: Communicating about assessment with parents and students
Glazer, S. (1994). Helping our students see their learning. Teaching Pre K-8, 25(2), 100-101.
Faber, A., & Mazlish, E. (1996). Chapter 7. How to talk so kids can learn. New York: Scribner.
For May 7: Wrap-up and last words
Johnston, P. H. (2012). Chapter 9.
Nieto, S. (1999, 2009). Chapter 7.
                                                  10
