                                                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                            KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                                 Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
KIN 351: Philosophy of Sport and Physical Activity
Professor: Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
Email: tolga@austin.utexas.edu
Office: BEL 605G
Office Hours: T/W/TH, 12-12:30, by appointment
Office Phone:(512) 232-6018
Class Meeting Time: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and Thursdays, 12:30–3:00
Classroom: GDC 2.502
COURSE OVERVIEW
Generally, the aim of this course is to help students learn to question, reason, and think in a
manner that will serve them when faced with higher-level issues and ethical dilemmas in their
future careers. Specifically, the purpose of this course is to provide the student with
introductory exposure to the various ideas, techniques, and research related to the Western
philosophical exploration of play, sport, athletics, exercise, and the body. Beyond content,
the course also emphasizes the development of broadly applicable skills, such as critical
thinking, argumentation, collaboration, oral communication, and, of course, writing.
This course carries both an Ethics Flag and a Writing Flag
Ethics courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for making ethical
decisions in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the process of
applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations.
Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic
discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete
substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve
your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you
may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet
the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.


                                                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                          KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                                Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
PREREQUISITE
Students must have attained upper-division or graduate standing in order to be enrolled in
this course.
REQUIRED TEXTS
Fair Play: The Ethics of Sport, 4th Edition by Robert L. Simon, Cesar R. Torres, and
Peter F. Hager (Westview, 2015)
Ethics 101by Brian Boone
The Nuts and Bolts of College Writing, 2nd Edition, By Michael Harvey (hardcopy
recommended, title is available electronically via UT libraries)
All other required readings will be posted to Canvas
DESIGN OF ASSIGNMENTS
Assignments are designed to provide students with an opportunity to apply concepts and
methods from the texts, lectures, and class activities. Assignments are due at the beginning of
class on the day they are due. Assignments received after that time will be deemed late and
penalized 10% for each day late.
SPECIFIC ASSIGNMENTS
—This section provides an overview of the work we will do throughout the
semester. Full assignment details will be distributed in class and via Canvas in
a timely manner. See the schedule at the end of the syllabus for tentative due
dates and make sure to download schedule updates as they are announced
via Canvas.
—Important: unless otherwise specified, assignments are due via Canvas
upload, by the start of class on their respective due dates.


                                                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                           KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                                 Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
Attendance (5%, stiff penalty for missing 4 or more days) and
Participation (10%) (15% total)
Given the seminar-style approach to this course, active engagement and participation
is a vital component. Students are expected to attend all class meetings, having done
readings and prepared adequately to contribute to discussion.
The attendance portion of the grade will be determined as follows:
              Number of Absences                                      Penalty
  1                                                                                          none
  2                                                                                            2%
  3                                                                                            5%
  4 or more                                         25% (yes, you read that right…there are
                                                           only 15 class meeting days, missing
                                                            more than 3 is truly unacceptable)
The participation grade is holistic and will be based on: consistent and prompt
attendance, active and insightful participation in class discussions, and completion of
in-class work and activities (e.g., reflections, group work, free-writing). Beginning in
the third week, students may inquire about where their participation grade stands. It
is my hope that everyone gets the full 10%...how do you do this? Show up and
participate! Also, quality--not quantity--of participation is essential.
Essay #1: “The New Rules” (15% total, for first draft, final draft, and
related components)
Students will write a brief persuasive essay (750-1000 words), utilizing deductive and
inductive reasoning to argue for rule changes in a sport setting of their choice. Full
assignment details will be distributed in class.
Quiz: Ethical Theories in Your Own Words (10%)
An open-ended quiz, asking you to distill key ethical frameworks from readings and
lectures in your own words.
Essay #2: Ethics (25% total, for first draft, final draft, and related components)
A formal paper, examining an ethical issue in sport or physical activity, serves as the major
project for this course. A process-oriented approach to writing will be used to guide student
writing; full assignment details will be distributed in class.


                                                                     The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                            KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                                  Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
Ethics Application Exam (20%)
An essay exam in “take home” format, wherein students will apply major ethical frameworks
to the analysis selected chapters from the reading. Open notes. Full details and hints on how
to best prepare will be discussed in class.
Group Projects:
Fair Play “Ethics Forum” (15%, 5% from peer evaluation)
Full assignment details will be distributed in class.
GRADING OF ASSIGNMENTS
Assignments will be assessed using the following criteria:
•       Quality of writing
•       Application of methods and concepts from the text, lectures, and class activities
•       Synthesis and integration of ideas and insights
•       Clarity and logic
In any instance where a student would like to discuss their grade - either on a specific
assignment or in terms of the final overall grade in this course - the student must have a face-
to-face meeting with the instructor and outline the specific issues in question. Emails in which
students ask for points on assignments or ask that final grades be bumped up at the end of
the semester will be disregarded; I will not discuss changes to grades in anything but a face-
to-face meeting.
In the event that a student wishes to challenge their grade on any specific assignment they
must adhere to the following procedure. Requests for a meeting to discuss the assignment
must be made within 7 days from receipt of the assignment grade. The request should include
a basic explanation or justification for a re-grade on this particular assignment. Following a
face-to-face meeting, the instructor will review the student’s assignment and re-grade the
assignment based on the student’s rationale – assuming this rationale is deemed sufficient to
re-assess the grade. The grade on the assignment may then increase or decrease based on
the instructor’s re-assessment of the student’s work. The re-grade will be the final grade for the
assignment.
NOTE ON HOLISTIC GRADING
Assignments that are not graded with a rubric will be graded holistically. This means that we
will evaluate your response as a whole, or for its overall quality, while considering five
elements (Florida Department of Education, 2005-2013):
1. Content of the paper is appropriate (see assignment directions)
2. Focus which refers to how clearly the paper presents and maintains a main idea, theme, or
unifying point and does not contain extraneous information.


                                                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                           KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                                 Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
3. Organization which refers to the structure or plan of development (beginning, middle, and
end) and whether the points logically relate to one another. Organization refers to (1) the
use of transitional devices to signal the relationship of the supporting ideas to the main idea,
theme, or unifying point and (2) the evidence of a connection between sentences.
4. Support which refers to the quality of the details used to explain, clarify, or define. The
quality of support depends on word choice, specificity, depth, credibility, and thoroughness.
Papers representing the higher end of the point scale provide fully developed examples and
illustrations in which the relationship between the supporting ideas and the topic is clear.
5. Conventions which refers to punctuation, capitalization, spelling, and variation in sentence
used in the paper.
COURSE GRADING
Final grades for the course will be based on the aggregation of scores for the assignments, in-
class work, participation, and exams. Requests to ‘bump’ final grades are frowned upon and
will not be considered. Final grades will be assigned based on the following scale, without
rounding:
A = 92.5% - 100%
A- = 89.5% - 92.49%
B+ = 86.5% - 89.49%
B = 82.5% - 86.49%
B- = 79.5% - 82.49%
C+ = 76.5% - 79.49%
C = 72.5% - 76.49%
C- = 69.5% - 72.49%
D+ = 66.5% - 69.49%
D = 62.5% - 66.49%
D- = 59.5% - 62.49%
F = <59.49%
NOTE ON APA FORMAT
Students not familiar with the APA (6th Edition) method of citations in papers should go to:
http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/ for information on how to (1)
properly cite sources in the paper, (2) build a reference list/bibliography, and (3) properly
cite electronic and online sources. For more information on citing electronic sources see:
www.apastyle.org/elecmedia.html. Adherence to APA style is part of the total grade
assigned to student papers.
POLICY FOR LATE OR MISSED WORK
Students are expected to have all assignments completed on the announced dates and times.
No late work may be turned in unless the professor has given prior approval in writing;
unless the professor specifies an exception, late assignments will lose 10% from the final
grade for each day late. All assigned work must be submitted online by the beginning of the
class on the announced dates, unless otherwise specified. For every day an assignment is late


                                                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                            KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                                 Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
it drops a letter grade. Students excused for athletic events, travel, religious purposes, etc.
should make every effort to turn in their assigned work before leaving. It is not acceptable to
email your work so that it is on time unless prior permission has been given. If you are
struggling with uploading your assignment, you are urged to contact ITS at 475-9400 for
assistance. We will not assist you with technical issues, nor will we accept an assignment
because you could not upload it. Give yourself adequate time to submit your work in case
you have technical difficulties.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
Students are reminded that matters of academic dishonesty are treated seriously by
the university and may result in failure in the class and possible expulsion from the
university. In particular, students should use care in the writing of their papers. For
instance, do not copy sentences and passages verbatim from others without placing
them in quotes and providing proper citations. Ideas and theories must also be
properly cited if you paraphrase from another person’s text. It goes without saying
that it is a breach of the academic code to purchase papers on the Internet or to turn
in work written by someone else.
COURSE COMMUNICATION
Outside of class, we will be communicating with you via email and Canvas postings.
Please be sure that the email address you have on file with the university is the email
that you check regularly. You must use the address on file as your primary university
contact. Please check your email and Canvas consistently to ensure you have not
missed a communication from me.
You are also responsible for all in-class communication. It is your responsibility to
listen carefully to all instructions prior to leaving class. You are welcome to speak to
me after class or at office hours if you need clarification on any class communication.
COURSE ADMINISTRATION AND EXPECTATIONS
1.This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can
expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects,
and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will
also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and to read and discuss
your peers' work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from your written work.
2.To be eligible to pass this course, students are required to complete all class-related
assignments at the time they are due or scheduled. Students are also expected to


                                                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                        KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                              Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
contribute fully to any group assignment. Failure to complete any assignment is
grounds for failure in the course.
3. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the
integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
For further information, visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
4. At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who need academic
accommodations should notify the instructor by presenting a letter prepared the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
5.By UT Austin policy, students must notify me of any pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
within a reasonable time after the absence.
6.Honor Code -- The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning,
discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/events/sjs_honorcode.php)
7.Full and detailed acknowledgment (i.e., citation and bibliographic reference) must
be provided if contributions are drawn from literature in preparation of assignments.
Your written work must properly cite and reference original work where appropriate
or required. Citation and referencing must conform to the style specified in the
Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association (6th ed.) – both in the
body of your paper and its attached reference section.
8.All assignments must be word-processed in .doc or .docx format, and must be
double-spaced throughout with 1-inch margins all around using font size 12. Title
page including name and EID must go on the last page of your assignment, not on the
front. Any work that is turned in by hardcopy must be stapled. If it is not, your
assignment may have points deducted.


                                                               The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                      KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                            Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
9.The student should retain a copy of work that is submitted, and should retain
graded assignments if/when they are returned. Students must be able to produce a
copy of all work upon request.
10.Submission deadlines will be strictly enforced. Extensions will only be granted on
medical or compassionate grounds and will not be otherwise granted except in the
most extreme circumstances. A request for extension must be made in writing (this can
be done via email) to the instructor and must be approved by the instructor prior to
the due date of the assignment or exam. An extension, if granted, will be provided to
the student in writing only.
11.Students will not receive credit for an assignment if they forget to include their
name on it. It is the student’s responsibility to check assignments for name and
accuracy.
12.Assignments must be submitted to Canvas at the beginning of class on the day in
which they are due. They are considered late if turned in after the first 15 minutes of
class. Points constituting 10% of the total will be deducted for each day an
assignment is late without prior arrangement.
13.In the event that a final exam is given, it will be scheduled during the University
Exam Period, as scheduled by the university. The exam will only be given at that time.
No arrangement can be made to take the exam at any other time.


                                                                      The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                              KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                                    Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
                             TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE
        Subject to change. Make sure to check Canvas for updates.
   Date                Topic/In Class                                 What’s Due?
6/6                  Class intro in brief.
                      Essay 1 Assigned
6/11               Class Intro Continued:                 Suggested: read Harvey chapters 1-4
             Course details, some thoughts on                   (free online, UT library)
            philosophy, writing, sport, and life.
              Introducing Philosophy: logical
              reasoning, fallacies, sports talk.
                        Metaphysics.
6/12       Introducing Philosophy: metaphysics                     Essay 1 First Draft:
                     and epistemology.                     -upload to Canvas by start of class
                     Essay 1 workshop.                   -bring laptop to class to work on peer
                                                                    review/workshop
6/13              Introducing Philosophy:         Suggested: finish Harvey sometime this week
                epistemology and aesthetics.
6/14               NOT A CLASS DAY                        Essay 1 Peer Reviews due by NOON
6/18                  Ethics Lecture #1                          Readings from Boone:
                         Discussion                     Virtue Ethics: chapter 1 + pgs. 111-121
                  Form Fair Play Groups                          Deontology: chapter 4
                                                   Consequentialism and Utilitarianism: chapter 3
                                                               Social Contract: 192-196
                                                              Alternative Views: chapter 7
6/19                  Ethics Lecture #2              Finish all readings you don’t get through for
                         Discussion                                      Tuesday
6/20                Wrapping Up Ethics                          Read: FP chapters 1 & 2
                   Introducing Fair Play          (2 is tough, but understanding it is key…try to get
                Fair Play Project Workshop          through it before class so that you can get the
                                                                 most out of the lecture)
                                                    Read, or at least have skimmed, your assigned
                                                                         chapter
6/22               NOT A CLASS DAY                        Essay 1 Final Draft Due by Midnight
6/25                     Ethics Quiz                               Read your chapter!
                Fair Play Project Workshop
6/26                  Ethics Forum #1                              Read Chapters 3&4
                      Chapters 3 and 4
6/27                  Ethics Forum #2                             Read Chapters 5 &6
                      Chapters 5 and 6
7/2                   Ethics Forum #3                             Read Chapters 7 & 8
                      Chapters 7 and 8
7/3                   Focus on Writing
7/4        No class! Celebrate the US ethically!


                                                    The University of Texas at Austin
                                                            KIN F351 Summer 2019
                                                                   Dr. Tolga Ozyurtcu
      Dates below subject to change via
              class democracy!
7/9      Essay 2 Writing Workshop            Essay 2 First Draft/Outline
                 Exam Prep                       Due at start of class
                                        Bring laptops to class for peer review
7/10   Individual Writing Workshops
          Exam Posted at 3:00PM
7/11   Individual Writing Workshops       Exam due to Canvas by 5:00PM
     Essay 2 Final Draft Due to Canvas
     by 11:59 PM on SATURDAY 7/13
