                               Syllabus: Spring 2020 –
         ENTREPRENEURIALISM IN COMMUNICATIONS
                   ADV 332D (05960) & PR 332D (06490)
Day & Time: Mandatory meet-up dates below
January 30th. 6-8PM - initial meet up
March 12th. 6-9PM - practice run
April 30th. 6-10PM
Classroom: BMC 5.102
Professor: Mark Bunting, MarkB@SkyTV.net
Teaching Assistant:
• Abby Hendricks
abbyhendricks@utexas.edu | (936) 645-6736
Enrollment: Course is designed as an open elective for students from any college.
Facebook: UTAdTech (https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech)
The Course: Think “SHARK TANK”. This independent study course is designed to help
would-be entrepreneurs develop a pitch deck for presentation to angel (other) investors.
Small teams will be assembled (5-7 per group) based on your skills and field of study. At
our first meeting you will select teams as your working group for the balance of the
semester. Each group will select a CEO as point of contact with the TA and will submit a
business start-up idea within 10 days of our first class. After approval of a concept there
will be a mid-semester check-in (rehearsal) to check progress and get advice and counsel
from Professor Bunting as you continue to iterate on our plan - culminating in a final
presentation to a group of experts at semesters end. The final product (pitch deck) and
actual team presentation (along with individual score) will be graded by the Professor and
panel. This presentation is 75% of your grade for the course.
This course requires a self-starter who is highly independent and works good with teams.
Collaboration and the ability to meet afterhours is required. The professor will provide
limited directional advice throughout the process but will be looking for the teams to do
their own executive summary, initial financial projections, etc. Ultimately the course is
designed to allow student the opportunity to build and practice a presentation in front of a
group of real investors. The team dynamic is key and your peer grades (based on your
participation) is equal to 25% of your overall grade.
ATTENDANCE: We only have 3 classes and all are required. There is no margin for
error and there are no excused absences. With only 3 meeting dates it’s imperative that all
students are in class for the required FULL CLASS.


January 30th, 6:00 - 10:00 PM - Initial Meet Up
During this first meeting we will split into groups. Everyone must be present for this
meeting - no exceptions! Instructions on how to split into groups will be given in class.
Once in groups, a group leader should be determined. This group leader will be the
person in charge of formal communications with Professor Bunting or the TA regarding
the assignment as well as turning in the final presentation on Canvas.
Additionally, each group should begin brainstorming ideas for a pitch. This must be a
new idea and cannot be a project you have been previously working on outside of class.
Any new business ideas should be national or global in scope. Please do not select
business concepts that are aimed at UT Students or even college students as a market.
Pitch proposals are due to Professor Bunting on February 20th by 5:00 pm. Pitch
Proposals are a quick summary (no more than 5 sentences) of what your group wishes to
pitch to the investors. Professor Bunting will approve, deny, or give feedback on the
proposals.
March 12th, 6:00 - 10:00 PM - Practice Run
This is the second meeting of the semester. This is a full dress-rehearsal to prepare and
practice for the final presentation. Everyone should dress in business attire. Everyone
must be present for this meeting - no exceptions! Everyone in the group must present a
part of the presentation. Presentations should be roughly 30 minutes, do not go over!
During this meeting, each team will present and hear feedback from Professor Bunting.
Each team should take this feedback and incorporate it into their final presentation in the
weeks to come. It is important to see your peer’s presentations and to hear all feedback as
this is a great learning opportunity.
April 30th, 6:00 - 10:00 PM - Final Pitch
This is the final meeting of the semester. Each team will be presenting their pitch to the
class, Professor Bunting, and a few other investors. Everyone should wear business attire
and be present for the entire time. Everyone in the group must present a part of the
presentation. Presentations should be roughly 30 minutes, do not go over!
At the beginning of this class, you will have the opportunity to fill out Instructor Surveys
to give any comments that you may have on the course. We will need a student volunteer
to help us with this. Please reach out to the TA if you are willing.
Afterwards, the presentations will begin for the remainder of the class time. You will
receive feedback from Professor Bunting after each presentation, however, you will not


know your final grade at that time. We will submit grades in the days following the
presentations. Please see how your grade will be determined below.
Grading Policy:
Final Pitch & Deck: 75% of Grade (50% group + 25% individually)
The final presentation grade will be a score on the quality of the working pitch deck
combined with the team presentation (performance) score. You will be judged
individually on your section/performance and as a team. You will find sample pitch decks
in Canvas as a guide. These templates are will give you working examples of the kind of
deck you will need to create to sell your concept/business idea. There is also a document
on “deck required elements” that must be present in each pitch deck and live
presentation.
Peer Evaluation 25 % of Grade
Team members will also score each other for their effort and contributions in a peer
evaluation score. Your peer score equals 1/4 of your semester grade.
                                               th
 Course Procedures:
• Canvas: (http://courses.utexas.edu): Canvas and classroom announcements will serve
       as communication vehicles for this course. Please check Canvas or the Facebook
       page below for PowerPoint slides for a class session, as well as for other session-
       related materials. In order to ensure that you receive all information sent out
       through Canvas, please update your email address on UTDirect
       (http://utdirect.utexas.edu).
• Facebook: Please like the UT ADTECH Facebook
       Page: https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech. This source will list additional
       information such as blog posts, articles and other content which may be relevant
       to in-class discussion. Video content from class lectures as well as PowerPoint
       slides will also be posted on this site.
• In Class Conduct: Use of laptop computers, cell phones, mobile tablets and other
       electronic devices during class session is prohibited. NOISE DURING
       LECTURES AND SPEAKERS IS HIGHLY DISRUPTIVE. Quiet is required!
• Academic Dishonesty: All students are expected to act within and uphold the UT
       Honor Code fully. You may access the General Information Catalog to review
       specific University policies on scholastic dishonesty or refer to the Student


       Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ (Links to an
       external site.)Links to an external site.
A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an
external site.
