                                               Animation and Rigging
                                                         AET 328
                                                           20639
                                          re-animator animatronic remix.
                                                       Spring 2019
                                                        DFA 4.126
                                               TTH 2:00 PM- 3:30 PM
Instructor:                  Dax Norman
                             daxnorman@utexas.edu
                             daxnorman.com
Office Hours:                Mondays and Tuesdays : 11am-1215 pm in the Foundry,
                             or by appointment
I. Rationale:
This course teaches the observation and implementation of believable character movement through a series of
iterative projects that focus on the classic principles of animation, applied to 3D digital characters.
II. Course Aims and Objectives:
Aims
This course explores 3-D character rigging and animation using joints, forward and inverse kinematics, multiple
character animation approaches, facial animation, bipedal character rigging and animation, and exploration into 3 -D
production environments, such as rendered video for film, games, the web, and VR.
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
          •    Understand the similarities and differences between producing animation for a 3-D game versus film
          •    Understand the situations to use forward kinematic (FK) vs inverse kinematic (IK) rigging approaches
          •    Create 3D character animations which apply the classic 12 animation principles
          •    Be fluent in the process of character setup, implementing specifics to a model’s design needs
          •    Explore animated blend shaping approaches to deform digital models
          •    Apply 3-D character animation for use in both rendered video as well as real time
               environments
          •    Successfully collaborate on a state of the art 3-D production
III. Format and Procedures:
This course will meet twice a week. During the first meeting, there will be a lecture that will include demonstration
along with discussion. During the second meeting of the week, there will be group learning project with discussion.
The in-class projects will review and practice the material covered from the week’s first cla ss meeting. Active
participation in weekly in-class group projects will be a major component of the professionalism and participation
component of student grades for the course that will comprise 20% of the final grade.
                                                              11


IV. Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and objectives. As we go
through the semester, those plans may need to change to enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected.
    Date                    Main Topic(s)                         Work to do at home               Evaluation
                                                                to be completed before class
 Jan 22,24     Course Introduction. Basic FK/ IK            Setup blog for class project
               rigging and animation review.                process. Download Maya (if
                                                            applicable)
                                                            Begin Abstract rig and
                                                            animation project.
 Jan 29,31     Animation principles, continued.             Finish rig and animation for
               Lighting and rendering basics.               Abstract Project.
   Feb 5, 7    Creating a beat list, setting up             Begin Animation on “Shot #1”        Abstract Rig and
               shots for animating narrative.                                                   Animation due
               First Pass animation process.
 Feb 12, 14    Second pass animation process, the           Refine animation and render        Shot #1 First Pass
               graph editor/ animation cleanup.             shot #1.                           Due
 Feb 19, 21    Creating Blend Shapes                        Create blend shapes/ facial       Shot #1 Render Due
                                                            animation setup on character
 Feb 26,28     Facial Animation/ lip sync basics.           Create facial animation (shot       Blend Shapes, first
               Reaction Shots. Animation takes.             #2) First Pass.                     pass
    March 5,   Working with audio and animation. Lip        Facial Animation (shot #2)        Shot #2 First pass
    March 7    Sync, continued.                             Second Pass. Render
                                                            animation.
    March      Character Rigging, continued                 Begin Character Rig                 Shot #2 Render
    12,14                                                                                       Due
March 19,21 Spring Break                                  Spring Break                        Spring Break
    March      Character Rigging, Continued                 Finish Character Rig
    26,28
 April 2,4     Animation Principles, Continued              Begin Shot #3 (first Pass)          Character Rig
                                                                                                Due
April 9,11     Compositing and editing                      Shot #3, Second Pass animation
               animation.                                   and rendering.
April 16,18    Discuss Final Project.                       Begin final project               Shot #3 Render Due
               Film Language.
April 23, 25   Animation and Virtual Reality                Work on Final Project               .
 April 30,     Designing in Time                            Finish final Project
 May 02
                                                         22


  May 7, Final Project Presentations/    Finish final projects, be prepared Final Projects Due
  May 9  Course Wrap-up                  to present and discuss work with
                                         class
Date TBA Digital Demo Day                Final Project Presentations        During Finals
                                                                            Week
                                      22


Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to your requests for their feedback)
During this course I will be asking you to give me feedback on your learning in informal as well as formal ways,
including through anonymous surveys about how my teaching strategies are helping or hindering your learning. It’s
very important for me to know your reaction to what we’re doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these
surveys, ensuring that together we can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
V. My Assumptions
It is my belief that with hard work and a little bit of patience, anyone can be good at 3-D animation. The learning
curve is slower for some than others, but do not be discouraged and you will get to where you want to be. With the
projects we create in this course, I advise students to make something that they can get really excited about. Think
about making short-term goals for your progress, and try to learn a new skill each day. The 3-D animation process is
very iterative, in that projects build upon one another, and many steps are repeated ad infinitum. With a firm plan in
place, it will be easy to create a road map for success.
VI. Course Requirements:
          1. Class attendance and participation policy:
                    (a) Expected classroom behavior: take notes, ask many questions, and attend class for the entire
                         duration. Make a solid effort on each project outside of class, so that you may have many
                         questions to contribute to the discussion.
                    (b) Cell phone use, including texting, is unallowable. Keep cell phones stored during the duration
                         of class
                    Religious Holy Days
                    By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
                    the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
                    assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
                    complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
          2. Course Readings/Materials:
                    (a) Recommended Textbooks: Introducing Autodesk Maya 2016: Autodesk Official Press, by
                    Dariush Derakhshani. 1st Edition. ISBN: 9781119059639
                    (b) The Animator’s Survival Kit, by Richard Williams. ISBN: 978-0571238347
                    (b) Supplies needed: Laptop computer capable of running Autodesk Maya and Adobe After Effects
                    (c) Other supplies: Jump Drive for external storage and data backup. A mouse for your laptop, as
                    the 3D software will be much slower to use without one.
                    (d) To download free student version of Maya:
                    http://www.autodesk.com/education/free-software/maya
                    (e) URL for course website: http://goingforwardbackwards.tumblr.com
          3. Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
                     (a) Finished Assignments should be posted to canvas in the requested format before 9:00 AM on
                            the Due Date
                     (b) Late assignments will lose 10 points for the first day late, 20 points if 2 days late, 40 points
                            off if 3 days late, and so on, with point subtraction doubling for each day of lateness
                     (c) Preliminary information on papers or projects, with due dates, shall be posted to canvas on
                            the date of assignment
                                                               33


                  (d) List of assignments that will impact the final grade
                  Project 1: Abstract Rig and Animation (10%)
                  Project 2: Animation (Shot #1) (10%)
                  Project 3: Blend Shape/ Facial Animation Setup (10%)
                  Project 4: Animation (Shot #2) (10%)
                  Project 5: Character Rig (10%)
                  Project 6: Animation (Shot #3) (10%)
                  Project 7: Final Project (20%)
                  Attendance, Professionalism and Participation (20%) MISSING M ORE THAN 3 CLASSES will
                                                                        result in an AUTOMATIC ZERO for this grade.
                   (e) This course will consist of seven projects. Other than the final project, the distribution of
                  weight towards the final grade is even, with each project worth 10% of the final grade. Each of
                  these projects in of itself represents one aspect of the 3-d animation production pipeline and
                  builds upon the last, culminating in a finished multimedia work.
                  (f) Any changes in the syllabus, such as project due dates, will be announced in class as well a s
                  on canvas.
           4. Use of Canvas in class
                In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-protected
                access at http://canvas.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
                online, to post grades, and to submit assignments. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS
                Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
   VII. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
                    Abstract Rig and Animation (10%)
                   Animation (Shot #1)           (10%)
                  Blend Shape/ Facial Animation Setup (10%)
                    Animation (Shot #2) (10%)
                    Character Rig          (10%)
                  Animation (Shot #3) (10%)
                    Final Project        (20%)
                  Professionalism and Participation (20%):-→ MISSING MORE THAN 3 CLASSES will
                                                                 result in an AUTOMATIC ZERO for this grade.
   Letter Grade        Percentage
A                      93%-100%
A-                     90%-92%
B+                     87%-89%
B                      83%-86%
                                                             44


B-                         80%-82%
C+                         77%-79%
C                          73%-76%
C-                         70%-72%
D+                         67%-69%
D                          60%-66%
F                          0%-59%
   IX. Academic Integrity
   University of Texas Honor Code
   The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
   opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
   honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
   X. Other University Notices and Policies
    Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
       • All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
            student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e -mail address. Students
            are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
            communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time -critical. It is recommended that e-
            mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions
                                                               44


          for updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 .
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. (Note to Faculty: Details
of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty should not ask questions related to a student’s condition or
diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.)
     ▪▪   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g.,
          instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion,
          etc.).
     ▪▪   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
          required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g.,
          transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
     ▪▪   Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
          reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
          http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
 discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a part nership
 among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
 Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512 -232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6). As
stated in Senate Bill 1231:
          “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
   undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has
   dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than
   that number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
 Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm
 is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
          ▪▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
               exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
          ▪▪ If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
          ▪▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                     ❖❖ ❖❖     ❖❖    ❖❖
                                                            55


66