                                                  University of Texas at Austin
                                                           Course Outline
                           Economics 329: ECONOMIC STATISTICS-WB
                                           Summer 2020, Unique Number 79480
Course web site: Canvas at UT-Austin
Instructor: Dr. Valerie R. Bencivenga
Office: BRB 3.102C (UT campus is closed)
Office hours: By email, Piazza, and Zoom (by appointment)
Office phone: 512-475-8509 (do not leave a message, email instead)
Email: Eco329.vrb@gmail.com (course email for most email), benciven@utexas.edu (UT email for confidential matters)
I check email multiple times per day and usually I will reply within minutes or hours (or by the next day at the latest). Do not leave a
phone message. Send an email to the course email. Do not use Canvas messaging.
KEY INFORMATION
Because this is an online course, and I won’t be greeting you and introducing the course to you in person, I’m
putting some tips about key information and where to find it here at the beginning of the course outline. The usual
course outline information then follows.
In this course, you’ll watch videoed lectures (and do the associated reading in the textbook), take Canvas quizzes,
and take three exams on Canvas. You can take this course from anywhere but be aware that the exams will be on
Canvas, offered in windows of time based on “Austin time” (and Canvas due dates/times use “Austin time”). All of
the work and materials will be on the Canvas course web site from the start of the course, and you can do the work
on your own schedule (except for Canvas quiz due dates and scheduled exams).
All students should be concerned about keeping an appropriate pace and studying effectively so that you can do
well on the exams, which count for 85% of your course grade. Midterm #1 is 15%, midterm #2 is 30%, and the
final exam is 40%. The Canvas quizzes are 10% and the InstaPolls (pop up questions in lecture videos) are 5%.
To help you, I’ve created the following tools, which are on Canvas:
        2020 Summer Teaching & Learning Plan.xlsx. A downloadable Excel spreadsheet with a suggested
         day-by-day schedule for viewing the lecture videos, Canvas quiz due dates, and targeted practice problems
         (organized to coordinate with the lecture videos, links are in the topic modules on Canvas).
        Calendar images (reproduced below).
        ECO 329 Lecture Videos & Reading ONLINE COURSE.pdf. A table of the lecture videos and associated
         reading (reproduced below).
In addition, on Canvas you’ll find
        Details about the course and strategies for learning are on the READ FIRST page.
        Topic modules. Each topic module has links to the lecture videos and a web page with a lot of information
         and links to lecture slides, Canvas quiz questions (so you can do them before opening the quiz), and
         targeted practice problems with detailed solutions.
        5 semesters of old exams for practice. Additional practice problems. Formula sheets and probability tables.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
Economic Statistics is a first course in quantitative methods that are widely used in economics and business. The
main objectives of this course are to
        explore methods for describing data
        teach students how to build and analyze probability models of economic and business situations
        introduce a variety of statistical methods used to draw conclusions from economic data, and to convey the
         conceptual and mathematical foundations of these methods
        lay a foundation for econometrics


COURSE DESCRIPTION
SEGMENT 1. The unit on descriptive statistics covers methods for describing the distribution of data on one or
more variables, including measures of central tendency and dispersion, correlation, frequency distributions,
percentiles, and histograms.
In economics and business, we specify a probability model for the random process that generated the data (data-
generating process, or DGP). The unit on probability theory covers the set-theoretic foundations of probability
and the axioms of probability; rules of probability derived from the axioms, including Bayes’ Rule; counting rules;
and joint probability distributions. MIDTERM #1.
SEGMENT 2. Random variables are probability models of random quantities and events. We study the binomial,
hypergeometric, and Poisson distributions, which are discrete random variables (used, for example, in quality
control and to forecast customer arrivals). We study the uniform and normal distributions, which are
continuous random variables (providing models of the amount of time to complete a task, or wages, for
example). Random variables allow us to compute probabilities of events (for example, the probability a portfolio
loses money, or the probability a bid wins in an auction). The chi-square, Student t, and F distributions, which
are related to the normal distribution, are introduced for use later in this course and in econometrics (may be
covered in the unit on sampling theory).
Sampling theory builds probability models of the impact of randomness in the DGP on statistics we compute from
data. We derive sampling distributions of various statistics in the context of different DGPs. The Central Limit
Theorem sometimes allows us to derive approximate sampling distributions even when we don’t know much
about the DGP. Part of sampling theory is covered in Segment 2. MIDTERM #2.
SEGMENT 3. Sampling distributions provide a basis for choosing an estimator of a population parameter, and
they allow us to calculate confidence intervals from data (intervals that quantify uncertainty in our estimates of
parameters of the DGP, such as the true mean rate of output of a production process, or the true variance of the rate
of return on a portfolio). We also develop hypothesis tests for a set of DGPs. Statistical inference (estimation and
hypothesis testing) about one parameter of a single population and about the relationship between parameters
across two populations are considered. FINAL EXAM.
PREREQUISITES
Grades of at least C- in ECO 304K and L and in MATH 408C and D or MATH 408K and L (or the equivalent)
TEXTBOOK AND OTHER REQUIRED MATERIALS
The required textbook is PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS FOR ENGINEERING AND THE SCIENCES, 9th edition,
by Jay DEVORE (Cengage). The textbook is available in a hardcover edition for purchase. Alternatively, you can
rent the textbook, which is less expensive. Here is the link to the Cengage web site, which has that option:
https://www.cengage.com/c/probability-and-statistics-for-engineering-and-the-sciences-9e-devore
LECTURE VIDEOS
The topic modules on Canvas (Topics 1 through 10) have links to the lecture videos. You can watch the lecture
videos as many times as you want but InstaPolls vanish once you pass them (see below). You are responsible for all
material covered in the lectures.
EVALUATION
Your course score will be based on midterm exam #1 (15%), midterm exam #2 (30%), a final exam (40%),
Canvas quizzes (10%), and InstaPoll questions (5%). Your course score will be computed as a weighted
average, using your percentage scores on these components. A course grade will be assigned based on your course
score relative to the distribution of course scores in the class together with an absolute standard that reflects
required minimum knowledge needed for using statistics and for subsequent courses. Pluses and minuses will be
used.
The percentage of students receiving any particular letter grade is not predetermined. It is possible for all students
to get a C or above, and for the large majority to receive an A or a B. However, lower grades will be assigned to
students who do not demonstrate adequate proficiency and knowledge of the material.
Curve. In this course, exam scores are “curved” by adjusting the “denominator” (dividing by a number less than the
point total of the exam, which effectively converts some points to “extra credit”), and by setting cutoffs between
letter grades. After MT#1, I will post tentative cutoffs (percentage scores) between A, A-, B+, etc. After MT#2, I will
announce updated tentative cutoffs, based on the distribution of a weighted average of MT#1 and MT#2 scores. At
the end of the semester, I will post final cutoffs for course grades, based on the distribution of course scores.
                                                             2


EXAMS
Exams will be open-book, open-notes exams taken on Canvas, on the "quizzes" tab. They will be timed exams
offered during a window of time. You must take the exam within the window, and the allowed time starts when
you open the exam, but you will have some flexibility as to when you start the exam.
During the spring 2020 semester, once the UT campus closed, I broke MT#2 and the final exam into pieces that
students took on consecutive days. I may do that for the Summer 2020 course, as well, because students seemed to
like this. I plan to ask the class about this by sending a Canvas announcement. I will set the windows of time for
the exams once it is decided whether or not the exams will be broken into pieces.
Exam dates
      MT#1: June 22 or June 22 and 23 if broken into two pieces
      MT#2: July 9 or July 9 and 10 if broken into two pieces
      Final exam: July 30 or July 29 and 30 if broken into two pieces
Let me know immediately if you have a conflict that prevents you from taking any of the exams on the scheduled
dates. If you have a conflict with another class or exam, I will schedule your exam at an alternate time. I give
alternate time exams only to students who legitimately need them. If you do not notify me of a conflict by Friday
June 12 at noon, you will be required to take the exams at the scheduled times unless an emergency arises.
That being said, in the unusual circumstances that prevail during the coronavirus pandemic, please email me at
any point in time about problems that you are having if they affect your ability to study and to do the work
in this course. While I do need information about students’ schedules for planning, and I do need to maintain
some deadlines in order to give grades, I will help you if I can.
If you require an accommodation for a disability, please let me know about it as soon as possible, even if you don’t
yet have your accommodation letter from Services for Students with Disabilities. See the section on
accommodations for students with disabilities (below).
Students who have an accommodation letter must send a pdf of their accommodation letter to the course
gmail. I’ll reply and that will initiate the discussion about how the accommodations will be provided. The notice I
receive from SSD that your accommodation letter is available in the portal is not sufficient. It is the student’s
responsibility to contact me directly and to provide the pdf of the letter.
There will be no makeup midterms. If you miss a midterm due to illness, a personal emergency, or other valid
reason, and if you provide me with documentation of the event, I will re-weight your other exams. An illness or
emergency must be serious and unavoidable, and documented, in order for you to be excused. Otherwise, you will
receive a zero for the missed exam. Contact me by email as soon as possible, to discuss your situation.
You must take the final exam at the scheduled or arranged time unless you have a valid, documented reason. A
request to take the final exam at an alternate time should be made well ahead. If an illness or emergency prevents
you from writing the final exam at the scheduled or arranged time, contact me by email at the earliest opportunity.
If the illness or emergency is serious and unavoidable, and documented, you will receive an incomplete for the
course, and a makeup final exam will be arranged, which may be during the following semester. If you are excused
from MT#2 and the final exam, you will be required to make up both of them (even if you have taken MT#2).
CANVAS QUIZZES
There are quizzes on Canvas, with due dates, that count as part of your course score. Point values of Canvas
quiz questions vary. The number of questions and point values of Canvas quizzes vary. Each Canvas quiz answer is
either correct (full points) or wrong (zero points). Each quiz gives you two attempts and the last attempt
counts (not the highest).
You take the Canvas quizzes using the “Quizzes” tab on Canvas. Canvas quiz questions also are posted in the
Canvas “topic modules”, so you can solve them before opening the Canvas quiz. I recommend this, because
opening a Canvas quiz counts as an attempt. You may work together on the Canvas quizzes (but you should
make sure you understand every solution in order to learn from the quizzes).
Answers will be discussed in the problem-solving sessions but will not be posted on Canvas.
The Canvas quizzes provide essential opportunities for you to learn the material of this course. The questions are
excellent preparation for the exams. Many of the questions are old exam questions. Many of the questions are
accompanied by “hints” about how to think about the question, and how to approach it. Absorbing these hints will
help you learn. Leave enough time to take full advantage of the learning opportunity each Canvas quiz provides.
                                                             3


INSTAPOLL QUESTIONS
There are InstaPoll (pop-up) multiple choice questions embedded in the lecture videos. InstaPolls may pop up
during the lecture or at the end. There are approximately 130 InstaPolls over the course. Each InstaPoll answer is
correct or incorrect. InstaPoll questions are weighted equally. When an InstaPoll pops up, that is your only
opportunity to answer. Once you answer, or if you pass the InstaPoll, it vanishes permanently. Do not scroll
ahead or click ahead in the video. Any InstaPoll you pass will be lost permanently. All of the InstaPolls will be
scored (“graded”) at the end of the course (on July 29).
PROBLEM-SOLVING SESSIONS (OPTIONAL)
Most Wednesdays and Fridays, the TA’s will hold a problem-solving session where they go over Canvas quiz
answers (after the due date) and solve selected practice problems from the Excel spreadsheet, to help students
prepare for upcoming Canvas quizzes and exams.
If the TA’s are able to hold the problem-solving sessions synchronously on Zoom, the times will be posted and the
synchronous session will be recorded and posted on Canvas. Otherwise, the TA’s will record the problem-solving
sessions and post them. Watch for Canvas announcements about the problem-solving sessions.
The problem-solving sessions are optional but strongly recommended.
CANVAS
See the “READ FIRST” page on Canvas for an overview of the course, including the resources available on Canvas.
There’s a link to “READ FIRST” on the home page, and you can find it directly in the “Schedule of work and
information about graded work” module.
PIAZZA
This course will use Piazza, a discussion board that is built directly into the Canvas course web site. On Piazza,
students can submit questions related to the content of the course that other students might benefit from seeing.
Students are encouraged to answer each other’s questions. There’s no better way to be sure you understand
something than to explain it to others! I will check Piazza regularly to answer questions and to “endorse” good
answers submitted by students.
COMMUNICATION
You are responsible for all information posted on Canvas, including Canvas announcements. The TA’s and I will use
Canvas announcements to communicate with students. I strongly recommend you set up Canvas so that
announcements are emailed to you. You are responsible for all information in email exchanges directly between
you and me, and between you and the TA’s. Emails from the TA’s and me may come from our UT email addresses,
or the course gmail, Eco329.vrb@gmail.com.
OFFICE HOURS
I will hold office hours by email and Piazza, and using Zoom (by appointment). I strongly encourage students to
sign up for Piazza and to use it for content questions – Piazza is great! Snips (images) can be embedded which
makes it easy to ask and answer questions about mathematical material. I monitor Piazza fairly continually.
For email, please use Eco329.vrb@gmail.com which is the course gmail. Feel free to embed or attach snips or
photos so that you can refer to details in your question. I will answer email promptly – usually within hours and
definitely by the next day. Usually weekends are the same but occasionally on a weekend it might take me a bit
longer to reply.
The TA’s will hold Zoom office hours as well as offering the optional problem-solving sessions. See the Canvas
module called “Office hours and TA information” for updates on TA office hours.
TEACHING ASSISTANTS
TA names, and TA office numbers, office hours, and email addresses will be posted on Canvas.
Name                     Email address
Lauri Kytomaa            lauri.kytomaa@utexas.edu
Ziyue Zu                 ziyue353@utmail.utexas.edu
                                                            4


SCHEDULE OF TOPICS AND READING
Below is a schedule of the videoed lectures together with the pdf’s of the lecture slides (posted on Canvas) and the
textbook reading. This schedule is also posted on Canvas in the “Schedule of work and information about graded
work” module in a document with the title “ECO 329 Lecture Videos & Reading ONLINE COURSE.pdf”.
On Canvas, you’ll find a page that has a calendar of topics, Canvas quizzes, and exams (same module). These
calendar images are reproduced below.
On Canvas, you’ll also find a downloadable Excel spreadsheet that has a day-by-day timetable of topics, Canvas
quizzes, suggested dates for viewing the videoed lectures, the number of InstaPoll questions for each lecture, and
practice problems that are available in the topic modules. “Schedule of work and information about graded work”
module.
ECO 329 Lecture Videos & Reading ONLINE COURSE.pdf (also posted on Canvas):
Topics          Lecture titles (and video titles)         Time    Lecture slides (file names) Devore    Notes
1: Introduction Introduction and the Nature of Economic   53:02   01-1 intro LECTURE          1.1
                Data
2: Descriptive  Part 1, Lecture 1: Measures of Central    38:20   02-1 descriptive LECTURE 1  1.3
Statistics      Tendency
                Part 1, Lecture 2: Measures of Dispersion 29:19   02-1 descriptive LECTURE 2  1.4       Skip boxplots
                Part 1, Lecture 3: Linear Transformation  30:14   02-1 descriptive LECTURE 3
                Part 2: Covariance and Correlation        39:11   02-2a descriptive LECTURE
3: Frequency    Part 1: Frequency Distributions and       1:20:40 03a freq dist LECTURE       1.2       Skip stem and leaf
Distribution    Grouped Data                                                                            plots and dotplots
4: Probability  Part 1: Set Theory and the Axioms of      1:06:32 04-1 prob                   2.1, 2.2
Theory          Probability
                Part 2: Rules of Probability              1:07:14 04-2 prob                   2.2, 2.3,
                                                                                              2.4, 2.5
                Part 3, Lecture 1: Bayes Rule and         1:12:11 04-3 prob LECTURE ONE                 Bayes Rule is in 2.4
                Bivariate Probability Distributions
                Part 3, Lecture 2: Counting Rules         42:42   04-3 prob LECTURE TWO       2.3
                MIDTERM #1
5: Discrete     Part 1: Random Variables and              1:41:36 05-1 discrete rv 1          3.1, 3.2,
Random          Mathematical Expectations                                                     3.3
Variables       Part 2: Joint Probability Distributions   2:09:00 05-2 discrete rv 2          5.1, 5.2  Part 2: Absorb the
                Part 3, Lecture 1: Binomial Random        1:10:06 05-3 discrete rv 3 LECTURE  3.4       discussion about
                Variable                                          1 binomial                            jointly distributed
                Part 3, Lecture 2: Poisson Random         19:58   05-3 discrete rv 3 LECTURE            discrete random
                Variable                                          2 Poisson                             variables. Re-read
                Part 3, Lecture 3: Hypergeometric         33:55   05-3 discrete rv 3 LECTURE  3.6       the discussion about
                Random Variable                                   3 hypergeometric                      jointly-distributed
                Review Questions: Binomial,               14:14   No posted file (InstaPoll   3.5       continuous random
                Hypergeometric and Poisson                        questions)                            variables along with
                Distributions                                                                           the next topic. Skip
                                                                                                        Ex 5.8.
6: Continuous   Part 1: Continuous Random Variables       1:34:58 06 continuous rv 1          4.1, 4.2
Random          Part 2: Continuous Random Variables       1:50:23 06 continuous rv 2          4.3       4.3: Skip the
Variables                                                                                               binomial
                                                                                                        approximation to the
                Part 3: Continuous Random Variables:      28:46   06 continuous rv 3 NORMAL   4.6       normal distribution
                Normal Plot                                       PLOT                                  Skip 4.4, 4.5
7: Sampling     Part 1: Sampling Theory                   1:52:51 07 sampling 1 (BEFORE       5.3, 5.4,
Theory                                                            MT#2)                       5.5
                MIDTERM #2
                Part 2: Sampling Theory                   1:38:37 07 sampling 1 (AFTER
                                                                  MT#2)
                Review Questions: Sampling Theory         27:53   No posted file (InstaPoll
                                                                  questions)
                                                             5


8: Point and  Part 1: Point and Interval Estimation   1:56:38 08-1 point & interval est   7.1, 7.2, Skip prediction
Interval                                                      LECTURE                     7.3       interval, tolerance
Estimation                                                                                          intervals
              Part 2: Properties of Estimators        55:28   08-2 properties of          6.1       Skip Ex 6.8, skip 6.2,
                                                              estimators LECTURE                    skip the score CI for p
9: Hypothesis Part 1: Conceptual Framework for        37:45   09-1 hyp testing intro      8.1
Testing       Hypothesis Tests                                LECTURE
              Part 2: Hypothesis Testing: Success     1:18:45 09-2 Bernoulli pop LECTURE  8.4
              Probability of a Bernoulli Population
              Part 3: Hypothesis Testing: Population  2:07:44 09-3 population mean        8.2, 8.3
              Mean                                            LECTURE
              Part 4: Hypothesis Testing: Normal      NA      09-4 normal pop, variance
              Population, Variance                            LECTURE
              Part 5: Rejection Regions, Confidence   1:17:38 09-5 p-values etc LECTURE   8.5       Skip simultaneous
              Intervals, and P-Values                                                               testing, likelihood
                                                                                                    ratio principle
10: Two       Part 1: Two Populations: Hypothesis     1:53:47 10-1 two pops, diff between 9.1, 9.2  Skip to pooled t
Populations:  Tests and Confidence Intervals                  means LECTURE                         procedures in 9.2
Hypothesis    Part 2: Hypothesis Tests and Confidence 33:35   10-2 two Bernoulli pops     9.4
Tests and     Intervals: Two Bernoulli Populations,           LECTURE
Confidence    Large Samples
Intervals     Part 3: Hypothesis Tests and Confidence 55:50   10-3 two normal pops, diff  9.5
              Intervals: Variances of Two Normal              between variances LECTURE
              Populations
              FINAL EXAM
                                                         6


These calendar images are also posted on Canvas (see the “Calendar Images SUMMER 2020 ONLINE COURSE” page):
                                                                7


QUANTITATIVE REASONING FLAG. This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are
designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly
encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES. A student with a disability may request academic accommodations
from Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/). SSD accepts
documentation of the disability, and provides the student with letters for their instructors stating the appropriate
accommodations. SSD also provides guidelines for informing instructors about needed accommodations.
Let me know of any accommodation(s) you will need as early in the session as possible, even if you don’t have your
accommodation letter yet. In order to receive an accommodation, I need either the SSD letter or knowledge that the letter is
on its way at least as far ahead as specified by SSD guidelines for informing instructors. (If you receive an accommodation, I
will need your SSD accommodation letter in order for your score to count toward your course grade.)
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, or an assignment, in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable amount of time after the
absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY. Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
          “The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
          opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
          integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
On all graded work in this course, you are expected to submit work that is your own. On homework and quizzes, you are
welcome to discuss with others how to approach a problem, but the last step before you submit your answer should be that
you solve the problem yourself. However, discussion in class about clicker questions is allowed and encouraged.
During exams, you must do your own work. Unless it is explicitly allowed, you may consult only the materials provided as
part of the exam, and you may not look at notes, books, articles, etc., whether yours or anyone else’s. No communication of
any kind is permitted between students during exams (written, verbal, non-verbal, etc.). You may not look at another
student’s work, and you may not show another student your work. Any such behavior during the examinations will result in
failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
USE OF EMAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. All students should become familiar with the University's
official email student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed of any changes in his
or her email address. Students are expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. This includes emails from
instructors. It is recommended that email be checked daily.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION. From the Office of Campus Safety and Security (512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/):
     o Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
          alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
     o Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
          exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     o Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
     o In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     o Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas
          at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     o Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
     o Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
          utexas.edu/emergency.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If you become worried about someone who is acting differently, you may call the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line at 512-232-5050 to discuss your concerns about their behavior. This service is provided by
the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP),
and the University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal for more information.
                                                                   8
