                  University of Texas at Austin || Geography and the Environment
                                GRG356 Children’s Environmental Health
                                                       SUMMER 2020
Professor:                                  Jules R. Elkins
Lectures:                                   Mondays 10:00 – 12:00
E-mail:                                     jules@austin.utexas.edu
Introduction
Each year, hundreds of chemicals are found in Americans of all ages, including lead,
mercury, dioxins and PCBs. Studies have detected antibacterial agents from liquid soaps in
infants' cord blood, breast milk, and children’s urine. PBDEs, or flame retardants, which
can have negative impacts on learning and memory, show up in fabrics, upholstery,
mattresses, and electronics, and leach out into household air and dust. News magazines
call autism an ‘epidemic.’ Pollution is an affliction of the industrial age, and remains one of
the most vexing unintended consequences of economic growth.
This course discusses these contemporary, and often controversial, issues in environmental
health, focusing on how today's environmental issues directly affect children.
Environmental contaminants often affect children differently, and more intensely, than they
do adults. Pound-for-pound, children eat more food, drink more water, and breathe more
air than do adults, which exposes them to higher levels of toxicants. Children engage in
activities differently than do adults, such as putting their hands in their mouths, playing on
the ground, and putting objects in their mouths, which can result in more intense
exposures to contaminants. In addition, environmental contaminants may affect children
disproportionately because children are not fully developed - environmental contaminants
can interfere with critical pathways of development, their immune systems are not fully
functioning, and their ability to remove toxins is less effective.
The thousands of chemicals children are exposed to have undergone little to no toxicity
testing and their potential health dangers to children are generally unknown. These
exposures, in conjunction with the public health achievements of vaccines and antibiotics,
have shifted the nature of childhood illness in developed countries from communicable
disease to one of chronic illness. The childhood face of toxic environmental exposures is
both chronic and acute – from asthma exacerbated by air pollution to delayed
development from lead in paint to the complex, chronic conditions of multiple origins, like
autism. These are known as the “new pediatric morbidity.”1
Of particular interest in this new pediatric morbidity is the unequal distribution of
exposures among children of different socioeconomic, racial, and ethnic backgrounds.
Poor children are disproportionately exposed to environmental hazards, in the home, in
school, and outdoors.
Toxic environmental exposures typically cannot be easily controlled individually, and
therefore are heavily determined by our larger community and political decisions.
Accordingly, this course focuses on the decision-making process and the larger concept of
1 Haggerty, R., Roghmann, J., and Press, I.B. Child health and the community. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1975.


              University of Texas at Austin || Geography and the Environment
environmental ethics. Because toxic exposures from manufactured chemicals could
potentially be avoided by not using the chemicals in the first place, many ethical
questions, dilemmas, and controversies arise in this course. For example, fossil fuels and
human health – how should the short-term gains of using fossil fuels be weighed against
the longer-term health consequences of respiratory and cardiopulmonary disease? Or
obesity, under-nutrition, and starvation - the simultaneous existence of these conditions,
particularly in one country, reveals a problem in environmental justice. Accordingly, we
examine the relationship between humans and nature, and discuss the concepts of
sustainability and resilience, and global health.
Ethics and Leadership
This course carries the Ethics and Leadership flag. Ethics and Leadership courses are
designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for making ethical decisions in your
adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade
to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the process of applying ethical
reasoning to real-life situations.
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity
to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’
work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
                                  COURSE REQUIREMENTS
If you have any questions or concerns about a grade, you must bring it to my attention
within one week of when the exam/assignment was returned. To do so, please write a
case for why you think the grade is incorrect. After two weeks, the grade is final.
Lecture Assignments
     •  You will be responsible for 10 total papers
     •  For every day late I will deduct 1 point.
     •  Detailed information about lecture assignments is available on the course web
        page.
Semester Project
     • For this class, you will have the choice for your semester long main body of work.
        You can choose any topically relevant creative project, such as write a children's
        book or create a digital story.


               University of Texas at Austin || Geography and the Environment
     •   All related to children's environmental health, of course! The expectations for each
         are detailed on their respective course website pages.
     •   Please submit your assignments on time! To keep the playing field level, I will
         deduct 5 points for every day late (out of 100 points).
     •   These assignments are detailed on the course website on Canvas.
     •   The final video project presentation is required.
Texts/Readings
There is no textbook for this course. All readings are available online.
Policy on Academic Integrity
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and / or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
University, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further
information, please visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website
at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
Students should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted to a
plagiarism-detection tool such as Turnitin.com. Turnitin is a software resource intended to
address plagiarism and improper citation. The software works by cross-referencing
submitted materials with an archived database of journals, essay, newspaper articles,
books, and other published work. In addition, other methods may be used to determine the
originality of the paper. This software is not intended to replace or substitute for the faculty
member's judgement regarding detection of plagiarism.
Special Concerns
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video
Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations.
Accommodations for religious holidays. By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy
day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements. Under Senate Bill 212 (SB
212), the professor and TAs for this course are required to report for further
investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual
assault, dating violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or
employee. Federal law and university policy also requires reporting incidents of sex-
and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title
IX incidents). This means we cannot keep confidential information about any such
incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can maintain


               University of Texas at Austin || Geography and the Environment
confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-
475-6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-
471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these services for any needed support
and that you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
Canvas
This course is a Canvas course. As such, you will be expected to monitor the website for
course news and relevant emails. Readings may be posted on this website. If you have
questions about how to get a password and how to use this system, please contact Campus
Information Technologies and Instructional Resources.
Extra Credit
You can earn extra credit for viewing and reviewing up to 5 of these movies over the
course of the semester. You may also earn extra credit for attending lectures, work days,
etc. that are topically related to this course. Extra credit will be used in your final grade to
push you over the hump if you are on the cusp on a higher grade. Review 5 movies (well
and originally – see details following) and you can get up to 1 point in your final grade.
Not sound like much? If you have an 89, 5 movie reviews will give you a 90 and an A.
Pretty good deal!
Details: Movie review MUST BE ORIGINAL. No copy-and-paste from movie review sites,
as doing so will result in plagiarism charges and an F. Please review film in 300-500
words, referring to its validity with respect to what we have learned in class. Please submit
on Blackboard by the last day of class. Listed films may or may not be available easily.
Before watching, please make sure we are not watching a film in-class.
Brief Biography
My background is as an environmental economist, and I seek to bring the analytical tools
and methods of that discipline to look at the issues of environmental health. A main
research focus of mine is healthy indoor environments for children. I am consulting with
the Eanes School District in Austin to provide policy recommendations for best practices in
managing food allergies, asthma, and chemical sensitivities within the school environment.
Another research focus is healthy building. As an exercise in pushing the envelope of
healthy building, I recently completed construction of my family home for which I am
seeking certification from the Living Building Challenge (https://ilbi.org/lbc). This
certification is widely considered the most advanced measurement of sustainability in the
built environment possible today. My goal was not only to create a 'green' home and seek
to obtain net zero energy, but more importantly to create as healthy a home as possible
using conventional building techniques. The house was featured on the Austin Institute of
Architects 2012 Tour of Homes where it was featured as Austin Energy’s Green Home, it
received a 2012 EcoHome Magazine Design Award, and the 2012 GreenBuilder Magazine
Healthy Home of the Year Award, and was recently featured in Austin Home Magazine
entitled, “Home is Where the Health Is.” I teach courses on environmental health,
children’s environmental health, and livable and sustainable cities.
