                                   The Age of the Samurai
                                           Fall 2019
                                     HIS 364G/ANS 372
Class time
Tuesday and Thursday: 1230P - 200P
Location: ART 1.110
Instructor
Dr. Adam Clulow
Office: GAR 2.202
Email: Adam.Clulow@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesday 2:30-4 and by Appointment in GAR 2.202
Teaching Assistant
Jing Zhai
E-mail: zhaijing@utexas.edu
TA office hours: 12:30 to 2:00 at Prufrock's Java city (the coffee shop by the entrance of PCL
library).
THE CLASS
Course Description
The samurai has captured the global imagination, occupying a unique cultural space and
generating a remarkable proliferation of images across multiple genres. But who were these
warriors and why have they come to assume such an outsized status? This course explores the
complex and ever-changing figure of the samurai and with it the history of Japan. The focus
is broadly on the period from 1185 to 1867 when Japan was ruled by a succession of warrior
regimes, but we will also examine the evolution of samurai images and representations up to
and including the present. The central concern is with the changing nature of the historical
samurai across this long period and with the constant tension between the ideals put forward
about the way of the warrior and the actual realities of samurai life. Across the class, we will
investigate how and why the samurai emerged as a distinct group, how they changed across
Japan’s long history and the nature of samurai representations.
Course Goals
By the end of the course, I hope you’ll learn the following:
    1. To distinguish between recurring myths and the historical reality of the samurai
    2. To understand the broad chronology of Japanese history from the premodern to the
        modern period and the changing role of the samurai
    3. To place yourself in a historical place and time and to appreciate the complexity of
        the dilemma faced by Asano’s retainers, Confucian scholars and Tokugawa officials
    4. To decipher scholarly debates over the emergence of the samurai and the nature of
        Japan’s warrior class
    5. To grapple with the multiplicity of representations of the samurai and to understand
        why Japan’s warrior class has come to occupy an outsized role in the global
        imagination


Flags
This course fulfills the requirements for a Global Cultures Flag. At least one third of the
course content requires an in-depth examination of the broader cultural context and
perspectives of one or more non-U.S. communities, countries, or coherent regional groupings
of countries, past or present.
REQUIRED BOOKS
The following books are required:
Ikegami, Eiko. The Taming of the Samurai: Honorific Individualism and the Making of
Modern Japan (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1997)
Constantine Vaporis, ed. Voices of Early Modern Japan: Contemporary Accounts of Daily
Life During the Age of the Shoguns (Boulder: Westview Press, 2013)
John Tucker, The Forty-Seven Rōnin: The Vendetta in History (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2018)
Nitobe, Inazo, Bushido, The Soul of Japan: An Exposition of Japanese Thought (Tokyo,
1899), available for free via archive.org
All of the required texts are available at the UT Co-Op. Additional required readings will be
available via the Canvas course site. If you have problems getting hold of any of the readings
please let me know as soon as possible. Please note that some weekly reading are optional
and these are clearly marked. All other readings are required.
Optional texts
Friday, Karl. Hired Swords: The Rise of Private Warrior Power in Early Japan (Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1992)
Conlan, Tom. In Little Need of Divine Intervention: Takezaki Suenaga’s Scrolls of the
Mongol Invasions of Japan (Ithaca, NY: Cornell East Asia Series, 2001).
Benesch, Oleg. Inventing the Way of the Samurai: Nationalism, Internationalism, and
Bushido in Modern Japan (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2014)
You can purchase these as background reading if you’re especially interested but they are not
required for the class. We will read key excerpts which will be available via Canvas.
ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING
Reading Responses – 10% (5 responses x 2% each)
Map Quiz – 5%
Periodization Quiz – 5%
Akō incident Group Exercise (performance in class) – 5%
Akō incident Reflective Essay – 20% (due November 21)


Midterm– 25% (Short IDs and essay)
Final exam – 30% (Short IDs and essay), during the regularly scheduled final time in exam
week
Grading Scale
Students’ work will be assessed using the +/- scale:
Grading Scale:
A        95-100          B+      87-89            C+     77-79          D+    67-69
A-       90-94           B       84-86            C      74-76          D     64-66
                         B-      80-83            C-     70-73          D-    60-63
F        0-59
*Failure to turn in an assignment will result in 0 grade points
Midterm and Final
For the midterm and final exams, I will be distributing questions for study beforehand. This
will be a long list of possible questions that may appear on the exam. You should study the
full list of questions but not all of these will appear on the exam itself.
Reading Responses
During this class you will be required to complete five response grids about the secondary
source readings. The blank grid template is posted on Canvas. These grids are designed to
structure your reading and to help you situate individual works in a wider context. The grids
must be submitted in pdf form via the Canvas assignments tab 24 hours before the start of
the class for which the reading is assigned. So if the relevant class is on Tuesday at 12:30pm,
the reading grid is due by Monday at 12:30pm. No grids will be accepted on primary source
documents, such as the Vaporis readings so make you sure you only look at the secondary
readings.
To make sure that everyone doesn’t respond to the same readings, we will split the class into
four groups. If you have a preference for one group, please let us know as otherwise we will
be assigning students randomly.
You will be required to
Group A: Do your five reading grids in weeks 1, 2, 9, 10
Group B: Do your five reading grids in weeks 3, 4, 11, 12
Group C: Do your five reading grids in weeks 5, 6, 12, 13
Group D: Do your five reading grids in weeks 7, 8, 14, 15
The reading responses are designed to help you with the readings. They are also intended to
stimulate discussion during individual weeks so be prepared to be called upon during class to
contribute during one of your weeks.
Keep in mind that you should do all the readings for every class. The reading responses are a
specific assignment, and this doesn’t mean you should neglect the readings in other weeks.


To help you get started, here is a sample reading grid filled in for one of the optional readings
for week 2.
Reading Response Grid (Age of the Samurai)
Student Name: Sample
Reading: Friday, Hired Swords
 What kind of work is this? What is the     This is the introduction to Karl Friday’s 1992
 main topic?                                book, Hired Swords. Friday is concerned
                                            especially with the emergence of the samurai in
                                            the Heian period.
 What are the main arguments or             Friday argues that samurai emerged as a response
 interpretations? What are the key          to the court’s desire to professionalize its military
 elements of those arguments? (Think        forces and achieve maximal efficiency. He
 about historiography, that is prior        suggests that the court was a powerful actor that
 scholarship on this issue and how this     maintained a monopoly over force even as it
 reading relates to those)                  enfranchised the samurai. He challenges the
                                            Asakawa-Sansom thesis which suggested there
                                            was a total breakdown in central authority.
 What issues and/or questions does this     Friday ascribes considerable agency to the court.
 reading raise for you about the            This makes the samurai seem like little more than
 samurai? List at least three issues or     imperial tools. If the court was so good at
 questions that struck you while you        manipulating the bushi, why did they lose control
 were reading                               in the end?
                                            This looks a lot like private military companies
                                            like Blackwater etc. Is this an encouraging or a
                                            cautionary tale? In other words, does the bushi
                                            example show the value or danger of privatizing
                                            military force?
                                            Friday dismisses past scholarship on the samurai
                                            as clearly wrong? But shouldn’t we consider
                                            when Asakawa was writing and what he was
                                            trying to argue for? Is Friday’s critique accurate
                                            or too harsh?
Akō incident Exercise
During this class, we will run an extended historical roleplaying exercise designed to
simulate one of the most fascinating episodes in Japanese history known variously as the Akō
incident or Chushingura or the 47 ronin. The exercise has two parts:
Exercise A: Responding to Asano’s death
Exercise B: The Trial of the Ronin


To make this exercise work, we will be splitting the class into two sections which will meet
separately. The total exercise is worth 25%. 5% of this will be based on your performance in
the exercise itself and 20% on a reflective essay written after the exercise finishes.
We will be providing detailed instructions for each stage of the exercise as the semester goes
on but here are the basics so you can get a sense of what is involved.
Exercise A: Responding to Asano’s death
The year is 1701. The retainers of the house of Asano Naganori have gathered at Akō castle
to discuss what they should do in response to news from the capital that their master has been
forced to commit seppuku for having attacked and injured Kira Yoshinaka, a shogunal
official. As further punishment, the shogunate has also ordered the arrest of Asano Daigaku,
Naganori’s brother and presumptive heir, the seizure of Ako castle and the disbandment of
the house.
To make this exercise work, we will be splitting the class into two sections. Please note
which section you’re in as you’re not required to attend class if your section is not in action
that day. For the first exercise, your section will be divided into five separate factions each
with around 8 students each. These are:
    •   Radical faction
    •   Ritual seppuku (junshi) faction
    •   Defend the Castle (rōjō) faction
    •   House Restoration/Continuity faction
    •   Abandon the domain faction
If you have a strong preference for joining a particular faction, please let us know via a sign-
up sheet. Faction membership will be determined on a first-come, first-served basis. If you
have no particular preference, we will randomly assign you to a faction.
The central question for this exercise is:
How should you respond to the shogunate’s action in forcing your master to commit
seppuku?
Your goal is to convince a majority of students to vote for your faction’s proposed course of
action. This will be settled by a series of anonymous ballots. Each faction will receive a
specialized set of instructions, but you should also study the weekly readings for ideas.
When preparing, please keep in mind these general guidelines:
1. Assume you are in the year 1701. Although you will have a clear sense of what ultimately
happened to the Akō retainers, do not let this influence your judgement. Your goal is to
present your faction’s arguments in the most persuasive way possible.
2. The retainers are divided broadly into five distinct factions but there are other possibilities.
Not everything should be viewed in terms of a zero-sum, black and white dichotomy. If
you’re able to negotiate compromises or acceptable alternates, this is within the parameters of
the exercise.


Timeline for Exercise 1:
Stage 1 (before class) – complete the readings, discuss your position,
Stage 2 (before class) – write a letter to one of the other factions laying out your position and
trying to persuade them of the futility of theirs
Stage 3 (in class) – receive a letter from another faction, discuss the letter. If you receive no
letter, you can draft a new letter to a second faction
Stage 4 (class) – send an envoy or envoys to a different faction and receive an envoy to begin
negotiations.
Stage 5 (class) –Present your side’s case before the wider class. Each group should designate
one or multiple representatives to present their case.
Stage 6 (class) – Vote. And repeat the earlier steps if there is no consensus. Be prepared to
send more envoys and engage in more discussion as it’s very rare for this to be settled in one
round.
Exercise B: The Trial
The year is 1703. Two years have passed since the forced seppuku of Asano Naganori. His
former retainers, who were made ronin after his death, have taken their revenge in a
coordinated surprise attack that resulted in the death of Kira Yoshinaka. Following this act,
the ronin have turned themselves over to the Bakufu to be tried. It is now up to a council of
Bakufu members (effectively a kind of jury) to decide their fate.
In comparison to exercise A, this one has more individual roles. Each one comes with its
own challenge and demands. The roles are as follows:
3 judges
13 Bakufu council members (jurors)
2 expert witness on vendettas (one for prosecution, one for defense)
6 interpretative witnesses (Confucian scholars)
1 fact witness (Kira house retainer)
7 members Prosecution legal team
7 members Defense legal team
1 Scribe
  Role                 Responsibilities
  Legal teams (7           •   Review and analyze evidence
  plus 7)                  •   Prepare written statements
                           •   Interview witnesses during pre-trial preparation
                           •   Opening statements
                           •   Examination and cross-examination of witnesses
                           •   Closing statements
  Suspects                 •   Research a specific historical character
  (1 in total)             •   Deliver testimony before the court
                           •   Respond to questions
  Witnesses                •   Research a specific historical character or issue
  (9 in total)             •   Deliver testimony before the court
                           •   Respond to questions


  Judges (3)                •   Prepare for the trial
                            •   Adjudicate special questions and prepare written justification
                                explaining your reasoning
                            •   Keep order in the court, oversee the two legal teams, make sure
                                the trial stays civil and orderly
                            •   Ask questions of the two legal teams, manage questions from the
                                jury
                            •   Decide on an appropriate punishment once a verdict has been
                                reached
  Bakufu council            •   Review all the evidence
  (13 members)              •   Ask questions via notes to the judge
                            •   Discuss, debate and come to a unanimous verdict
  Scribe                    •   Produce a record of the case
                            •   Provide an impartial observer who can be consulted on key
                                points
This is a trial and as such, a verdict needs to be rendered at its conclusion. The key debate
here is over the legality of the ronin’s actions and what their punishment should be if they are
found guilty. It is inevitable that there will also be a discussion of the morality of the ronin’s
actions. This is entirely appropriate.
There are two basic positions
     •  The prosecution’s position is that the ronin violated Bakufu law. The ronin’s actions
        were not only illegal but also immoral. Law and order must be maintained at all
        costs. They are clearly guilty and should be executed immediately.
     •  The defense’s position is that the ronin acted appropriately and should be acquitted.
        They are thus arguing that the ronin’s actions were both legal but also moral. Hence
        the ronin should be set free and in fact commended for their actions.
The witnesses can be questioned by both sides. Some have a clear view, others are more
neutral. When preparing, please keep in mind these general guidelines:
Assume you are in the year 1703. You will know what actually happened but do not let this
influence your judgement. Instead, work on the understanding that anything could happen. If
you are part of the Prosecution or Defense, you should work towards persuading the judges
and the member of the Bakufu council (jury) to your point of view. If you are a witness, you
should present your views on the case in a way that is consistent with your character.
There was no trial system in the Tokugawa period in the way we understand it today. The
trial we will stage is therefore a historical anachronism but one designed to highlight the very
real debates that took place in the wake of this episode. We will be running the trial
according to a hybrid model so keep in mind that our goal is not to depict a modern American
courtroom with its familiar features. The trial will run according to the following basic
timeline:
Preparation Phase
Legal teams – prepare your arguments. Interview witnesses to get a sense of their positions
and how best to question them during the trial.


Preliminary Stage
The judges are required to rule on a vital question related to the case:
    •   Was the revenge of retainers on behalf of their lord a legally valid vendetta?
The two teams can each call on their own expert witnesses, one favorable to the Defense, one
favorable to the Prosecution. They should use their witnesses to build a strong case. The
decisions taken here will inform the rest of the case so treat this preliminary phase with care.
Opening Statements (trial stage)
Representatives for the two legal teams should present a basic overview of their case. The
judges can ask you questions but the other team cannot. The members of the Bakufu council
(jury) can ask questions via notes passed to the judges. The prosecution will go first.
Examination and Cross-Examination (trial stage)
Here is a chance for both sides to interview witnesses that will help make their cases. There
are two kinds of witnesses. Fact witnesses saw something and can be questioned on that
basis. Interpretative witnesses have an opinion on the legality or morality of the ronin’s
actions. The two teams want their witnesses to make statements that will help them build
their cases. They will also need to cross-examine opposing witnesses but keep in mind that
this had to be done in a courteous and respectful manner.
Closing Arguments (trial stage)
Argue your case and try to dismiss any objections raised by the other side. You may wish to
discuss concepts such as honor, loyalty, and morality. The prosecution will go first.
Jury phase
The Bakufu councilors will deliberate in secret. They should decide on a verdict. The verdict
must be unanimous, that is all 13 jurors must agree. This will likely take time so be prepared
to convince your fellow councilors. Once a verdict is reached, a representative should
explain the nature of the verdict and why it was reached to the judges.
Punishment phase
The judges are now required to come up with an appropriate punishment. They should base
this on the jury’s findings, but they can also exercise their own judgement to some degree.
They will be required to justify this punishment in writing.
Akō incident Reflective Essay
At the end of the exercise, you should prepare a reflective essay of around 1000 words. This
should consider the following questions:
    1)  What did you learn from this exercise?
    2)  In your final assessment, did the ronin act appropriately? Why?
    3)  In your final assessment, did the Bakufu make the right decision? Why?
    4)  Why does the Akō incident continue to fascinate us after so many years?
Note: This is a basic overview of the exercise. Detailed Instructions for each role will be
provided closer to the exercise.


NOTES
• Please Note: I reserve the right to change this schedule and amend readings as necessary
• All make up exams will be held at the official History Department make up time: Friday
  afternoons at 2 pm in Garrison Hall. Make up exams will only be given with approval of
  the instructor. You must have approval before the exam for a make up or document a
  verified emergency to request a make up after the exam. No other make up times will be
  offered.
• You are very welcome to email me at any time at Adam.Clulow@austin.utexas.edu and I
  will respond as quickly as I can. Please note that all emails should include the appropriate
  form of greeting (Prof. or Dr. Clulow) and be signed with your name.
• My office hours: I encourage all of you to see me at least once during my office hours in
  GAR 2.202 (preferably more than once) and to discuss issues and topics that are of
  particular interest to you or strategies for the Akō exercise. I also strongly encourage you
  to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211 or The University Writing
  Center in The Learning Commons at the PCL http://uwc.utexas.edu/ or 512.471.6222 to
  make an appointment. Both locations offer free, individualized, expert help with writing
  for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. They work with students
  from every department on campus, for both academic and non-academic writing. Their
  services are not just for writing with "problems." Getting feedback from an informed
  audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help students
  develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is intended to
  foster independence. Each student determines how to use the consultant's advice. The
  consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that preserve the
  integrity of your work.
• All assignments must be submitted on Canvas except for the exams. I do not accept
  submissions of assignments by e-mail except under exceptional circumstances and as
  specified in this syllabus for particular assignments
• Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations and a letter
  documenting such needs from the office of Services for Students with Disabilities area of
  the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement:
  http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/contact-us/; e-mail: ssd@austin.utexas.edu; tel: 512-
  471-6259 voice or Videophone 512-410-6644. Please be aware that accommodations
  adjustments will not become effective until I have a hard copy of your accommodations
  letter from the office of the Services for Students with Disabilities.
• Students are expected to uphold irreproachable standards of academic integrity. Any form
  of academic dishonesty (cheating, plagiarism etc) will result in a grade of 0. See the
  website of the Office of the Dean of Students for academic honesty policies at UT. See
  www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs.
• In accordance with the Campus Concealed Carry legislation, all guns must be concealed
  at all times. If the instructor or a student sees a gun in class, the UT police will be called
  immediately per the UT implementation policy for the statute.
• BCAL: If you have concerns about the behavior or well-being of another member of the
  campus community, call BCAL at 512-232-5050.
• Do take a look at the History department’s terrific website Not Even Past which offers
  short articles and reviews on topics of interest to history students and anyone interested in
  history in general. See www.notevenpast.org


•   In this class, I hope to show a number of film clips but this will of course depend on
    working technology so this may vary.
SCHEDULE OF CLASSES, ASSIGNMENTS AND READINGS
*Note: I reserve the right to change this schedule if necessary
Part 1: The Emergence and Development of the Samurai
WEEK ONE
29 August
Introduction: Samurai as myth, Samurai as history
Readings:
1. Henry Smith, “The Paradoxes of the Japanese Samurai,” from Smith, ed., in Learning
    from Shôgun” (Program in Asian Studies, UCSB: 1980), 86-98.
2. Henry Smith, "Five Myths about Early Modern Japan" In Asia in Western and World
    History, edited by Ainslie Embree and Carol Gluck (Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe, 1997),
    514-522
WEEK TWO
3 September
Emergence of the samurai
Readings
1. Martin Collcutt, “The ‘Emergence of the Samurai’ and the Military History of Early
    Japan,” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies 56:1 (June 1996): 151-164
2. Ikegami, The Taming of the Samurai (Chapter 2: The Coming of the Samurai), 47-61
3. Friday, Karl. Hired Swords: The Rise of Private Warrior Power in Early Japan (Stanford:
    Stanford University Press, 1992) [OPTIONAL READING]
5 September
Genpei Wars and Outside Tests
Readings
1. Ikegami, The Taming of the Samurai (Rise of Honorific Culture, Vassalage and Honor),
    72-82
2. Conlan, Thomas. In Little Need of Divine Intervention: Takezaki Suenaga’s Scrolls of the
    Mongol Invasions of Japan (Ithaca, NY: Cornell East Asia Series, 2001), 1-18; 254-275
WEEK THREE
10 September
Violence and Display in the Muromachi period
Assignment
Map quiz during class


Readings
1. Ikegami, The Taming of the Samurai, Chapter 4 (The Rite of Honorable Death), 95-103
2. Thomas Conlan, “The Culture of Force and Farce: Fourteenth-Century Japanese
   Warfare,” Edwin O. Reischauer Institute of Japanese Studies Occasional Papers in
   Japanese Studies, 1-21
Film clip:
Seven Samurai (Kurosawa, 1954)
12 September
The Warring States and a World turned upside down
Readings:
1. Ikegami, The Taming of the Samurai (Expansion and Limitation of Ikki organizations),
   132-138
2. Excerpts from the 17-article injunction of Asakura Toshikage (Asia for Educators)
3. Mary Elizabeth Berry, The Culture of Civil War in Kyoto, 11-54 [YOU CAN SKIM THIS
   READING TO GET AN OVERALL SENSE]
Film clip:
Seven Samurai (Kurosawa, 1954)
WEEK FOUR
17 September
Piracy and Disorder on the Seas
1. Jurgis Elisonas, “The Inseparable Trinity: Japan’s Relations with China and Korea,” in
   John Whitney Hall, ed. The Cambridge History of Japan, Volume 4, Early Modern Japan
   (Cambridge, 1991), 249-255
2. Kwan-Wai So, Japanese piracy in Ming China during the 16th Century (Michigan State
   University Press, 1975), 178-185
3. Adam Clulow, “The Pirate and the Warlord,” Journal of Early Modern History 16.2
   (2012): 523-542
Film clip
Kagemusha (Kurosawa, 1980)
19 September
Oda Nobunaga and the Military Revolution
Readings:
1. Asao Naohiro, “The Sixteenth-Century Unification,” in John Hall ed., Early Modern
   Japan (Cambridge University Press 1991), 40-53
2. Matthew Stavros, “Military Revolution in Early Modern Japan,” Japanese Studies 33.3
   (2013), 243-261.
Film clip:
Kagemusha (Kurosawa, 1980)


WEEK FIVE
24 September
Toyotomi Hideyoshi and the invasion of Korea
Readings
1. Swope, Kenneth, Crouching Tigers, Secret Weapons: Military Technology Employed
    During the Sino-Japanese-Korean War, 1592-1598, The Journal of Military History 69.1
    (2005): 11-41
2. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Weapons Control in Japanese Society, 79-84
26 September
Tokugawa Ieyasu and the Tokugawa Settlement
Readings
1. Ikegami, The Taming of the Samurai (Tokugawa state formation, Frustration of the
    Tokugawa Samurai), 151-63, 218-22
2. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Chapter 12, 13 (Forging political order), 68-78
WEEK SIX
1 October
The British samurai?
Readings
1. Antony Farrington, The English Factory in Japan, 1613-1623 (London: The British
    Library, 1991), 65-73.
2. Derek Massarella, Anthony Farrington, William Adams and early English enterprise in
    Japan (London: Suntory and Toyota International Centres for Economics and Related
    Disciplines, 2000)
Film clip
Shogun: The Mini-series
3 October
The ‘Samurai’ in East and Southeast Asia
Readings
1. Adam Clulow, “‘Great help from Japan’: The Dutch East India Company’s Experiment
    with Japanese Soldiers”, in Adam Clulow and Tristan Mostert, The Dutch and English
    East India Companies: Diplomacy, Trade and Violence in Early Modern Asia
    (Amsterdam University Press, 2018)
2. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Chapter 17 (Regulating Foreign Relations), 98-
    104
Investigate
The Amboyna trial website
www.amboyna.org
WEEK SEVEN


8 October
Midterm 1
Part 2: The Crisis of the Samurai
10 October
The Confined World of the Tokugawa Samurai
Readings
1. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Chapter 23, “Trying to Get by on a Fixed
    Income,” 128-133
2. Katsu, Kokichi, Musui’s Story: The Autobiography of a Tokugawa Samurai, trans.
    Teruko Craig (University of Arizona Press, 1988), ix-xxi
3. Constantine N. Vaporis, “Samurai and Merchant in Mid-Tokugawa Japan: Tani Tannai's
    Record of Daily Necessities (1748-54)”, Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, Vol. 60, No.
    1 (2000): 205-227
Film clip
Twilight Samurai (Yamada, 2002)
WEEK EIGHT
15 October
The Crisis of the Tokugawa samurai
1. Excerpts from Hagakure (In the Shadow of Leaves)
2. Ikegami, The Taming of the Samurai, Chapter 14 (Hagakure: The Cult of Death and
    Honorific Individuality), 278-298
3. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Chapter 22 (The Social Estates), 124-27
Film clip:
 Twilight Samurai (Yamada, 2002)
17 October
Akō incident Overview
Readings:
1. John Tucker, The Forty-Seven Rōnin: The Vendetta in History, Chapter 2, Eyewitnesses
    to Bloodshed
2. Bito, Masahide. “The Akô Incident, 1701-1703.” Monumenta Nipponica 58:2 (Summer
    2003), 149-170
WEEK NINE
22 October
Ako incident Exercise
The Akō incident (Exercise A, Section 1)


Readings:
1. John Tucker, The Forty-Seven Rōnin: The Vendetta in History, Chapter 3 (Ronin
    Schisms)
2. The Forty-Seven Samurai: An Eyewitness Account,” in Sato, Legends of the Samurai,
    304-338.
24 October
Ako incident Exercise
The Akō incident (Exercise A, Section 2)
Readings
1. John Tucker, The Forty-Seven Rōnin: The Vendetta in History, Chapter 5 (Confucian vs
    Confucian Debates)
2. Henry D. Smith, II, “The Trouble with Terasaka: The Forty-Seventh Rōnin and the
    Chūshingura Imagination”, Japan Review No. 16 (2004), pp. 3-65 (OPTIONAL
    READING)
WEEK TEN
29 October
The Many Lives of Samurai Women
Assignment
Periodization quiz during class
1. Ikegami, The Taming of the Samurai (Transformation of the ie and the Marginalization of
    Women), 123-127
2. Yamakawa Kikue, Women of the Mito Domain: Recollections of Samurai Family Life,
    trans. Kate Wildman Nakai. (Stanford University Press, 1996), 15-23; 169-74
3. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Chapter 4 (A Woman’s Place), 17-25
Film clip:
Harakiri (1962)
31 October
Performance and the Edo samurai
Readings
1. Constantine Vaporis, “Lordly Pageantry: The Daimyo Procession and Political
    Authority”, Japan Review 17.3 (2005): 3-54
2. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Chapter 5 (Fashion and Sumptuary Laws), 28-37
Time will be set aside in the lecture to prepare for the Akō incident Exercise B
WEEK ELEVEN
5 November
Ako incident Exercise
Akō incident (Exercise B, Section 1)


Readings
1. John Tucker, The Forty-Seven Rōnin: The Vendetta in History, Chapter 6 (Confucian vs
   Confucian, Round 2)
7 November
Ako incident Exercise
Akō incident (Exercise B, Section 2)
Readings
1. James McMullen, “Confucian Perspectives on the Akô Revenge: Law and Moral
   Agency.” Monumenta Nipponica 58:3 (Fall 2003)
WEEK TWELVE
12 November
Tokugawa Troubles and Meiji transformation
Readings
1. Vaporis, Voices of Early Modern Japan, Sizing up the Foreign Threat, 119-22
2. Cohen, Mark. “The Political Process of the Revolutionary Samurai: A Comparative
   Reconsideration of Japan’s Meiji Restoration.” Theory and Society 4, 2 (2014): 139-168
14 November
Saigo and the Samurai rebellion
Readings
1. Mark Ravina, “The Apocryphal Suicide of Saigō Takamori: Samurai, Seppuku, and the
   Politics of Legend,” Journal of Asian Studies, Vol 69 no. 3 pp. 691-721
Film clip:
The Last Samurai” (Edward Zwick, 2003)
WEEK THIRTEEN
19 November
From protest to government
Readings
1. Ishimoto, Mahito, ed, Remembering Aizu: The Testament of Shiba Gorō. Translated, with
   introduction and notes by Teruko Craig (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1999), 1-
   73
21 November
Nitobe Inazo and the Creation of bushido
Assignment
Akō incident Reflective piece due by 5pm on November 21
Readings


1. Nitobe, Inazo, Bushido, The Soul of Japan: An Exposition of Japanese Thought (Tokyo,
   1899), skim the text
2. C. Cameron Hurst, III, “Death, Honor, and Loyalty: The Bushidô Ideal,” Philosophy East
   and West, 40:4 (October 1990), pp. 511-27.
WEEK FOURTEEN
26 November
Reinventing the Military
Readings
1. Karl F. Friday, “Bushido or Bull? A Medieval Historian’s Perspective on the Imperial
   Army and the Japanese Warrior Tradition,” http://ejmas.com/jalt/jaltart_friday_0301.htm
2. Oleg Benesch, Inventing the Way of the Samurai: Nationalism, Internationalism, and
   Bushido in Modern Japan (Oxford University Press, 2014), Introduction, 1-19
Film clip
Know Your Enemy: Japan (1945)
November 27-30 Thanksgiving
WEEK FIFTEEN
3 December
The Samurai Postwar
Readings
1. Benesch, Oleg. “Reconsidering Zen, Samurai, and the Martial Arts”, The Asia-Pacific
   Journal: Japan Focus Vol. 14, No. 17 (2016): 1-23
2. Mishima Yukio, The Way of the Samurai: Yukio Mishima on Hagakure in Modern Life
   (Basic Book, 1977, originally in 1967), 3-29,
5 December
Review for final
