Introduction to Information Studies
Dr. Blaha
Unique Number 78300
Summer 2019
Syllabus
    The syllabus for 304D includes goals for the course, the grading policy, an overview of
assignments, and a list of writing tips and resources you may find helpful. If, at any time
throughout the semester, you have questions about the syllabus, please contact your
instructor for clarification.
Contact
Instructor:      Craig Blaha
Office Hours:    by appointment
Office:          UTA 5.456
Email:           (please contact me using Canvas) craig.blaha at utexas.edu
TA:              TA Pool Email: ta_pool@ischool.utexas.edu
Course Goal
    This course will introduce students to the field of information studies. Students will
explore the foundations of the field, professions in the field, and issues within those
professions.
    This course has a writing flag and therefore requires a substantial written component
throughout the semester.
    Prerequisite: none.
Course Objectives
    Students will be able to:
    • Demonstrate an understanding of major topics, identify key issues, and discuss
        important terms in information studies
    • Examine numerous perspectives related to professions and issues in information
        studies and formulate independent arguments based on these perspectives
    • Relate perspectives and issues in information studies to both their personal and
        professional lives
    • Fulfill the requirements of a substantial writing component course by writing and
        editing at least three, 5-page essays
Course Materials
    INF 304 does not have a textbook or course packet. Instead, all readings will be
available through the course Web site, Canvas, UT’s Library, or through the World Wide
Web.
    This course is a web-based course, so students will need regular access to the following
materials:
    • Internet – If you do not have access to a personal computer, you may use the
        iSchool lab (UTA 1.210) while enrolled in this course. You do not need to sign up for
                                                                                             1


        an iSchool account. The iSchool lab has both Macs and PCs, as well as lots of great
        software. I encourage you to check out the lab!
    •   Email – You can open an email account through UT, Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo, etc. if
        you do not already have one. Make sure you register your official email account with
        the university. All correspondence for this course will use your official UT email, and
        "I didn't get the email" is not accepted as an excuse for missing an assignment!
    •   Microsoft Word – You will submit essays as Microsoft Word documents. The
        Campus Computer Store sells software, including Microsoft Office, to UT students
        and faculty at a discount. Since your written work will receive considerable
        feedback, only Microsoft Word documents will be accepted. I love open source
        software, but in order to provide feedback in a timely manner I need everyone to
        use Word.
    •   Adobe Acrobat Reader – Several articles we will read are in .pdf format so you will
        need Adobe Acrobat Reader (you most likely already have it).
    •   UT Box – UT offers you unlimited storage for your files and make them available to
        you anywhere. All you need is an Internet connection and a Web browser. Set up UT
        Box synch and keep your local files backed up to the cloud automatically! As a
        student, you have already paid for this service. Use it! Set up an account with your
        UTEID.
Course Format
    This course is Web-based, so there are no class meetings. The course is divided into
modules, and each week two new modules will be released. You can do the work whenever
you want throughout the week as long as you submit everything no later than the
designated date and time for each assignment. I recommend setting up a few 3-hour time
blocks each week that will help you keep up with the class.
    Each week I will release a new module (or two) that will focus on one topic within
information studies. Each module will be composed of the following activities:
    • Online lecture - Each module begins with an online “lecture.” Read each lecture
        before proceeding to the assigned readings. While reading, take notes on questions
        you might have, interesting points made by the author, or concerns you may have
        related to the topic.
    • Readings – There are citations provided at the beginning of each module, and all
        readings are available through the course Web site, Canvas, UT Library Online, or
        through the World Wide Web. See the “Course Materials” section for more
        information.
    • Discussion – Students will engage in discussions about the lecture, readings, and/or
        related topics each week using the discussion board section set up by the instructor.
        You will find more information on discussions in the “Assignments” section of this
        syllabus.
    • Quiz – an open book review of what we covered that week.
    In addition, students will write three essays which are described in the “Assignments”
section below.
Grading Policy
304 uses the traditional UT Austin undergraduate grading scale:
                          A          94 – 100
                                                                                              2


                          A-        90 - 93
                          B+        87 - 89
                          B         83 - 86
                          B-        80 - 82
                          C+        77 - 79
                          C         73 - 76
                          C-        70 - 72
                          D+        67 – 69
                          D         63 - 66
                          D-        60 - 62 (minimum for pass/fail
                                students to pass)
                          F         Below 60
     The course grade is divided into five different assignment groups: participation, quizzes,
the preparation steps for your essays, peer reviews, and the revised drafts of your essays.
The weight of each of these groups is described below, and the groups will be described in
more detail in the “Assignments” section below:
     Discussions:                10%
     Quizzes:                    10%
     Essay Preparation:          15%
     Peer Review:                15%
     Essays:                     50%
     Each essay must be turned in to pass the class. If you do not turn in any one of the three
essays, you will receive an F in the class, regardless of the grade Canvas displays. You might
as well turn them in on time and earn some points! You can turn in an essay late in order to
pass the class, but you will not receive points for late submissions.
     Grades for essays, quizzes, participation, and weekly discussions will be posted in
Canvas. You will need your UT EID and password to log in. I usually have each assignment
that was submitted on time graded within a week, and essays graded within two weeks, so
you should be able to keep up with your score on a regular basis. If you have any questions
about your grades at any point, definitely let me know!
Late Grading:
     All work is due before the deadline listed on the due date. Late discussions will not be
graded. No exceptions.
     Canvas records the exact time you upload, so make sure you give yourself plenty of time
for the document to upload before the deadline. I will use Canvas' recorded time as the
official submission time. If the deadline is midnight and Canvas lists 12:01 AM as the time
you uploaded your assignment and marks it late, then you will not receive credit.
     No essays will be accepted for a grade after the deadline except in the case of a
verifiable medical emergency. If you do miss the deadline, you will still need to turn in an
acceptable essay to pass the class! A computer virus, a computer crash, athletic events, and
thunderstorms are not verifiable medical emergencies.
     There is no final exam for this class.
Assignments
Discussions
                                                                                               3


    This semester will include a discussion for each module as well as an occasional
discussion for different essays, depending on what the class might be struggling with. For
most discussions, Canvas will divide the class into a number of randomly assigned
discussion groups. Discussions will be graded on a 4-point scale; two points for your
original submission and one point for each of your responses to two other students. You
must complete all three parts of the submission (original post and two responses) and meet
the minimum requirements to receive credit. If you submit a great original post and only
respond to one peer, you can only earn three points.
    2 Points: For most original discussions, your submission should be at least 200 words
long and make it clear to the instructor or TA that you have read the assigned reading for
that week. Detailed instructions are listed on each discussion assignment.
    2 Points: In addition, students must respond to the submissions of two other students.
These responses should be at least two sentences long and should move the conversation
forward. Responses of "I agree. This happened to me once." or similar short responses will
not receive credit.
    Remember that these word limits are articulated in order to help you understand the
minimum amount of effort required to avoid failing. They don’t represent the minimum
effort required to get an A!
Quizzes
    Each module also includes a quiz to help you review what we discussed in that module
and in the assigned reading. Quizzes are open book, so consider them more of a review than
a “test of knowledge”. Quizzes time out after 3 hours, so set aside an appropriate amount of
time to work through the quiz.
    The first module will discuss the writing conventions and process I expect from you in
this course. Not all of the information in this section will be new to everyone, but I hope that
each of you will get something out of this section.
    This module will also discuss plagiarism. I know you are each already familiar with how
to avoid plagiarism, but please be extra cautious in this class. Every semester I have had
students fail the class, receive zeros, and be referred to Student Judicial Services for
including content from other sources without proper citation. The process of finding,
documenting, and referring students who plagiarize takes a TON of my time, and I would
rather spend that time working with students to improve their writing than working with
you to create a black mark on your permanent academic record. Avoid plagiarism and we
will both enjoy the class more! The first module includes two quizzes – one is part of the
plagiarism video, the other is a freestanding quiz. You must earn a perfect score on these
two quizzes in order to open up the other modules in the course. You can take each quiz
more than one time to earn a perfect score.
Essays
    Students will complete three essays throughout the semester. Each essay will be
evaluated using the traditional undergraduate letter grade scale listed above (A – F).
Writing your essay at the last minute usually results in a poor grade. Each essay is intended
to help you focus on a different writing skill while reviewing the course material. The first
essay will focus on using evidence to support your argument, the second on structuring
your paper, and the third on grammar and general writing skills.
    For the first essay, for example, 80% of your grade will be based on whether you include
two well formatted APA quotations and two well formatted citations that use paraphrasing.
The other 20% I will determine by the quality of your writing according to these criteria:
                                                                                               4


         1.  Grammar and spelling
         2.  The clarity of thought demonstrated in your essay
         3.  Your use of resources (including citation)
         4.  The structure of the essay and how well you followed writing conventions
         5.  The overall quality of the essay
    The first two essays will include a research/preparatory step, the submission of your
draft, and a peer review component. The third essay only includes a draft submission; no
preparatory step or peer review. In addition to these steps, your essay will be sent through
Turnitin. I STRONGLY encourage you to review the Turnitin score and address any issues
before the submission is due. I use the Turnitin score as an indicator of potential problems;
Turnitin will highlight what it thinks are problematic areas, and I typically take a closer look
and decide if I agree. If you choose not to review these highlighted areas and either leave a
note explaining why it isn’t a problem or to make a change and address the issue, you run
the risk of failing the assignment and receiving a referral to Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity. Most people never have a problem with this, but use the tool to your advantage to
help you avoid plagiarism!
Essay Topics
    The essay topics are selected to encourage you to synthesize the materials in the
modules. My hope is you will reflect on what you learned in each group of modules, and
build on those ideas to develop an essay that addresses the prompt. The prompt is designed
to get you thinking about the topic, but I hope you will take your own personal experiences,
undergraduate major, and future career goals to decide how to take the information in the
modules and make it more interesting to you (and me!)
    1. First Essay Prompt: Information and communication technology (ICT) is a term
         used to describe the variety of different tools we use to communicate with each
         other. These tools include mobile devices, laptops, the Internet and everything the
         Internet makes possible from social media to self-driving cars. Why is information
         and communication technology important now and into the future?
             a. The main goal of this essay is for you to demonstrate your skill in using
                  evidence to support an argument. I often see student essays that talk about
                  "the explosion of the Internet" or how we can learn anything at "the touch of
                  a button" (avoid both of these expressions!). What these students really
                  mean to do is to offer specific examples of the number of people who have
                  Internet access now as compared to ten years ago, or to discuss the
                  reliability of information you can find from a specific source, such as
                  wikipedia, and both the positive and negative aspects of that easy
                  access. Essay 1 will focus on using evidence to “show” your reader that
                  something is true rather than “tell” your reader it is true.
             b. Module 1 tells you how to cite outside sources as well as the modules both in
                  text and in your reference page, so make sure you review module 1 for that
                  information!
             c. Essay 1 will include a peer review component. We will use Turnitin to
                  review each other’s work.
    2. Second Essay Prompt: Why is the organization, management, preservation, and
         access to information important?
                                                                                               5


             a. Essay two helps you focus on the structure of your essay. The use of
                 introductory and concluding paragraphs, as well as the appropriate use and
                 construction of paragraphs are the main goals of this essay.
             b. Use the Librarianship, Archives and Preservation, Museums and
                 Conservation, and Records Management modules as the foundation of your
                 essay. You do not need to cite or refer to all of them, but your writing should
                 reflect a synthesis of the ideas in these modules.
             c. Feel free to use any current events, personal experiences, or other ideas to
                 make this essay your own. The prompt allows you to use a number of
                 different lenses. For example; are the activities listed in the prompt
                 important to a functioning democracy, business success, a professional
                 sports organization, cultural heritage, or fighting oppression? Any one of
                 these topics should give you plenty of material to discuss in five pages, and
                 there are a lot of other possible directions to take this essay.
             d. Essay two will also be peer reviewed.
    3. Third Essay Prompt: Your Choice
             a. For the last essay, choose any topic we have touched on in class and examine
                 this topic in depth. I encourage you to focus your investigation on a topic
                 related to your major or to your future career. For example, in the past I
                 have had students who heard about this “blockchain stuff” and used this
                 essay as an opportunity to learn more about it, especially from a security
                 and privacy point of view. I have also had students decide to conduct a
                 competitive intelligence report on a company they were hoping to work for.
             b. The third essay will focus on grammar, colloquialisms, ambiguous pronouns,
                 and other language conventions.
             c. As with essays one and two, use the modules as a foundation for your essay
                 (citing appropriately), but feel free to include current events, information
                 from your major, or anything else you find relevant or interesting.
Essay Drafts
    Remember to include a title page and bibliography for each essay. These pages DO NOT
count toward the five-page minimum. Title pages should include your name, the date, the
number and title of your essay, and the class number and section. Your essay must be
submitted to Canvas as a word doc, and the file name needs to start with your last name. For
example, my persuasive essay would be BlahaEssay1.doc. Without this title page and these
naming convention, your essay may not be graded! I typically download all of the essays and
run them through the plagiarism checker, so an essay titled “essay2.doc” will get tossed in
the virtual circular file.
    You must cite all sources within the essay and provide complete citation information in
a bibliography page, including any module readings or the online lecture. Students caught
plagiarizing will suffer strict academic consequences. All citations should use APA format.
For more information on APA, please see the Purdue University OWL
guide: http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/
    All essays will be submitted to Canvas and will be passed through Turnitin or another
plagiarism check software. The results of this software analysis are not the only method I
use to determine whether something is plagiarized. As I said earlier, plagiarism is my least
favorite thing to deal with in this course. Avoid it!
    The essay requirements include a five-page minimum, which means exactly that; if your
essay is 4 ¾ pages long, you don’t receive credit. If you expand the margins and increase the
                                                                                                6


point size from the word defaults and more than double spaced in order to take up more
space, you won’t receive credit. Don’t leave it up to me, write the full amount and make us
both happy!
Essay Submission
     Submit all assignments using Canvas. Assignments submitted via email will not be
counted (I lose track of them – I get hundreds of emails a day, so I ask that you use Canvas
both for communicating with me and submitting your assignments so we both have a
record).
     A tutorial for submitting documents is located
here: http://edutech.ctl.utexas.edu/submitting-assignments/
     All essays must be in Microsoft word format, saved as .doc or .docx. 11 point font
(whatever the default is for Word, usually cambria), double spaced with one inch margins. I
personally prefer open source software, but Canvas and Turnitin work best with Microsoft.
Peer Review
     I will use the Canvas plugin Turnitin to pair you with another student for the first essay.
Turnitin will have a series of questions for you to answer. For details, check the Turnitin
web page for more information:
     https://help.turnitin.com/feedback-studio/moodle/direct-
v2/student/peermark/writing-a-peer-review.htm?Highlight=peer%20review
     This process is important because not only does it help your classmate improve their
writing, but it also helps you improve your critical thinking and writing skills. More details
on the specific expectations for each peer review will be included in each assignment.
     The way Canvas handles peer-review does not allow for the reviewer to receive points
for their effort (madness!). I will include a separate assignment called “Peer Review Points”
(or something very similar) that does not allow you to submit anything. Please understand
this is just for me to keep track of your peer review efforts in a transparent way – I want you
to be able to see that you have earned these points, and to be able to contact me if you have
any questions about your grade.
     The details of the peer review process for the second essay is described in Canvas.
Resources
Style Manuals
     Students will need to cite all sources for their essays in APA format. Purdue University
Online Writing Lab (OWL) offers a great overview on how to do
this.http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl Style manuals are located under Research and
Citation.
U.T. Writing Resources
     You are fortunate to attend the University of Texas, where you have access to one of the
largest research libraries in the world! Take advantage of all the wonderful resources
available through the U.T. system.
     • Undergraduate Writing Center – located in FAC 211
     • UT Library Online's (UT LOL) homepage – You can find library information,
          resources, and receive virtual assistance from a reference librarian!
                                                                                               7


    •    Full text articles and essays – Databases offering a plethora of articles and essays,
         available in both in HTML and .pdf format and from many disciplines
    •    Social Sciences Citation Index – An outstanding resource for finding articles and
         information on citation rates for many articles
    •    Databases arranged by subject – You can locate articles within specific disciplines.
Other Writing Resources
    •    The Citation Machine – A free Web site that can translate citation information into
         proper format for both APA and MLA style. A helpful and time-saving resource.
    •    Online Writing Lab – Purdue University provides an excellent online writing lab,
         including information about avoiding plagiarism, citing resources, and avoiding
         grammatical errors.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
    Please abide by the University’s policy on academic integrity. All work you submit must
be your own. "Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to, cheating and plagiarism...
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. University policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced." From: The
University of Texas: General Information, Appendix C.
Special Needs
    The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. To determine if you qualify, please
contact the Dean of Students at 471-6259; 471-4641 TTY. If they certify your needs, we will
work with you to make appropriate arrangements.
Religious or Holy Day Observance
    "A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for
the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the
absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
reasonable time after the absence.”
(http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi04-05/ch4/ch4g.html)
Email
    “Electronic mail (e-mail), like postal mail, is a mechanism for official University
communication to students. The University will exercise the right to send e-mail
communications to all students, and the University will expect that e-mail communications
will be received and read in a timely manner.”
(http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi04-05/app/appn.html). Both the
instructor and the TA will reply to student emails within 24 hours on weekdays and 48
hours on weekends barring a rare and extenuating circumstance.
    I look forward to working with you all this semester. If you have any questions,
comments, or concerns, do not hesitate to email me!
                                                                                               8
