                                                   Fall – Autumn - 2018
                         AET310: Foundations of Creative Coding – Unique #: 20884
                                                      Michael McKellar
                                            mmckellar@austin.utexas.edu
                          Office Hours: 9:30 – 11:30 PLAI LAB/DFA 4.132E (Or by appointment)
                                             Tuesday & Thursday 8:00-9:30am
                                                            DFA 4.112
                          Required Textbook: Learning Processing, 2nd ed, Daniel Shiffman
OVERVIEW
In this class we look at building the foundations of creative thinking and practical coding. The class serves as an
introduction to coding and creative process on a whole. Examining the use of computers as an artist medium in
contemporary art.
Using the graphical language ‘processing’ we develop the key skills required to program and realise an artistic or creative
vision via code.
Later weeks explore future of creative coding and alternative outlets for artistic creation.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This practical lab class introduces students to use code to realise and implement artistic vision.
Exploration of the uses of computers in the development and creation of contemporary art and design, students will leave
with a practical understanding of the uses of creative coding in the real world.
Development and learning in the graphical language ‘processing’ will give students a foundation in using code for artistic
creation.
Later weeks will develop a practical understanding of further creative coding applications and alternative development
environments.
At the conclusion of this course, students will meet the requirements for a number of upper AET courses and classes.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of the semester, students will be able to:
      •    Critically analyse and discuss the qualities of computer-generated art;
      •    Demonstrate practical development, creation and implementation of creative coding;
      •    Gain experience in various industry software;
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
      •    Participation (15%): Students should be prepared to raise ideas, critique designs and add to class discussions, this
           is expected weekly.
      •    Technical challenges (40%): Compounded learning from class in the form of homework/lab challenges to
           implement and develop upon discussed techniques. These challenges are given out from week 3 onwards,
           expected to be return the following Thursday (9 days per challenge). Each task is worth 3%, with an additional 1%
           for a creative or bonus addition. – Final submission due week 14 (11/27/18)
      •    Project (40%): Created during the instructed lab sessions, students will end with a complete game built within
           processing. This will be developed during class learning and lab time, final submission will be graded week 15
           (04/12/18 & 06/12/18)
      •    Attendance (5%): Attendance is taken during every class
CLASS POLICIES
UT ELECTRONIC MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY


Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students. Students are
 expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related
 communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked
 daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or her official e-
 mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned to
 the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable
 messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action
 required of the University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
ATTENDANCE
Attendance and punctuality are professional attributes. This class is designed to provide students skills for a more practical
and professional future career.
You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for in-class assignments
or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up. However, if a serious medical or personal crisis
(hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see
the exception below for religious holy days.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving
class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy. Three tardies equals an absence. Four absences will lower your
course grade by one letter grade. Additional absences may result in failure of the course.
Learning, research and development within the class all build on knowledge gained from previous lessons, you are
responsible for making up for work missed during any absence. It is your responsibly to obtain any notes or assignments
from one of your classmates.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be
absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
(from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-
6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations
promptly.
CLASSROOM ETIQUETTE
       1.   Be on time at the start of class time and after any breaks
       2.   This class is a place for artistic discussion and critique, not texting on your phone – please turn them on silent
       3.   Discussion is good, distraction is bad – I reserve the right to reduce marks for that day’s assigned work for repeat
            offenders
       4.   Consider bringing headphones/earphones for any periods of solo work, such as class work sessions
COURSE COMMUNITACTION
The syllabus and assignments will be posted on the course Canvas site. All communications outside class hours is via
Canvas.
This class is designed around discussion and group learning, it will help everyone if you post questions in the discussion
area wherever possible. I will post, comment and otherwise add to the discussion wherever relevant, or with topics to help
steer general discussion in class.
I will attempt to respond to all private communications within 24 hours on weekdays.
I normally check emails twice per day, once in the afternoon, once in the evening.
       •    Always ask questions where there is doubt. Do not make assumptions.


ASSIGNMENTS
   •   All assignments will be given out and discussed during class time and available to view on Canvas.
   •   Some classes will have specific technical assignments with focus on students learning specific skills in a software
       or working with a hardware. Additional smaller assignments may be made throughout the semester as the need
       arises.
   •   You are responsible for making up for any class work missed – specifically technical challenges completed during
       class time as these, and the homework assignment contribute heavily to the final grade.
   •   It is your responsibility to ask and inquire if you are unclear about what is required or when.
ASSIGNMENTS DEADLINES
   • It is vital that you do not get behind in this class as all work builds upon previous work.
   • As a general rule all projects, reading, research and homework assignments must be completed begore the
       beginning of each class period. However, many class assignments have a due date and time in the evening before
       class. This allows time for review and feedback, as well as discussion based upon the submitted work during the
       next lesson. Any work not submitted on time will still receive feedback but will not benefit from peer review in
       class time.
   •   All work is due as specified in the assignment listed on canvas. Work not completed before the canvas deadline
       will be considered late.
   •   Any work turned in late, without prior consent and valid reason will result in a single grade drop from the
       deserved reward (an A submission will reward a B etc).
   •   Technical challenges are given from week 3 onwards on the Tuesday session, expected to be returned on the
       following Thursday session. Each challenge is worth a maximum 4% of your total grade. Late or no submission
       will result in no grade for that challenge.
   •   The class project is a game created throughout the length of the class lab sessions. With directed development
       week 1 through 6. A grading scheme will be given out in week 7 for what to expect and what you may need to
       add extra for exemplar grades. Final projects will be graded in class at the end of semester in week 15 (12/04/18
       & 12/06/18).
CLASS SCHEDULE
      Week      Days           Topics                                     Homework/assessments
      1
                30-Aug         Course Introduction
                               Creative Coding Demo
      2         04-Sep         Week 2 (chapters 1-3)
                               Pixels
                               Processing
                               Interaction
                06-Sep         Lab
      3         11-Sep         Week 3 (chapters 4-6)                      Challenge 1
                               Variables
                               Conditionals
                               Loops
                13-Sep         Lab
      4         18-Sep         Week 4 (chapters 7-8)                      Challenge 2
                               Functions
                               Objects
                20-Sep         Lab                                                                     Challenge 1 due
      5         25-Sep         Week 5 (chapter 9)                         Challenge 3
                               Arrays


   27-Sep Lab                                                          Challenge 2 due
6  02-Oct Week 6 (chapters 10-12)               Challenge 4
          Algorithms
          Debugging
          Libraries
   04-Oct Lab                                   Project grading scheme challenge 3 due
7  09-Oct Week 7 (chapters 13-14)               Challenge 5
          Mathematics
          Translation and Rotation (in 3D)
   11-Oct Lab                                                          challenge 4 due
8  16-Oct Week 8 (chapters 15-16)               Challenge 6
          Images
          Videos
   18-Oct Lab                                                          challenge 5 due
9  23-Oct Week 9 (chapters 17-19)               Challenge 7
          Text
          Data Input
          Data Streams
   25-Oct Lab                                                          challenge 6 due
10 30-Oct Week 10 (chapters 20-21)              Challenge 8
          Sound
          Exporting
   01-Nov Lab                                                          challenge 7 due
11 06-Nov Week 11 (chapter 22)                  Challenge 9
          Advanced Object-Orientated
          Programming
   08-Nov Lab                                                          challenge 8 due
12 13-Nov Week 12 (No book)                     Challenge 10
          Other Creative programming
          languages
   15-Nov Lab                                                          challenge 9 due
13 20-Nov Alternative Creative Coding tools - 1
   22-Nov Thanksgiving - no class
14 27-Nov Alternative Creative Coding tools - 2                        challenge 10
          Lab                                                          due
   29-Nov Lab
15 04-Dec Project Presentations                                        Project due
   06-Dec Project Presentations                                        Project due
16 11-Dec No Class
   13-Dec No Class


EVAULATION & GRADING
Neatness, scholarship and presentation will all count towards your final grade:
Being able to visually communicate ideas is part of the process.
YOU WILL BE GRADED ON
      •    Reading, discussion, Participation (15%);
      •    Technical challenges (10*4% = 40%);
      •    Project (40%);
      •    Attendance (5%)
This course does not have a final exam.
GRADING SCHEME
To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not recognize the grade of A+. Thus, the conversion from
percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
      •    A=         94+
      •    A- =       90 – 93.999…
      •    B+ =       87 – 89.999…
      •    B=         84 – 86.999…
      •    B- =       80 – 83.999…
      •    C+ =       77 – 79.999…
      •    C=         74 – 76.999…
      •    C- =       70 – 73.999…
      •    D+ =       67 – 69.999…
      •    D=         64 – 66.999…
      •    D- =       60 – 63.999…
      •    F=         0 – 59.999…
PRIVACY
This class is designed to be an open space for discussion, critique and learning. What is said about each other’s work during
this class should remain in the classroom. It will not be published in a blog or any other personal website, tweeted or
posted on social networks.
MOBILE DEVICES
Mobile devices of any kind must be silenced and out of sight.
There may be times when using a mobile is appropriate, such as aiding in discussion – these times will be very obviously
announced. Texting, talking or otherwise using a mobile device is never appropriate during class.
RESOURCES AND EQUIPMENT
This class will make use of processing, a free to use & develop programming language available at: processing.org
Other useful links:
      ● Processing.org - main site for Processing
      ● Processing.org - tutorials
                ○ hello.processing.org - great starting point
      ● Processing.org - reference
      ● Processing.org - libraries
      ● Processing.org - IDE reference
      ● Learningprocessing.com - website for the textbook
      ● Sketchpad.cc - an online processing editor
      ● Awesome Creative Coding list by TerkelG on GitHub
Lab class for this class will require the ‘Learning Processing, 2nd edition’ text book by Daniel Shiffman.
