1
                       Department of Accounting
                    ACC 334M – Healthcare Accounting
                                Spring 2020 Syllabus
Instructor:                        Anindita Roy Bardhan
E-mail:                            anindita.roybardhan@Mccombs.uTexas.edu
Office:                            GSB 5.126C
Office Hours:                      Wed: 11 am - Noon & Thu: 5 - 6 pm and by
                                   appointment
Teaching Assistant:                Ben-Tien (Tammy) Pan; tammy1107@utexas.edu
Class times and
Locations:                         Unique #02325: T/Th. 9:30-10:45am UTC 1.104
Course Prerequisites
ACC 310F or ACC 311/311H
Required Materials & Equipment
Textbook:               Financial Management of Health Care Organizations, an
                        introduction to fundamental tools, concepts and applications,
                        Fourth Edition
                        By William N Zelman, Michael J McCue, Noah D Glick and
                        Marcis S. Thomas
        Textbook Option 1: Traditional hardback version, ISBN # 978-1-118-46656-8
        Textbook Option 2: e-Book, ISBN # 978-1-118-46658-2
Calculator: A financial calculator is required for this course. A financial calculator is
one that has dedicated keys for convenience in working problems involving the time-
value of money. The keys typically are labeled N (number of periods), I/Yr. (required
interest rate per period), PV (present value), PMT (payment per period), and FV (single
future payment amount). If you already have such a calculator, you do not need to buy a
new one. However, if you do not already have such a calculator, you should buy an HP
10bII+.
Note: You may NOT use calculators that have text memory (e.g. for programs) or cell-
phone calculators on quizzes or examinations. Examples of PROHIBITED
CALCULATORS are the TI-83, 84, 86 and 89. You may use simple 4-function
calculators if an exam or quiz does not require TVM calculations.
1                             ACC 334 Healthcare Accounting                         SP 20


Course Description and Student Learning Objectives
The primary objectives of this course are to help students:
    o Develop an understanding of: i) revenue and expense drivers and their impact in
         Healthcare organizations and ii) accounting information in financial statements
    o Analyze and evaluate key elements of health care accounting and finance
         principles (mentioned above) that managers should use for decision-making
         purpose
    o Analyze healthcare companies strategically along with industry trends, for
         planning purposes
    o Gain the ability to communicate information to others in the organization using a
         critical thinking approach via cases and case presentations.
This course is designed to benefit all students who will be future users of accounting
information especially in the Healthcare industry. By the end of the semester, you will:
     Understand the accounting principles, theories and processes that guide financial
         reporting (via class lectures and discussions)
     Identify and analyze healthcare revenues, expenses, management problems &
         ethical dilemmas and apply theory and tools discussed in class, to recommend
         solutions to the problems and for general decision making (via tests, case analyses
         and projects)
Course Routine
     I will conduct the course by giving lectures, facilitating solutions to in-class
     exercises and conducting discussions in a manner that encourages class participation
     by students, consistent with the objectives of the course and the time available.
     Lecture slides are posted on Canvas for reference. Students are expected to study
     the chapter readings before topics are introduced in class and be sure to bring
     calculators to each class. Students are encouraged to ask questions and to request
     explanation of particular points in more detail if they remain confused or uncertain
     about items discussed or if concepts remain unclear. However, problems and cases
     discussed and solved in class will not be posted on Canvas. In case of a missed
     class, these may be collected in the subsequent class or requested from a classmate.
     Requests to email them to students will not be entertained. Recording of class
     lectures is not allowed.
Class Protocol
    If for some reason you are running late, do not feel you should skip class. Please
    come in quietly and take a seat at the side or in the rear of the classroom. If you must
    leave class early, please tell me before class starts. I would appreciate it. Such
    comings and goings during class should be rare—do not let them become a habit.
    If you need to miss a class or other required activity, including an examination, for
    any reason, please inform me as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that I
    can approve the absence as excused and arrangements can be made to complete any
    missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. If you miss a class or other
    required activity, including an examination, for reasons beyond your control,
    precluding prior notice, inform me of the circumstances as soon as you are able.
2                             ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                           SP 20


Personal Electronic Equipment Policy
    The University delegates to individual faculty member’s responsibility for and
    authority over classroom procedure and decorum. Due to abuse by those who came
    before you, I regret to announce you may not use a LAPTOP, e-Tablet, CELL
    PHONE, PDA, DVD player or MP3 (iPod) or any other such equipment during class
    time (unless it is an accommodation specified by the Office of Services for Students
    with Disabilities). Such types of equipment are distractions. Moreover, if I tolerate
    any one student using such equipment, I cannot deny others. From experience, I
    know that I cannot allow use of these distracters to escalate and get out of hand.
    Therefore, I will not tolerate any use by any individual student while class is in
    session. All such equipment should be turned off and put away. You are encouraged
    to bring a calculator to class and have it ready to use.
    In addition to the use of the above types of equipment, all other forms of distracting
    behavior are prohibited. I will not begin to list such behaviors; you should know
    what is inappropriate.
E-mail and Canvas
    The use of email and Canvas is required for this course. I will frequently
    communicate with the class with announcements and guidance and I will answer
    questions via email. I check my e-mail at frequent intervals during weekdays and
    somewhat less regularly over weekends. I will use the email addresses that I have
    access to, on Canvas. They are the email addresses that you have given the
    University for Directory Purposes. If you need to update your email address with the
    University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal info/all my addresses,
    change your email address. Before each class, I will post on Canvas any PowerPoint
    slides I intend to use. You can print them in handout style to save paper—either six
    slides to a page or, if you prefer, three slides accompanied by note-taking space. It is
    your responsibility to regularly check both your e-mail and the class website on
    Canvas.
Grading Questions or Appeals
    Do not wait until the end of the semester to question or appeal grade components
    other than the final examination.
    If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the grade components, or if you feel
    you need to bring to the attention of our Teaching Assistant or me other facts or
    circumstances that might affect the grade for that item, you will have ONE WEEK
    from the date the grade is posted on Canvas or Connect to take such action and have
    the matter resolved.
Electronic Class Rosters & Privacy in Canvas
A recent opinion from the US Department of Education states that the University must
inform students in advance if their name will be appearing on an electronic class roster:
Since Fall 2001, web-based, password-protected class sites have been available for all
accredited courses taught at The University. Class e-mail rosters are a component of the
sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters
must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building,
3                             ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                           SP 20


Room 1. For information on restricting directory information see:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi00-01/app/appc09.html                      Privacy in
Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that I
will use a merged Canvas site for all sections of the course that I am teaching this
semester. This will allow students in other sections to see that you are enrolled in the
course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn
your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you
have any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your
name from view of other students.
Academic Standards
A high academic level will be maintained with respect to (a) the quality of the course and
(b) grading. Semester grades will be determined using the following factors and relative
weights (no extra credit is available):
Quizzes (2).………………………………………………………… ..                                                               10%
Test 1…………………………………………………………………                                                                     20%
Test 2…………………………………………………………………………                                                                  15%
Final exam …………………………………………………………..                                                                 30%
Group project……………………………………………………………….                                                              20%
Attendance ………………………………………………………………………….                                                              5%
                                             TOTAL                                                  100%
I have adopted the University’s plus/minus grading as the standard for this course.1 The
faculty believes that plus/minus grading permits us to better distinguish gradations in
performance and provides better feedback to students on their performance.
Course grades will be such that the class average will be in the range of 3.0 – 3.2.
Grades will be based on the total points earned in the course (as shown above).
You may assess your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-,
80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and below 60% = F. It is possible, but not guaranteed,
that we will curve grades at the end of the course. No grades will be associated with
scores on exams or quizzes during the semester. In addition, no individual exam grades
will be curved during the semester.
Group Project (100 points): Students will form teams of 3- 4 members for the group
project and should submit their member names to me by the due date stated in the
syllabus. A grading rubric may be provided for this assignment which the students are
advised to refer to.
      Teams can choose their own company and a competitor from the same
          industry, to research. It can be a Hospital, Pharmaceutical; Healthcare related
          Manufacturing or services, or Health Insurance Company. A written report
          not exceeding 5 pages should be submitted on Canvas by the due date, by a
          designated team member. This member can download feedback and share
          with the rest of the team, after grading is complete. Page limit includes the
1
  Under the traditional grading system an undergraduate student needs a D or better to receive credit for a
course; under the plus/minus system an undergraduate student needs a D- or better to receive credit.
4                                 ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                                      SP 20


          graphs and charts but excludes reference page and Financial Statements.
      Font size should not be less than 10 and 1 ½ line spacing is preferred though
          single spacing is acceptable.
      Please refer to the grading rubric attached to the Project/Assignment, on
          Canvas, for details of what should be included in each area of the written
          submission.
      Failure to submit the project by the deadline will result in a grade of zero for
          the group project. Please include the following in the written report:
    Company Name, Course #, Year and semester, as a footer in each page
    Company profile – Nature of the business, how old the company is, market
     leader or player, revenue of the past year, among others. Not to exceed ½ a page.
     (20 points)
    Industry profile – Include details of how new/mature it is, any new
     laws/changes, are lawsuits frequent, annual revenue etc. Remember, it is for the
     industry as a whole, NOT more on the selected company or the competitor. Not
     to exceed ½ a page. (10 points)
    Ratio Analyses using 10-12 ratios comparing the selected company to that of a
     competitor, for a minimum of 2 years (maximum of 3 years). The data used
     should not be older than 3 years from the current year. Be sure to show ratios
     (including formulas, $ used in calculations) side by side for the years selected
     and for the competitor, as the case may be. Do not calculate ratios for the entities
     in separate sections, this makes it difficult to compare and follow. (30 points)
    Graphs & Charts as relevant - do not cut & paste. You can have up to 4 ratios on
     a graph. DO NOT include as appendix; graphs are included in the page limit. (10
     points);
    Identify the strengths and weaknesses based on the calculated ratios and give
     recommendations. Recommendations should not only include what needs to be
     done, but more importantly HOW it should be done. For e.g. increasing revenue
     is the “What”, increased marketing and awareness is the “How”(20 points)
    References including Financial Statements. Please provide actual FS for BOTH
     the entities (IS, BS, SCF) showing the name of the entities and dates, and not
     just links to them. Ensure that the FS included, show the $ that you have used
     for the ratio calculations, so I can verify them. You will not receive credit for the
     calculations if I’m unable to trace the $ to the FS provided. (5 points)
    Class presentations. PowerPoint presentation files should be emailed to my TA
     no later than 6 pm of the day preceding the due date of the Paper, irrespective
     of the actual date of your group presentation. All members have to present. I will
     provide the schedule of presentations a week earlier (5 points)
Each team will also present in 8 (minimum) -10 minutes (maximum), their projects in
class. You may use Power Point slides. DO NOT present large amounts of information
and data in the PPT. Do not present all ratios that are included in the paper. Be sure to
include the formulas, strengths/weakness and related recommendations for the selected
ratios, in your presentation. Avoid sending links to Google documents for presentations.
Attendance
Classroom attendance is critical to your success in this course. Students are allowed up to
2 unexcused absences for the course. Beyond that every absence will result in -2 from the
5                             ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                             SP 20


course grade. Absences related to work, sickness or UT events should be communicated
to me in advance (subsequently for sickness) along with proof of the same.
Quizzes
There will be 2 quizzes during the semester, each worth 100 points. Because the quizzes
are take-home and available on Canvas, late quizzes will not be accepted and there will
be no opportunities to makeup missed quizzes. Quiz submissions should be submitted on
Canvas. Email submissions to my TA or me will not be accepted.
Exams
Exams will be in-class and closed book/closed note (EXAMS ARE 100%
INDEPENDENT WORK!). They will consist of calculations and theory questions. Exam
formats will include multiple-choice questions and work out problems requiring
development, analysis, and presentation of comprehensive solutions. Concepts from
chapter notes and quizzes will be included on the exam. The Final Exam will be a
cumulative exam covering ALL topics in this course.
You are not permitted to use any electronic communication devices during the exam.
This explicitly includes cell phones, pagers, computers, iPads, Smart watches and other
advanced electronic devices. I will consider it cheating if a cell phone or other electronic
communication device is used and/or visible during the exam. All forms of cheating are
expressly prohibited and will result in referral to Judicial Affairs for punishment. You are
not permitted to copy or otherwise reproduce the exams at any time. This includes taking
pictures of the exam with your cell phone or other device while taking the exam or when
reviewing graded exams in class. Textbook/notes and other reference materials cannot be
kept open during tests and exams. Cell phones and smart watches should be turned in to
the proctor when a student steps out for restroom breaks during tests/exams.
All students are required to present proof of identification at the time of tests and final
exam. Acceptable documentation must include picture identification such as an official
UT ID, Passport, or State approved driver’s license.
Unless you have prior approval from the instructor, you must take the exam in the section
for which you are registered.
Calculator usage during the exam is limited to financial calculators only. Graphic
calculators are NOT ALLOWED.
Exam Make-up Policy
Students MUST take all exams. Make-up exams are given only for excused absences,
which must be determined prior to the exam. Make up for Final exams prior to
scheduled date will not be allowed to facilitate family fun trips scheduled prior to final
exam. Excused absences may be given for verifiable medical or family emergencies or
UT sponsored activities. Written documentation must be provided to qualify as an
“excused absence.” Students who do not show up for an exam without making
arrangements with me prior to the exam will receive a zero. Failure to take the make-up
exam at the agreed time and place will result in a grade of zero. Make-up exams will be
different from the exam given in class.
6                            ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                              SP 20


Disposition of exams: As per school policy, exams will be retained for one year and then
destroyed.
Dropping the Course
Students must go through the official procedures to drop the course. A student who stops
attending the class and fails to officially drop will receive a grade of F. Consult the
Academic Calendar on the Registrar’s website (http://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/) for
specific deadlines.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives will be well served
by this course, that students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the diversity that students
bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and
benefit. Please let me know right away if this ever is not the case.
Classroom bias research
Faculty bias:
Soraya Chemaly, Time, 12 February 2015•“The impact of unconscious teacher bias
is long understood and well-documented. This new research confirms decades of
work done by Myra and David Sadker and Karen R. Zittleman. Through thousands of
hours of classroom observations, the Sadkers and Zittleman identified specific ways
in which implicit and stereotypical ideas about gender govern classroom dynamics.
They, as others have, found that teachers spend up to two thirds of their time talking
to male students; they also are more likely to interrupt girls but allow boys to talk
over them.”
Students’ bias:
Economist, 23 January 2016•“Teachers could also benefit from a bit more of the
scrupulous attention paid on modern campuses to sexual equality. Earlier analysis
by Ben Schmidt of Northeastern University showed that language used to describe
professors was heavily gender-dependent. Men were more likely than women to be
described as ‘intelligent’ or ‘funny’, but less likely to be described as ‘nice’ or
‘mean’.”
Economist, 23 September 2017–Business School experiment•“...evaluations place
female instructors an average of 37 slots below male ones. Students taught by
women gave lower ratings even to teaching materials that were the same for all
course instructors...[despite the fact that]female instructors added the same amount
of value to students’ learning as did male instructors ....the bias was particularly
pronounced in the case of junior instructors.”
7                               ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                                 SP 20


Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in
detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to
observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to
observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by
the Office of Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
         evacuate buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
     If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire
         authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
8                              ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                                    SP 20


                                 ASSIGNMENT SCHEDULE
CHAPTER                 READING ASSIGNMENT                    SUGGESTED QUESTIONS &
  (in the order                                                         PROBLEMS
covered in class)
                  The Context of Health Care Financial    Key Terms
        1         Management                              Review Questions
       13         Provider Payment Systems                Key Terms
                                                          Review Questions
                                                          Key Terms
        3         Principles and Practices of Healthcare  Questions: 6,7,10,11,17 & 20
                  Accounting
                                                          Key Terms & Equations
        2         Healthcare Financial Statements         Questions 4 – 7,10,13,16,18 & 23
                  (including Appendix A)
                                                          Key Terms
        4         Financial Statement Analysis            Questions: 2,4,7,13,16 &23
                                                          Key Terms
                  Working Capital Management              Questions: 2,3,5,13,15,17,18,21,24,
        5                                                 27,33,36 &40
                                                          Key Terms
                                                          Questions: 2, 8,10,11,
        6         The Time Value of Money                 16,19,22,25,32,37,39 & 44
                                                          Key Terms
        7         The Investment Decision                 Questions: 3,6,8,10,12,16,22 & 28
        9         Using Cost Information to make special Key Terms
                  decisions                               Questions: 2,3,5,8,10,12,14,17,20 & 25
                                                          Key Terms
       10         Budgeting (including Appendix I)        Questions: 3,7,10,11,16,17,19,23 & 27
                                                          Appendix I: Exhibit 1.1 c, e, 1.5b
*Unless otherwise noted, read the entire chapter in the textbook but exclude appendices.
 *Course content is subject to change at the discretion of the Professor.
 9                             ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                         SP 20


SYLLABUS SIGNATURE PAGE: Due Dt.: Thursday, February 13th, 8 am – Exam 1 grades
will not be released until the submission of this page with student signature on Canvas by
the due date.
I have read the above syllabus, rules and regulations and agree to abide by them. I understand
that any behavior on my part that goes against the above mentioned regulations will subject me to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University.
__________________________________________                            ______________________
Signature of Student                                                          Date
__________________________________________
Name of Student (PLEASE PRINT)
10                             ACC 334M Healthcare Accounting                                   SP 20
