             University of Texas at Austin                             Dept. of Middle Eastern Studies
                  Intensive Arabic II​ ‫ اﻟﻔﺼﻞ اﻟﺪراﺳﻲ اﻟﺜﺎﻧﻲ‬:‫اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌﺮﺑﯿﺔ‬
                                            ARABIC 611C/ARA381J
                                                     Spring2 2019
  Unique #:           Instructor: Mohammad                                TA: TBA
                      Office: CAL 415
                      Office Hours: TTH 2:00-3:00 pm
                      Email: mamohammad@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE MATERIALS​:
    1. Al-Kitaab fii Tac​ ​allum al-​ c​Arabiyya​,​ Part 1​ (​ Third Edition) by Brustad, Al-Batal & Al-Tonsi.
    2. Al-Kitaab ​Companion Website (See files on ​Canvas​ for registration).
    3. The Hans-Wehr Dictionary of Modern Written Arabic.​ ​4th​             ​ Edition recommended, but earlier
         editions are acceptable. However, please note that you must have a ​Hans Wehr dictionary​ for
         work in this course. The dictionary is available online:
http://ia800300.us.archive.org/30/items/Arabic-English-dictionary/Arabic-english-Dictionary-complete.p
    df
    4. Canvas:​ In this class, we will use Canvas—a web-based course management system at
         http://courses.utexas.edu/​—to distribute course materials, communicate online, and
         post assignments and grades. You will receive emails with important course information
         from your instructor via Canvas’s email tool, so be sure to check your email frequently.
COURSE OBJECTIVES:
By the end of this semester you will, ‫إن ﺷﺎء اﷲ‬, have reached Intermediate proficiency in Arabic, which
means that you will be able to:
    1. speak about yourself and your environment, initiate and sustain conversations on a number of
         topics (e.g., family, friends, study, etc.,) and narrate in present, past and future time frames,
    2. initiate and maintain dialogue in both c​​ aammiyya (Colloquial Arabic) and FuSHaa (Standard
         Arabic) when appropriate,
    3.       read texts on familiar topics and understand the main ideas without using the dictionary,
    4.       comprehend simple Arabic discourse dealing with familiar topics,


    5.       carry out written tasks connected to daily life and write short letters and essays, and
    6. demonstrate familiarity with many aspects of Arab culture, such as social and religious customs
        and traditions, family life, and education.
    In addition, you will:
        ▪ recognize and use verbs in all major tenses, recognize and form complex sentence structures
             such as dependent clauses, and recognize and use negation patterns,
        ▪ add approximately 300 words to your active vocabulary, and
        ▪ learn the root-and-pattern system to be able to use an Arabic dictionary.
This course will continue the practice of introducing you simultaneously to formal Arabic along with one
variety of spoken Arabic [either ​MaSri​ o
                                         ​ r ​Shaami ​depending on your instructor’s choice]. Our aim here is
to prepare you to function in a range of situations and expose you to the varieties of Arabic and the
many ways in which these varieties interact in real-life communication. In so doing, we embrace a
dynamic view of Arabic reflecting authentic communication with and among native speakers across
various contexts and geographical areas in the Arab world. While it is impossible to capture all the
nuances of spoken Arabic in a single course, you will be introduced to tools that will enable you to
function successfully within this exciting sociolinguistic environment.
IMPORTANT COURSE POLICIES:
Academic Honesty:
    ➢ Do your own work.
    ➢ Using any means to obtain homework answers without doing the work, getting help from a
        fluent Arabic speaker, using ​Google Translate,​ u​ sing​ ​Al-Kitaab Answer Key​, ​or ​having your work
        checked​ ​by anyone other than your instructors ​before submitting it are all violations of the UT
        Honor Code and will be treated accordingly. These ​and any other​ academically dishonest
        behaviors will not be tolerated. ​If you are in doubt of whether you are breaking this policy,
        please ask. Your honesty will be appreciated.
    ➢ You are encouraged to study and work on homework assignments together; however, each
        student must participate fully in doing the work and submit his/her own individual answers.
        Doing otherwise violates the UT Honor Code and may result in disciplinary action.
    UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
    ➢ The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your
        own, or that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code.
    ➢ All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent, or 2) who have had schooling in an
        Arabic-speaking country, or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at
        UT prior to enrollment in this course must contact the Arabic Coordinator, Olla Al-Shalchi at
        olla@austin.utexas.edu immediately to determine whether they can be placed in this course.
        Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Language:


     ➢ Arabic is the language of our classroom; ​you are expected to speak only in Arabic from the time
         you enter the classroom.​ If you think you need to use English, please ask permission first.
         Controlling the urge to blurt out even a few words in English is an important part of keeping
         your brain in “Arabic-mode” and of maintaining our intensive learning environment. You will
         have the option of using English in office hours.
Classroom Conduct:
     ➢ Use of laptops (unless requested by the instructor) and cell phones is not permitted. ​Please
         put cell phones in silent mode (not just vibrate) and keep them in your backpack. Having your
         cell phone/laptop/ tablets out during class will result in deductions from your participation
         grade.
     ➢ Please ​do not chew gum or eat in class​, as this prevents you from speaking! Drinks in spill-proof
         mugs and bottles are fine.
GRADE DISTRIBUTION & COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
         Attendance & Participation                    15%
         Homework Assignments                          15%
         Homework Corrections                          5%
         Tests                                         18%
         Language Partner Assignment                   2%
         Online Quizzes                                5%
         Writing Portfolio & Corrections               10%
         Final Skit                                    5%
         Cultural Project                              5%
         Final Oral Interview                          5%
         Final Exam                                    15%
GRADE DISTRIBUTION/COURSE REQUIREMENTS IN DETAIL:
1. ​Attendance & Participation:​ (15%)
Attendance Policies:
     ➢ Daily attendance is mandatory.
     ➢ If you are absent from class you will receive a “0” for that day’s attendance and participation.
         Your ​lowest 3 grades for attendance and participation will be dropped when calculating your
         final grade at the end of the semester​.
     ➢ More than ten absences—whatever the reason—will result in an "F" for the course. This is a
         department policy and no exceptions will be made.


     ➢ Please inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as possible ​before—not after—​the
          class you will miss. The absence will not be excused but informing your instructor of an absence
          helps considerably in planning for daily class activities.
     ➢ If you are ill and cannot come to class, do your best to contact your instructor before class and
          to stay caught up on class. Check with a classmate to see what you missed.
Tardiness Policy:
Arriving late to class is disruptive, so please make every effort to be in class and ready to start working
when class begins. Attendance and participation points will be deducted for tardiness as follows: arrival
during first 5 mins. of class = 1 Pt.; during first 10 mins. = 2 Pts.; during first 15 mins. = 3 Pts.; during first
20 mins. = 4 Pts. If you arrive more than 20 mins. late for class you will receive a “0” for that day’s class
participation and attendance and it will count as an absence in applying the absence policy.
Class time will be devoted to ​activating​ the vocabulary and structures that you have prepared at home
through your homework. At least two thirds of class time will be spent doing activities in pairs and small
groups. Thus, attendance and active participation in class is paramount for significant language
proficiency gains and good in-class performance. This part of your grade will be based on a daily
“attendance and participation” rating assigned by your instructor and TA according to the following
criteria:
  5- You are ​actively​ engaged in developing your Arabic proficiency and communicating ​in Arabic as
      much as possible​ with your partner/classmates/teachers from the moment you walk into the class
      until you leave it. Full credit will be given when you:
                   i. Are ready to begin class on time,
                  ii. Are well prepared for the class. This means that you have listened to recorded
                      materials on the companion web site/CD, learned the new vocabulary well enough
                      to be ready to activate it in class without referring to your book, read the grammar
                      explanations carefully and done the homework drills based on these explanations
                      before coming to class,
                iii.  Submit fully completed homework at the beginning of class,
                 iv.  Are alert,
                  v.  Participate actively when we are working together as a class,
                 vi.  Make maximum use of pair/group work time by
                           a) understanding the learning objectives of tasks assigned,
                           b) staying focused on those objectives,
                           c) continuing to work with your partner on the task objectives even if you
                                “finish” an assigned task before the allotted time is up (Ask your TA or
                                instructor for additional instructions if you aren’t sure what to do next), and
                vii.  Maintain the “Arabic as much as possible” policy.
  4-  You are present but lacking in one of the above criteria for full credit in participation.
  3-  You are present but lacking in two of the criteria.
  2-  You are present but lacking in three of the above criteria.
  1-  You are present but lacking in more than three of the above criteria. For instance, you come late to
      class, submit incomplete homework, use English to say something that you could say in Arabic and
      are not focused on the assigned task during group work.
  1- You are absent or more than 20 minutes late.


2. ​Homework Assignments ​(15%)
To prepare for the learning that takes place through practice in class, you will listen to, read and study
new material at home. This material will not be presented in class. Expect to spend an average of two
hours on learning new material, writing homework, and reviewing every night. Note that the assigned
homework at the companion website is required homework​. Failure to complete that online portion of
the homework will result in points being deducted from your homework grade.
Homework assignments (online and written) should be submitted by the start of class. Late homework
assignments will not be accepted without prior permission from your instructor. When submitting
homework:
           1. Write your name in Arabic.
           2. Write the homework number​ (from assignment schedule).
           3. Hand-write your assignments, unless instructed otherwise on the weekly schedule. The
               reason is to work on improving handwriting and increase familiarity with the Arabic script.
           4. Staple pages together or use a paperclip
           5. Double space. This gives your instructor and TA room to provide feedback.
           Failure to do any of the above may result in points lost.
Pay close attention to the instructor and TA’s comments on your assignments, and follow up promptly in
office hours or after class if you have questions about your homework grade.
Homework assignments will be evaluated on ​a scale of 1 to 5​ (5= excellent; 4= good but not your best
effort; 3= mediocre; 2= poor; 1= very poor). Your homework will be rated on the overall quality of your
work, not merely on the number of correct or incorrect answers. Note that you do not have to get
everything 100% correct on your homework in order to get a “5” but each assignment should reflect 1)
the time you have spent studying the new material and examples, and 2) your best effort to use that
new material in your work.
Your l​owest three (3) homework ratings​ will be dropped when calculating your final grade.
We expect you to write out your homework assignment ​in full sentences​. You will not receive full credit
for submitting only the words from a fill-in-the-blank exercise or submitting a Xeroxed copy of the
exercise from the book. The aim of the homework exercises is not only to build your vocabulary, but also
to recycle and reinforce the vocabulary and grammatical structures that you already know. By writing
out the exercise in full, you will notice details of the language (such as spelling and grammatical details)
that you may have missed the first time around. Furthermore, you incorporate your new vocabulary in
context rather than producing a simple list, and you increase your writing speed. Because a simple list
only meets one aim of the exercise, we consider it incomplete, and you may lose up to one point on
your homework grade for this reason.
Be sure your work on the homework assignments reflects your best effort and preparation. If you have
any questions about how an assignment will be graded, please ask your instructor.


A note about A​l-kitaabtextbook.com​ Companion website:
Put your best effort into the work you do on the website. Your instructors have access to records from
the website of how you perform on each assigned exercise on the website. Last semester, we found that
some students were clicking the “submit” button before actually attempting to answer any of the
questions. Presumably this is because they wanted to have the answers given so as to reproduce them
on their next attempt. ​You will NOT learn this way​.
The learning process involves you reading the explanation and examples of the vocabulary and grammar
in the book, attempting answers in the drills on the web site based on what you understand and then
getting feedback on your understanding so that you can adjust that understanding. If you do not make
an attempt, but simply copy the answers given, you are not developing that understanding, and hence
not learning! Please know that we will be monitoring this situation. If you do your homework on the
web this way, you will not receive credit for it. We are implementing this policy in order to give you an
incentive to do what is best for your learning.
Also, please note that, when doing the drills on ​Al-Kitaab​ companion website, ​you are free to redo any
drill as many times as you wish​ to help you improve your percentage of correct answers. So, take
advantage of the fact that you can re-attempt any drill many times before you decide to move to
another drill. When you complete a drill, make sure that you see the big green ​   ✓​mark when you are
done; otherwise the drill will be marked as incomplete on the teacher’s​ ​page.
3. ​Homework Corrections​: (5%)
Mistakes on homework are a natural and useful part of the learning process. For you to really learn from
mistakes, you need to go back and correct them. When you submit your homework the first time, your
instructor or TA will underline or circle the mistakes and label them with correction symbols using the
correction code posted on Canvas. For several assignments, you will be asked to make corrections
based on this feedback.
When correcting an assignment, go over it carefully and in full. Correct mistakes (using a ​different color
ink or pencil) on the original paper ​next to​ what you wrote originally. Be sure you are putting your best
effort into corrections. Please submit corrections according to your schedule; late corrections will not be
accepted. You will either receive a grade of 0-5 for your corrections based on the quality of your work
and the improvement demonstrated in the corrected version of your homework. If the corrections are
not complete, you will not be given full credit. If you have any questions about a correction you aren’t
sure about, check with your instructor or TA before the due date. They will be happy to help.
4. ​Tests (18%)
During the semester we will have ​three​ written tests after completing two chapters in Alkitaab. The
three tests will be:
Test 1: Chapters 5 &6
Test 2: Chapters 7 & 8
Test 3: Chapters 9 & 10
Exact dates of the exams will be written on the schedules with at least a week advance notice.


Each major written test may include vocabulary, grammar, and a skill-focused section (such as reading,
listening, or writing). You will be asked to write short vowels when you are tested on vocabulary, so
please plan your studying accordingly.
If you will miss a test, contact your instructor as soon as you know that you will be missing it. Requests
for make-ups will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
5. ​Language Partner Assignment​: (2%)
During the semester you will be required to meet with one or two other students from your class and
have a 20-30 minute conversation entirely in Arabic. Each student is required to participate in the
conversation for about 10 minutes. The conversation must be recorded and submitted to your instructor
along with a reflective assignment that will be posted on Canvas. This assignment will be due prior to the
final oral interview to help you prepare.
6. ​Online Quizzes​: (5%)
You will take a number of online quizzes this semester. These quizzes may take a variety of shapes- fill in
the blank, simple translation, and they will not be announced ahead of time. You are responsible for
keeping up with and reviewing vocabulary and grammar on a regular basis and should expect a quiz on
any given class period.
7. ​Writing Portfolio & Portfolio Corrections​: (10%)
This semester you will create a writing portfolio of essays in Arabic to practice the new vocabulary and
structures you are learning in class. The first draft will be commented on by a writing buddy from class
or by your instructors and returned to you for revision. When you submit the revised version, please
submit the ​original​ version also so that your instructor can evaluate the extent to which you were able
to make the requested revisions.
We expect to do ​five​ writing portfolio entries this semester. The due dates and guidelines for your
portfolio entries and revisions will be specified in your homework schedule. Late portfolio submissions
will not be accepted. All entries (original and revised) need to be ​typed​ in Arabic and a hard copy must
be submitted in class at the beginning of class on the due date.
Your revised writing entry will be graded on a scale of 1 to 5 as follows:
              ●5= your writing 1) meets the length requirement, 2) communicates your ideas successfully;
                3) uses new vocabulary with correct meaning; 4) uses the required # of new vocabulary
                words; 5) uses new structures we are learning, and 5) shows improvement from the first
                draft.
              ●4= does not meet one of the above criteria needed to earn a 5
              ●3= does not meet two of the above criteria
              ●2= does not meet three of the above criteria
              ●1= does not meet any of the above criteria
8. Cultural Project: (5%)
Students will be required to work on a cultural project throughout the term. They can choose the


subject matter of the project depending on their interests such as food, gender, family relations,
economy, pop culture, economy etc. It will be presented during the last month of the term. The project
is worth 5% of your entire grade. The projects will be group projects, where students are required to
work in groups of three. There will be a language component to the project. The students will be
required to explore the “deep culture” and not only the “surface culture”, which will be facilitated by
prompts and guidelines provided by the instructor.
9. ​Final Skit:​ (5%)
During the end of the semester students will be presenting a skit which will be incorporating as much
vocabulary, grammar, and cultural expressions as possible. More information will be provided after
Spring Break.
10. ​Final Interview:​ (5%)
We will also have a final interview, worth 5% of the final grade, to be held during the last week of class.
More information will be given near the end of the semester.
11. ​Final Examination:​ (15%)
The final examination will be comprehensive and will test reading, writing, and listening in addition to
vocabulary and grammar.
The final examination dates will be announced as soon as they are set by the university. Email your
instructor by May 1st if you need to take the makeup final. Requests to take the makeup final will be
considered on a case-by- case basis.
Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies
         Number/Letter grade equivalents are:
   Number           Letter     Number          Letter      Number        Letter       Number        Letter
   94 – 100           A        87 - 89.9         B+       77 – 79.9        C+         67 – 69.9       D+
                               84 - 86.9          B       74 – 76.9         C         64 – 66.9       D
   90 – 93.9          A-       80 – 83.9         B-       70 – 73.9        C-         60 – 63.9       D-
●    Grades on the border between two letter grades (89.9 for instance) may or may not be rounded up
     to the next higher letter grade, at the instructor’s discretion.
●    You must earn a C or higher​ t​ o continue to the next UT Arabic course. Thus, if you take this course
     pass/fail, you will not be eligible to continue to the next Arabic course. Auditing is not permitted and
     incompletes will not be given in this course.
●    Your instructor will record your grades regularly. It is your responsibility to check your grades
     regularly. If you notice any grade that you have a question about, you are welcome to discuss it with
     your instructor no later than one week from the date on which the grade is posted. If your question


    concerns a grade you received on paper, please bring the particular assignment (homework,
    corrections, writing portfolio entries, etc.) to your instructor to discuss it.
●   This syllabus is subject to change. However, any changes will be brought to the attention of students
    in writing via e-mail communication and also verbally in class.
                                          HOW TO DO WELL IN THIS CLASS
This class is a group effort​! We can make much more progress as a class than as individuals by creating
an Arabic-speaking community, of which you will be a fully participating member. The following
suggestions will help you get the most out of the course:
1. Be an active learner.​ The approach we use here at UT depends on you learning new material at
    home, and encourages you to use analogy and logical thinking to master grammar a little bit at a
    time. You will learn better and remember more when you are able to answer your own questions.
    Active learners often have questions that reflect their engagement with the material. Take initiative
    in class and on homework: this effort will be rewarded both in your grade and in your language
    ability. Feel free to write us questions on specific language features in your daily homework—just
    remember to be specific.
2. Put yourself out there. ​Language learning requires you to make mistakes, both in your assignments
    and in front of your peers. In this class, you will never be penalized for a mistake that you make
    when trying something new. You will be corrected in class. Feedback from your instructors is
    intended to support you as you develop your language proficiency, and not as criticism.
3.   ​Personalize vocabulary​. You will remember vocabulary when you “own” it. Make words relevant
    to your life by thinking of what you can say about yourself with them. Write extra sentences that
    are meaningful to you so that the vocabulary becomes “yours” and expresses something about your
    world.
4. Prepare for active participation in class by anticipating what you will do​. You should soon be able
    to predict what kinds of activities will be performed and how. As you study new material and
    complete assignments before each class, think about how you will use the new material. This will
    help you to prepare for the activities we’ll be doing in class.
5. Develop your memorization skills​. Experiment with different techniques, combining listening,
    speaking and writing together as much as possible. Cross-train: Try the following and find what
    combination of techniques works best for you:
              ▪ listening to words and repeating them aloud—not once but ten or twenty times, until
                  the word is easy for you to pronounce
              ▪ using flashcards—but without English definitions, and make yourself say the word aloud
                  and use it in a phrase or sentence
              ▪ writing out vocabulary over and over—but remember to pronounce it out loud while
                  you write!
              ▪ putting the words in sentences or a paragraph or story
              ▪ studying in groups and quizzing each other
              ▪ using word association techniques


6. Study out loud, and repeat new words many times​. The only way to train your brain and your
     mouth to speak this language is by doing it aloud. Certain muscles need to be strengthened before
     they’ll be able to produce some Arabic sounds correctly; studying aloud and exaggerating these
     sounds will help your muscles develop! Pronounce new vocabulary words at least fifteen times, until
     you can say them easily and it feels natural.
7. Guess​. Think about how you acquired your native language: you did not use a dictionary. Rather,
     you learned new words by guessing their meaning from context, and you learned how to produce
     sentences by imitating and using patterns. As adult learners, we can take some shortcuts, but
     guessing skills remain central to language acquisition. Do not leave blanks on the homework, but do
     not allow yourself to become frustrated; give it your best shot, and move on. If you are not sure you
     have understood a sentence in the homework, you may write a translation or a question on your
     homework for your instructor to check or answer.
8. Correct yourself. ​Good language learners learn from their own successes and mistakes and those of
     others. Correcting mistakes is an essential part of the learning process. When your instructors and
     classmates are speaking, be an active listener by listening both to what they are saying and how they
     are saying it. Correcting the mistakes of others in your head or in your notebook is also good
     practice.
9. Extend language learning beyond the classroom. ​Practice Arabic as much as possible. Study with
     classmates: ask each other questions, brainstorm about assignments, go over materials –and do this
     in Arabic as much as possible. Look out for films and cultural activities on campus and around town
     and go attend them.
10. Work with our instructional support team. ​The UT Arabic program offers you a unique opportunity
     to work with a talented instructional support team made up of some of our successful
     undergraduate Arabic language learners. Take advantage of this opportunity and schedule regular
     appointments with them. They can help you understand the linguistic and cultural aspects of Arabic
     and provide you with opportunities to practice your Arabic. In addition, you may ask them about
     strategies that helped them in their journey of learning Arabic. Your instructor will provide you with
     their names, schedules, and contact information.
Principles for Group Activities
There can be no language without community. In our class community, respect for each other at all
times will ensure a positive and fruitful learning experience. We will spend at least 75% of class time in
small group or pair activities so that each one of you gets the maximum possible time to participate and
practice. During these activities, the instructor plays the role of personal trainer. Learning a language is
a lot like going to the gym: the personal trainer guides you and pushes you to do your best, but you
have to do the work to get the benefit.
Please keep in mind the following principles for group work:
− Speak in Arabic. If you need help, ask for it from your classmates, TA or instructor.
− Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them: each of you can learn ​with​ and
     from​ everyone else.
− Work with different people on a regular basis.


−    Come prepared. Don’t be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to fully participate
     in the work.
−    Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to finish. Most activities are designed to elicit
     creative play with vocabulary and structures on which we are working. Take advantage of class time
     by pushing yourself to be creative and say and write as much as you can. If your group finishes a task
     before others, use your remaining time constructively with your partner and continue working on
     your Arabic.
−    The instructor may call time before everyone is finished. If your group does not finish or you still
     have questions, ask your instructor after class or during office hours.
IMPORTANT DATES
Friday, January 25th is the last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in registration
require the approval of the department chair and usually the student’s dean.
Monday, April 8​th​ is 1) the last day a graduate student may change registration in a class to or from a
credit/no credit basis, 2) the last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval,
withdraw from the University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, non-academic
reasons, 3) the last day an undergraduate student may change registration in a class to or from a
pass/fail basis.
IMPORTANT POLICIES
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your own, or
that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. Please see here for further details
regarding the UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking
country or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to enrollment in
this course must take the departmental placement examination for Arabic before beginning their study
of Arabic at UT. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students
(471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be
presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations
needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an exam the student should remind
the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed. See website below for more
information: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Religious holy days
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day MUST inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. The
Department of Middle Eastern Studies’ policy allows students to miss a maximum of 3 consecutive class
periods for religious observance.
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is


created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work
and announcements. Canvas is available at: http://canvas.utexas.edu Support is provided by the ITS
Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of
this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html​.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal​.
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may
not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.”
Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault
It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin to foster a campus environment that is free from
intimidation and one in which students may be educated to their fullest potential. Therefore, the
University will not tolerate any forms of harassment, physical abuse, threats of violence, physical
assault, or any form of sexual assault, including but not limited to acquaintance or date rape. Title IX
makes it clear that violence and harassment based on sex and gender is a Civil Rights offense subject to
the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to offenses against other
protected categories such as race, national origin, LGBTQ identity, etc. If you or someone you know has
been harassed or assaulted in any way, you can find the appropriate resources here:
Voices Against Violence Program
(512) 471-3515 ​for information, counseling and advocacy.
UT Austin Police:
http://www.utexas.edu/police/
Dean Of Students:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/
http://www.utexas.edu/ogs/student_services/ethics/harassment.html
Student Counseling & Health Services
http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Campus Carry
1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do not
attempt to question or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to handle this
situation.
2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited, including
some portions of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible for knowing the
locations that exclude concealed handguns and to plan their daily activities carefully.


3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus.
"About" the person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or
handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it
without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have
enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
4. All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times when the
consequence of your activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are going to a
Rec Sports area, have a class that requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact with other
students, you might expose the handgun. Remember that there is no storage on campus except in a
privately owned vehicle.
5. Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand those
passions.
However, regardless of your opinion about the legislation, you are required to follow the laws laid out
by the State of Texas, and the policies of The University of Texas at Austin. We also ask that everyone
show respect toward other members of the university community who have different views.
