              Course Title: ANT 662 – Field archaeology
Location: Taught in Northwest Portugal on Bronze Age/Iron Age/Roman Period sites (castros)
Dates: May 28 – June 27, 2019
Field Director: Dr. Mariah Wade
          Teaching Assistants:
          Jordan Bowers
          Elizabeth de Marigny
Pre- requisites:
Introduction to Archaeological Studies I: Prehistoric Archaeology Ant 304/Ary 301 or consent of the
instructor.
Course Description: This is four-week field methods course that trains students in traditional and new
archaeological field methods and techniques (survey; excavation; stratigraphic profiling; mapping;
drawing; Geographic Information Systems (GIS). The course exposes students to different techniques and
ways of thinking about archaeology and archaeological problems and it challenges students to think
innovatively about their work and their experiences. Students will learn about the archaeology of Iberia
from the Bronze Age through the Roman Period and will be encouraged to work on archaeological
materials from local castros for their Honors Thesis, MA Thesis and PhDs. This course also aims to
expose the students to a foreign culture, and promote interaction between the UT students and local
archaeologists, museum staff and scholars. The mixture of activities in the program, including several
cultural and archaeological field trips, is intended to provide ample learning opportunities and a good
experience abroad.
This course is proud to carry two UT FLAGS: The Ethics and Leadership Flag and
the Global Cultures Flag.
" Ethics and Leadership courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for making ethical
decisions in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the process of applying ethical reasoning to
real-life situations."
" Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United
States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present."
Texts: Iberian Archaeology Reader - supplied in pdf form on UTBox.
Evaluation and Grading: Students are required to be on site according to the schedule, perform assigned
field tasks, do lab work, go on field trips, know the contents of the assigned readings, attend lectures, take
part in the discussions and complete field chores. Students are required also to do the assignments related to
the two Flags this course carries. Students are to behave according to UT rules at all times and
inappropriate behavior will affect grades.
Note: The following schedule shows the approximate sequence and coverage of field chores per week, but
many of the techniques and learning procedures will take place simultaneously as different groups of
students are engaged in different activities that have to take place concurrently. All archeological field
work assignments and trips may be re-scheduled due to weather conditions and unforeseen events.
Weekly Schedule
Week 1


Introduction; visit to the site; review excavation history of the site or sites; field work; lay out an
excavation unit; triangulation and leveling; troweling; recording; note-taking;
basics of survey techniques; Total Station mapping and GPS mapping; excavation; screening; bagging and
processing of artifacts; profiling; site, feature, and artifact completion of forms; field trips.
Week 2
Field work; Total Station site and feature mapping; soil sampling and basic analysis; stratigraphy;
workshop; field trips.
Week 3
Field work; basics of site photography; chronological methods; dating methods, review of field notes;
review of field logs and photographic logs; Experimental Archaeology (ceramics); field trips; workshop;
Week 4
Field work (includes all procedures learned in previous weeks); laboratory cleaning and labeling of
artifacts, identification and storage protocols; basics of conservation and reconstruction; completion of
units, profiles, maps and processing of artifacts; clean and prepare site for closing; review of field notes,
site, feature, soil samples and artifact forms, field and photographic logs; field trips;
Activities for student groups during the four-week course include:
      •   Site gridding
      •   Triangulation techniques
      •   Set up and use of Total Station
      •   Total Station Mapping
      •   GPS Mapping
      •   Mapping floor plans, wall profiles
      •   Trowelling
      •   Square and feature excavation
      •   Screening
      •   Bagging and processing of artifacts
      •   Completion and processing of site, level and feature forms
      •   Production of site maps
      •   Collection of soil and radiocarbon samples
      •   Preliminary soil analyses
      •   Inventory and cataloging of fauna, flora, lithics and ceramics
      •   Lab protocols for cleaning and storing of material culture artifacts
      •   Basics of conservation and reconstruction of artifacts
      •   Basics of site photography
      •   Intensive exposure to northwestern Iberian archeology through lectures, visits to archaeological
          sites with on-site lectures; visits to museum and laboratory collections
      •   Exposure to the geography and geology of the region
      •   Intensive exposure to the regional culture and history.
