                      NTR 312: Intro to Nutritional Science
                           Summer 2019 Unique #85880
                         MTWTH 10:00-12:00 in GEA 100
Instructor: Ms. Drew Hays MA, RD, LD
Email: drew.hays@austin.utexas.edu
Phone: 512-471-2800
Office Hours: Wednesday 12:00-2:00, and by appointment
Office Location: GEA 331
Required Corse Materials:
Text:
Whitney, EN, Rolfes SR. Understanding Nutrition, 15th edition
Available for purchase at the CoOp, and rental or purchase at:
https://www.cengage.com/c/understanding-nutrition-15e-whitney?filterBy=Student
Squarecap:
SquareCap is a web-based classroom response system that engages students to actively
participate during class instruction. SquareCap will be used to engage students in required
discussions as well as to administer in-class extra credit quizzes.
Subscription is mandatory
https://info.squarecap.com/
Course Description
Intro to Nutritional Science provides an overview of the science of nutrition. It is an
introductory course that covers food and its relationship to health, development, and
disease. Topics covered include components of food (carbohydrates, fats, proteins,
vitamins and minerals), their digestion, absorption, transport, and metabolism, their
sources in foods, effects of deficiency or excess, and the biological roles they play in the
body. Students learn the vital role of scientific inquiry in addressing currently pressing
problems such as the growing epidemic of obesity and chronic illnesses, including diabetes,
coronary heart disease, and cancer. Other nutrition-related conditions, such as eating
disorders and osteoporosis are also covered. This course conveys knowledge and skills that
are relevant and applicable to students’ lives, now and in the future.
The content of this course will be communicated by lecture, assigned readings, videos,
projects, activities, and group discussion. In addition, the instructor engages the class in
discussions of current theories and empirical research in nutrition, and answers questions
raised by students.
Quantitative methods are widely used in a variety of contexts. Students will learn formulas
for determining major constructs in nutrition such as body mass index, basal metabolic
rate, and total energy needs. Students will become familiar with making calculations
related to nutrient proportions in their diet and in the foods they eat.


Learning outcomes:
• Demonstrate fundamental nutrition knowledge related to macronutrients,
    micronutrients, digestion and absorption, nutrient function, dietary recommendations,
    food composition, and nutritional health.
• Apply basic dietary principles of adequacy, balance, variety and moderation in planning
    healthy menus.
• Critically evaluate food and nutrition information in the popular media and scientific
    literature.
• Assess an individual’s nutritional status and make recommendations to improve dietary
    habits and promote health.
Course Policies and Procedures
This course may present sensitive material that you may find offensive.
Canvas: http://canvas.utexas.edu/
    • Syllabus, announcements, assignments, and supplemental information will be
        posted on Canvas. Canvas should be checked regularly for course updates.
    • Grades will be posted in Canvas
            o Due to policies concerning the Family Education Rights and Privacy Act
                (FERPA), information about grades cannot be emailed.
            o Questions regarding grades should be addressed in person with instructor or
                TA during office hours.
Classroom Behavior
Computers/ tablets: Students may use a computer/tablet for taking notes and answering
lecture content questions on SquareCap. Students are requested to refrain from using a
computer for other purposes (e.g., viewing non-class related websites and materials such
as Facebook, email, materials for other classes, etc.) in order to minimize distractions in
class. You may be asked to put away your computer at any time per the instructor or TA’s
request.
Persistent distracting or disrespectful behavior including but not limited to talking,
sleeping, and cell phone/computer usage for non- class related activities will lead to
dismissal from the course and referral to the Office of the Dean of Students for counseling.
Grades
Grading Scale: Final grades are based on 500 total points. Final point assignments
will be rounded to the nearest whole number.
    • Quizzes (6 @ 50 points each)                                      = 300 points
    • Midterm and Final Exam 50 points each)                            = 100 points
    • Dietary analysis project                                          = 50 points
    • Class Activities/Discussions                                     = 50 points
                                                                  Total = 500 points
Quizzes: There will be 6 total quizzes (50 points each) throughout the semester,
administered via canvas.
    • Quizzes will be available from 12:01am to 11:59pm on their scheduled day. They
        will be closed thereafter.
    • You will be allowed 1- 45 minute attempt at each quiz.


    •  No make-up or early quizzes will be offered.
    •  You are expected to work alone on the quizzes; notes and books are allowed.
    •  Quiz responses may be reviewed in person with the TA in office hours for ONE
       WEEK ONLY following the close of the quiz.
    •  Quizzes may not be preserved in any way; multiple windows are not allowed. See
       academic integrity section for penalties should this policy be broken.
Midterm and Final Exams: Comprehensive midterm and final exams (50 points each) will
be held during class time. Material will be presented in a case study format. Students will
apply their knowledge to ‘real life’ scenarios. Questions will be multiple choice and
administered via scantron.
    • Student IDs will be checked when handing in each exam.
    • You will not be allowed to take the exam if you are more than 15 minutes late, or if
       another student has finished the exam, and has left the room.
    • Only ONE pencil, your UT ID card, a non-programmable calculator (out of the
       sleeve) and the test should be on your desk. No hats, hoodies, pencil bags, markers,
       water bottles, cell phones etc. Smart watches must be removed and put away. If
       one of these items is used, or becomes distracting, you will be asked to leave and
       receive zero points on the exam.
    • You may not leave and return into the room during an exam.
    • All backpacks and personal items must be placed at the front of the room during an
       exam.
    • Exams will be available for review for ONE WEEK ONLY in office hours, or by
       appointment following the grade posting on canvas.
    • Absolutely no cell phones, computers, other electronics, or note taking of any kind is
       allowed while reviewing exams. See academic integrity section for penalties should
       this policy be broken.
Attendance/ Activities: There will be several interactive activities throughout the
semester. These may be announced, or unannounced. Responses may be recorded via
squarecap. No make-up quizzes/exams/assignments will be provided, no exceptions.
Students are required to be present in class and logged onto UT Wi-Fi when using
squarecap to receive any credit. Squarecap scores will not be adjusted following
submission. If you are late to class, or not logged onto Wi-Fi, no points will be recorded.
Extra Credit Quizzes: There will be several unannounced pop quizzes administered
through squarecap checking for correctness and/or attendance. The quiz points will be
added to the final 500-point score. No make-up quizzes/exams/assignments will be
provided, no exceptions. Students are required to be present in class and logged onto
UT Wi-Fi when using squarecap receive any credit. Squarecap scores will not be adjusted
following submission. If you are late to class, or not logged onto Wi-Fi, you will not receive
credit. Extra credit points are offered to offset losses of points for any reason making
makeups of any assignment, quiz, or activity unnecessary.
Final grade calculation
A      450-500 points                 C      375-399 points               F      0-339 points
B       400-449 points                D      350-374 points


NO GIFT POINTS WILL BE GIVEN AT THE END OF THE SEMESTER FOR ‘BORDERLINE’
GRADES. You must be proactive in this course. DO NOT wait until the end of the semester
to get help if needed!
Late policies for assignments: No late submissions of any kind will be accepted, no
exceptions. Quizzes will not reopen after the close date for any reason. No make-up exams
will be offered. Students must be present in class and logged onto UT Wi-Fi to receive
points for discussions or extra credit.
Dietary Analysis Project: The purpose of this exercise is to provide students with
experience in collecting and analyzing data, as well as provide useful information about
your own nutrient intake. Each student will keep a food diary for 3 days and then run a
quantitative analysis of his/her diet for a variety of nutrients. Results of the 3-day dietary
analysis will be compared to established guidelines to assess the adequacy of the student’s
diet in providing the necessary macro- and micro-ingredients to support good health.
Based on this assessment, students will determine changes that could be made to achieve a
healthier diet, including which food options (and in what amount) would remedy
deficiencies, and which foods should be reduced or eliminated.
Class Attendance and Preparation:
Attendance at ALL class periods is expected and essential to success in the course. Lecture
slides will be posted on canvas but WILL NOT include everything discussed in class. You
are expected to complete the reading BEFORE each class period. A portion of your extra
credit quiz points will be attendance. Assignments and exams will include some material
that is presented in class and is not covered in the text. Daily class attendance and
participation will assure the maximum possible points in the course. Point loss will result
from nonattendance; these points cannot be recuperated.
Email Correspondence
Email is a convenient tool but should be used sparingly and appropriately for
correspondence with your instructor and TA. Office hours are for discussing grades, course
content etc. Should you have questions, or need help regarding any course material, office
hours or a separate appointment are the only appropriate platforms for these discussions.
The instructor and TA will disregard unprofessional or inappropriate emails or canvas
messages.
Academic Integrity: Honesty and integrity must be practiced in all class activities.
Cheating will not be tolerated. Violations of University rules on academic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties including possible failure of the course and dismissal from
the University. The Students for Judicial Services site has important information regarding
academic integrity and standards of conduct. Students are expected to read, fully
understand, and abide by this content.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
The least severe penalty for scholastic dishonesty will be a grade of F. ALL instances
of scholastic dishonesty will be reported to the Dean’s office and will appear on your
official record.
No exam/quiz question, or assignment answer can be preserved through any means
whatsoever, including writing following the exam. Sharing exam questions, assignments,


lecture slides, or any other course material via e-mail, google doc, photographs, ‘academic
libraries’, course sharing websites, facebook (or other social media sites), or any other
internet means is strictly prohibited. Violations of these policies are considered scholastic
dishonesty and penalties outlined above will apply.
All assignments will be reviewed for plagiarism as well as wording consistencies with other
submissions from both current and previous semesters. Current software makes
plagiarism easily identifiable. Submit your own work, or face penalties for scholastic
dishonesty.
Religious Holy Day accommodations: By UT Austin policy, students must notify the
instructor of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day. Should an assignment be due on one of these days, it must be submitted
prior to your absence to avoid penalty for late submission.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities
(512) 471-6259, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
