ANT 394M: Sensory ethnography
Spring 2020
Wednesday 9-12
Marina Peterson
marina.peterson@austin.utexas.edu
OH: Th 2-4 and by appt.
Sensory ethnography encompasses ethnographic research with an emphasis on the senses to media
made with an attention to the haptic. In this class we take a broad approach to sensory ethnography,
drawing out ways of doing, thinking, and making. Hence we will read, go on ethnographic outings, write,
and create. Emphasis is on sensing as a way of engaging the world and one another, on the immanence
of sensation, on the ephemeral and atmospheric, and on a more than human sensorium – all concerns
that carry an ethical charge in the current climate.
Readings
The following books have been ordered through the Co-op:
Laplantine, François. 2015. The Life of the Senses: Introduction to a Modal Anthropology. London:
          Bloomsbury.
Luiselli, Valeria. 2019. Lost Children Archive. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Marder, Michael. 2016. Grafts: Writings on Plants. Minneapolis, MN: Univocal.
Toop, David. 2004. Haunted Weather: Music, Silence and Memory. London: Serpent’s Tail.
Paterson, Mark. 2007. The Senses of Touch: Haptics, Affects and Technologies. London: Bloomsbury
Most of the rest are available as PDFs on Canvas or elsewhere. Some are books I have, others are on
reserve in PCL.
Requirements
Reading
Read following your own thread and interest. Skim, slow down and dwell on provocative passages,
make connections across the readings. Consider aspect reading (from Davide Panagia):
          “An attention to the aesthetic requires one to come to terms with the fact that a work doesn’t
          simply represent arguments, but produces affects and effects too. Thus, aspect-reading is a
          genre of reading that acknowledges the incomplete, fragmentary, and untrustworthy nature of all
          reading practices, including the most attentive and analytic ones. … [I]t is advised that you not
          read for argument but attend to the moments that strike your curiosities and remark on those
          aspects in such a way as to create a network of relations between experiences, authors, texts,
          tuitions, and vistas.”
Two students each week will work together to provide us with a roadmap through the readings.
Everyone should engage fully, bringing notes, brainstorming inspired by the reading, other texts, images,
sounds, smells, and so on. Bring something to share, and a readiness to discuss the texts in themselves
and as openings.
Making
We will be making things throughout the semester, in and with media as inspired by ethnographic
encounters. You will also develop a longer media + writing piece as a final project. This should be driven
by a sensorial ethnographic engagement with a site of your choice (your dissertation research ideally, or
something related). The parameters of this are open ended and will be developed throughout the
semester, though the writing should be in relation to the media (as opposed to explanatory). The ethos is
one of play and experimentation. Don’t be afraid to risk failure. Aim to create something robust. We
might also make something together.


phenomenality of sense
Jan 22
openings
Ingold, “Textility of Making”
Latour, “Sensitizing”
Perec, “Approaches to What?”
Paul Stoller, Sensuous Scholarship
         “Prologue” and “The Sorcerer’s Body”
Ingold / Pink / Howes debate
Ingold, “Stop, Look and listen!”
Pink and Howes debate, “The future of sensory anthropology/the anthropology of the senses”
Ingold, “Worlds of sense and sensing the world: a response to Sarah Pink and David Howes
Jan 29
body-world
Aristotle, De Anima (On the Soul)
         “Sense-perception”
Laplantine, The Life of the Senses: Introduction to a Modal Anthropology
Merleau-Ponty, Phenomenology of Perception
         “Experience and objective thought: The problem of the body”
         “The body as object and mechanistic physiology”
         “The theory of the body is already a theory of perception”
         “Sense Experience”
Taussig, The Nervous System
         1. Why the Nervous System?
         8. Tactility and Distraction
Deleuze, “Painting and Sensation,” in Francis Bacon: The Logic of Sensation
Feb. 5
touch
Barad, “On Touching – The Inhuman That Therefore I Am”
Nancy, “Corpus,” in Corpus
Paterson, “sensory/motor”
Paterson, The Senses of Touch: Haptics, Affects, and Technologies
Seremetakis, Sensing the Everyday
         Pt. III Senses Revisited
Serres, “Veil,” in The Five Senses
Feb. 12
permeability
Agard-Jones, “Spray”
Ladd, “Bad Vibrations: Infrasound, Sonic Hauntings, and Imperceptible Politics,” in Acoustic City
Manning, “What if it Didn’t All Begin and End with Containment? Toward a Leaky Sense of Self”
Spahr, “The Connection of Everyone with Lungs”
Zardini, Sense of the City, excerpts
                                                                                                  2


Feb. 19
imperceptibility
FIELDTRIP – HOMEChem (unconfirmed)
Michelle Murphy, “Introduction,” in Sick Building Syndrome and the Problem of Uncertainty
Nash, “The Fruits of Ill-Health: Pesticides and Workers’ Bodies in Post-World War II California”
Shapiro, N. “Attuning to the Chemosphere: Domestic Formaldehyde, Bodily Reasoning, and the
          Chemical Sublime”
Twilley, “The Hidden Air Pollution in Our Homes,” The New Yorker
The Sensitives
Safe
                                                   Sound Studies Lecture Series (with No Idea Festival)
                                                                                 “High Vibration Resonance”
                                                                                     Zachary James Watkins
                                                                                        February 20, 12:30-2
                                                                              Sonic Ethnography, RLP 0.112
                                                                         Experimental sound workshop with
                                                                      Makoto Oshiro + Takahiro Kawaguchi
                                                                                            February 20, 3-5
                                                                 Digital Writing and Research Lab, PAR 102
                                                                                     Anechoic chamber tour
                                                                                         February 21, 2 p.m.
                                                                                               Foyer of ECG
                                                                  “3D Audio: Techniques and Applications”
                                                                                                Anne Guthrie
                                                                                            February 21, 4-5
                                                                               Acoustics Seminar, ETC 2.136
sensing beyond the human
Feb. 26
ticks, bats, and whales
Yusoff, “Insensible Worlds: Postrelational Ethics, Indeterminacy and the (K)nots of Relating”
von Uexküll, “A stroll through the worlds of animals and men: A picture book of invisible worlds”
Daughtry, “TURTLETALK”
Griffin, Listening in the Dark: The Acoustic Orientation of Bats and Men
Jones, “Sonic Ecology: The Undetectable Sounds of the City,” in The Acoustic City
Ritts, “Environmentalists abide: Listening to whale music – 1965–1985”
Songs of the Humpback Whale (1970)
                                                                                                           3


March 4
plants, insects, and stones
Hustak and Myers, “Involutionary Momentum: Affective Ecologies and the Sciences of Plant/Insect
         Encounters”
Myers, Becoming Sensor in Sentient Worlds
Povinelli, Geontologies: A Requiem to Late Liberalism
         “The Three Figures of Geontology”
         “Can Rocks Die? Life and Death Inside the Carbon Imaginary”
Hugh Raffles, “25 Years is a Long Time”
March 11
plant sense
FIELDTRIP – Tower Herbarium, 9-11
Hartigan, “How to Interview a Plant”
Karban, Plant Sensing and Communication
Marder, Grafts: Writings on Plants
Myers, “Conversations on Plant Sensing”
Myers, “Ungrid-able Ecologies”
March 25
technologies of sense
Doerksen, How to Make Sense: Sensory Modification in Grinder Subculture
Gabrys, How to Do Things with Sensors
Gabrys, “Sensing Practices”
Parisi, Archaeologies of Touch
Simondon, “On Techno-Aesthetics”
Listening with EMW detectors
                                                            AES/APLA Joint Spring 2020 Conference
                                                                                 March 26-28, 2020
listening in the anthropocene
April 1
atmospheric attunements
Choy and Zee, “Condition – Suspension”
Howe and Pandian, Lexicon for an Anthropocene Yet Unseen
Textures of the Anthropocene, Vapor volume
Phenomenographies. Describing Urban and Architectural Atmospheres. Special issue of Ambiences
April 8
echoes and sonic archives
GUEST LECTURE – Rupert Cox
“Echoes of life in Okinawa: a sonic ethnography”
Cox, “The Cave Mouth: listening to sound and voice in Okinawan war memory”
                                                                                                 4


Cox, “Walking Without Purpose: Sensations of History and Memory in Nagasaki City,” in Senses and
Sensation, Vol. 1
Cox, Irving, and Wright, Beyond Text?: Critical Practices and Sensory Anthropology
Recommended
Harnetty, “Earthquakes and frack-waste: sounds of extraction-related disaster in Appalachian Ohio”
Harnetty, “Shawnee, Ohio”
Luiselli, Lost Children Archive
          Pt. I: Family Soundscape
          Pt. IV: Lost Children Archive
April 15
elemental
FIELD RECORDING WORKSHOP – Andrew Garrison
Lane and Carlyle, In the Field: The Art of Field Recording
Parry, “An Underwater World of Walls: Machine Sensing, Maritime Sovereignty, and the Aesthetics of
Undersea Surveillance”
Toop, “Space and Memory,” in Haunted weather
Listen:
Toshiya Tsunoda
Luc Ferrari
April 22
weathering
Howes, The Sixth Sense Reader
Paterson, “Haptic geographies: Ethnography, haptic knowledges and sensuous dispositions”
Serres, “Boxes,” in The Five Senses
Starosielski, “Thermal Vision”
Yusoff and Gabrys, “Forecast Factory: Snow Globe and Weather Makers Weather Permitting”
April 29
“the boundary of life is quietly crossed”
GUEST LECTURE – Dario Robleto
Sagan et. al, Murmurs of Earth: The Voyager Interstellar Record
May 6
Final projects / wrapping up
                                                                                    DISTRIBUTE 2020
                                                                        SCA and SVA virtual conference
                                                                                            May 7, 8, 9
                                                                                                      5
