                                                                                                        1
Syllabus, Class Policies, and Schedule
Summer 2019 – RHE 309K: Rhetoric of Reality TV
Instructor: Michelle Rabe
Unique number: 83415
Class Time and Place: MTWRF 11:30 AM-1:00 PM, BEN 1.108
E-mail: mrabe@utexas.edu
Course Website: Canvas - http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Office: FAC 16
Office Hours: Mondays 9:30-11:30 AM, Fridays 1-2 PM, and by appointment
Course Description
In 1992, one brave TV show cut the script, lost the actors, and stopped being polite. With the
premiere of MTV’s The Real World, TV started being real. Drawing from some of its unscripted
documentary predecessors like PBS’s An American Family, The Real World featured non-actors
brought together to live in one house under constant recording. Its popularity has led to 31
subsequent seasons and multiple spinoff series, but its biggest claim to fame has been launching the
contemporary entertainment genre of reality TV. Since The Real World’s first season, reality TV
shows have come to dominate cable and network television alike, all featuring real lives in real
situations with real implications. From fly-on-the-wall shows to competition shows to dating shows,
reality TV programming has continued to expand and diversify, much to critical dissatisfaction.
Reality TV shows have come under scrutiny by critics who ask who puts the “real” in reality TV,
whose “realities” are being represented, and whether there is really any “reality” in the shows at all.
They question both the ethics of putting people’s lives under extreme, surveilled situations and the
shows’ allegedly unaltered realities.
In this class, students will interrogate these critical questions about the genre of reality TV to
understand how different reality shows are manipulated for particular viewing audiences and to
think about how these manipulated narratives are persuasive to them. This course will confront a
variety of opinions about the production behind reality TV and the programming it creates with a
specific focus on the rhetorical strategies that reality TV shows employ, such as confessionals,
narration, analogy, editing, and sequencing. Students will analyze a reality show’s portrayal of “real
life” issues, form their own argument concerning the potentially beneficial or problematic nature of
having reality shows act as representations of reality, and write their own reality TV show pitch to
convince an audience of viewers. In short, they will stop being polite, uncritical observers and start
being real rhetorical.
Course Goals
In this course, students will learn how to:


                                                                                                     2
     ● Identify a rhetorical problem within a reality TV show or subgenre of their choosing and the
         context in which the rhetorical problem and show/subgenre are presented
     ● Conduct extensive research through UT library databases, publicly available resources, and
         topic-specific resources
     ● Summarize and synthesize the main arguments of texts in a variety of genres and media
     ● Develop an understanding of the rhetorical strategies that reality TV shows use to appeal to
         their audiences
     ● Analyze, construct, and organize effective arguments
     ● Compose college-level papers that convey original critical thoughts, arguments, and analysis
     ● Revise ideas and compositions in response to constructive feedback from the instructor and
         peers
     ● Collaborate and present using digital media
Required Texts
     ● Nicotra, Jodie. Becoming Rhetorical: Analyzing and Composing in a Multimedia World. Cengage
         Learning, 2018. (required purchase)
     ● Bullock, Richard, Michal Brody, and Francine Weinberg. The Little Longhorn Handbook. 2nd
                 Edition. New York: W. W. Norton & Company Inc., 2014. (required purchase)
     ● Episodes/seasons from chosen reality shows (required purchase/streaming)
     ● Additional readings will be made available on Canvas by the instructor
Assessment Breakdown
You will be graded on the following assignments this term:
Project 1: Annotated Bibliography — (15%)
Project 2: Rhetorical Analysis — (20%)
Project 3.1: Argumentative Paper — (15%)
Project 3.2: Argumentative Paper Revision — (20%)
Project 4: Multimodal Group Assignment — (10%)
Four Short Writing Assignments — (10%)
Peer Reviews — (Mandatory)
Participation — (10%)
Grades
Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness, all numbers
are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For example, a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
       A=94-100                  B=84-86               C=74-76                D=64-66
       A-=90-93                  B-=80-83              C-=70-73               D-=60-63
      B+=87-89                   C+=77-79              D+=67-69               F=0-59
Major Assignments


                                                                                                       3
You will write an annotated bibliography, compose two essays ranging from 4-7 pages each (above
designated Rhetorical Analysis and Argumentative Paper), and create a multimodal group
presentation. You will also be graded on your revision of the argumentative essay based on my
feedback. In addition, you will compose four short writing assignments.
In order to receive a passing mark for the course, regardless of your performance on other
assignments or total average of all your grades, all major assignments must be completed to my
satisfaction.
Participation
Each class, you will be asked to complete small in-class or out-of-class assignments that will be
counted toward your overall participation grade for the semester. Sometimes I will ask you to come
to discussion with a few thought-provoking ideas or questions about the reading material to share,
and sometimes there will be a reading quiz, free write, or small group activity that I will ask you to
do during class. Regardless of the exercise, you should be ready to think critically about the course
materials and share your analyses through your participation in these assignments. I will also be
checking that you stay present in class discussions by keeping on task and not distracting others with
disruptive behavior. Thus, it is crucial that you have completed all of the assigned readings by our
meetings, bring the readings with you to class, and remain engaged in class activities. Any disruptive
use of technology or class time will negatively affect your participation grade.
Helpful Resources
     ●   Department of Rhetoric and Writing - http://www.drw.utexas.edu/
     ●   University Writing Center - http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     ●   Digital Writing & Research Lab – http://www.dwrl.utexas.edu
     ●   UT Libraries - http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     ●   University Health Services – http://healthyhorns.utexas.edu
     ●   Counseling and Mental Health Centre -- https://cmhc.utexas.edu/
     ●   Services for Students with Disabilities -- http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
                                           Class Policies
Accessibility
Your success in this class is important to me. If there are aspects of this course that prevent
you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we
will develop strategies to meet both your needs and course requirements. I am committed to
making all course materials and the classroom space as accessible as possible, and to working
with you if any materials or spaces are inaccessible. We will all need some accommodations in
this class because we all learn differently. If you need specific accommodations, let me know.
Any conversations we have about accommodations are confidential. I am happy to do what I
can to ensure accessibility for all students.
Classroom Environment Policy


                                                                                                      4
This class will always strive to be a safe space for learning and development; that is, a space where
we can develop and refine the knowledge and skills necessary for culturally competent practice.
Learning requires stretching beyond comfort zones, but feeling safe is a prerequisite for a good
learning environment. As we all bring diverse experiences to our shared classroom, the following
are some general guidelines to help create the environment we want:
     -   Be respectful of your colleagues. There is zero tolerance for slurs, derogatory language,
         or discrimination of any kind. It is never okay to laugh at, belittle, or harass a colleague
         because of their opinion or point of view. Everyone in our class has the right to be
         addressed in accordance with their personal identity. The university provides me with a
         class roster containing each student’s legal name and sex marker. I will gladly address
         you by the name and gender pronoun with which you identify. Please let me know
         your preferred name and pronouns early in the semester, so your peers and I can address
         you appropriately.
     -   If you find a reading or assignment triggering in any way, or suspect that you will be
         triggered, please contact me as soon as possible. I am happy to speak with you about the
         content of the material in advance and/or provide you with an alternative assignment. If
         you are troubled by or feel unsafe in any class discussion, please speak with me as soon
         as possible so that we can resolve the immediate problem and prevent future issues.
     -   Always think about how your comments will support our learning as a group.
         Challenging colleagues to explain their arguments in a thoughtful manner is key to
         creating an engaging learning community, but these challenges should not be personal,
         extreme, or derogatory. Make a commitment to understand unfamiliar positions from
         the context or point of view of your peers by actively listening to everyone, and be sure
         to speak for yourself rather than for a group.
Late Work
To receive full credit for an assignment, it must be complete and submitted by the deadline.
I will not accept any work for full credit that is submitted after the deadline. For each day late, a
5% penalty will be applied. Non-submissions and submissions received later than 1 week
following the due date will receive no credit. However, if you are unable to complete an
assignment on time due to an emergency or illness, please contact me at least 24 hours in
advance of the deadline and we can discuss a solution.
Tardiness
Being on time to class and staying until the end is important to both your own success in the
course and to the success of others who can become distracted by late arrivals and early
departures. Three late arrivals/early departures will constitute one absence in the course
(see attendance policy below for attendance requirements). You will be marked late if you arrive
after I take attendance for the day (usually within the first five minutes of class time). However,
if you arrive 20 or more minutes after class has started, you will be marked absent for the day.
Technology Policy
We will sometimes be working in class with technology, and there will be designated times in
class to use computers and/or personal electronic devices. There will also be times in class in


                                                                                                       5
which we will gather for activities that do not require the use of electronic devices. During those
times, you will be asked to put any electronic devices aside. If at any time your usage of
technology interferes with your performance or becomes distracting to your classmates or me,
you will be asked to put away any devices and your participation grade will be docked.
Email Policy
I am available by email for any pressing questions or concerns you might have. You can expect a
response from me within 24 hours (during the week), but you should not expect to hear back
immediately.
             Department of Rhetoric & Writing Course Policies Statement
Attendance Policy
Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses. Any questions or
appeals concerning this policy must be made directly to the department Associate Chair. You are
expected to attend class, to arrive on time, to have prepared assigned reading and writing, and to
participate in all in-class editing, revising, discussion, and conference sessions. Should you miss the
equivalent of six class sessions this term, you will fail the course. If you find that an
unavoidable problem prevents you from attending class, you should contact your instructor as soon
as possible, preferably ahead of time, to let him or her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, at least one week before the absence, so that alternative
arrangements can be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this
reason, provide your instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University
specifies very few other excused absences (e.g., jury duty). When you must miss a class, you are
responsible for getting notes and assignments from a classmate.
Scholastic Honesty
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University.
So, take care to read and understand the Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be
found online at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php If you have
any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the assignment.
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video


                                                                                                              6
phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More
information is available on the Services for Students with Disabilities website at
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/.
Email Accounts
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will use this medium
to communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email account and to
check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to the IT Services website
at https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/.
Emergency Information
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Information regarding
emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found on the UT emergency page at
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency. You can find more information about planning for emergencies
on the Emergency Preparedness site at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (512-232-5050):
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. You can learn more
about the Behavior Concerns Advice Line on their site at
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
                       Questions about these policies should be addressed to:
                 Department of Rhetoric & Writing, The University of Texas at Austin
                                              Parlin Hall, Room 3
                                 rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu; (512) 471-6109
                                            Course Schedule:
   *This schedule is subject to change. Please see Canvas for the most up-to-date version. Unless otherwise
   noted, the assignments and readings listed below are due before the start of class on the date indicated.*
  Week       Day           Lesson                Major Assignments Due                      Readings Due
                                          (others will be announced in class/on       (others will be announced in
                                                          Canvas)                          class/on Canvas)
    1      M 7/15      Course
                       Introduction
           T 7/16      Unit 1:           - Think about what show/subgenre of       - Syllabus
                       Rhetoric and      reality TV you want to research and
                       Reality TV        write about                               - Unit 1 Overview (on Canvas)


                                                                                              7
                       - Start to research show/subgenre        - Murray, Susan and Laurie
                                                                Ouellette. “Introduction.”
                       - Syllabus Quiz on Canvas                Reality TV: Remaking Television
                                                                Culture. 2009. pp. 1-13.
                                                                (Electronic resource on UT
                                                                library website).
                                                                - Deery, June. “Introduction:
                                                                Definitions, History, Critique.”
                                                                Reality TV. 2015. pp. 12-21, 41-
                                                                48. (PDF on Canvas).
  W 7/17 Researching a - Finalize your choice of                - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 6 pp.
         Rhetorical    show/subgenre                            122-137
         Problem
                       - Continue to find sources for your      - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 12 pp.
                       topic, and ensure that you have at least 260-281
                       one informational source found and
                       read                                     (no need to read “assignment”
                                                                sections)
  R 7/18 Annotations,  - Short Assignment #1 “Audition          - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 1 pp.
         Rhetorical    Tape” due before class                   8-21
         Situation
         Recap         - Continue to find sources for your      - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 3 pp.
                       topic, and ensure that you have at least 58-59
                       one viewpoint source found and read
  F 7/19 Peer Review   - Short Assignment #2 “Voiceover
         Annotated     Narration” due by 11:59 PM
         Bibliography,
         Workshop      - Peer Review draft of problem
                       analysis statement and four
                       annotations
                       - Project 1: Annotated Bibliography
                       due (before 11:59 PM on Sunday
                       7/21)
2 M 7/22 Unit 2:                                                - Unit 2 Overview (on Canvas)
         Expanding
         Rhetorical                                             - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 2
         Analysis
  T 7/23 Analyzing                                              - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 3
         Textual
         Rhetoric                                               - Booth, William. “Reality is
                                                                Only an Illusion, Writers Say.”
                                                                Washington Post, 10 Aug. 2004,
                                                                http://www.washingtonpost.co
                                                                m/wp-dyn/articles/A53032-
                                                                2004Aug9.html.


                                                                                            8
  W 7/24 Analyzing     - Think about what scene/episode you   - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 4 pp.
         Visual and    want to analyze                        67-91
         Multimodal
         Rhetoric                                             - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 5 pp.
                                                              100-111
  R 7/25 Producing     - Choose a specific scene/episode      - Kaufman, Amy. “The Reality
         Reality       from your topic to analyze             of Creating the Fantasy” and
                                                              “Method to the Madness.”
                                                              Bachelor Nation: Inside the World of
                                                              America’s Guilty Pleasure. 2018.
                                                              (PDF on Canvas).
  F 7/26 Analyzing     Short Assignment #3 “The Soup”
         Reality TV    due before class
3 M 7/29 Peer Review   Peer Review draft of Rhetorical
         Rhetorical    Analysis due before class
         Analysis
  T 7/30 Conferences - - Complete and bring Revision Plan to
         No Class      conference
                       - Work on Rhetorical Analysis revision
  W 7/31 Unit 3:       -Project 2: Rhetorical Analysis due    - Unit 3 Overview (on Canvas)
         Arguing       (before 11:59 PM)
         Rhetorical                                           - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 7 pp.
         Problems      - Think about which                    146-165
                       confessionals/scenes you could draw
                                                              - Sanneh, Kelefa. “The Reality
                       upon to support your argumentative     Principle: The Rise and Rise of
                       paper                                  a Television Genre.” The New
                                                              Yorker, 2 May 2011,
                                                              https://www.newyorker.com/
                                                              magazine/2011/05/09/the-
                                                              reality-principle.
  R 8/1  Creating      - Finalize what confessional you are   - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 13 pp.
         Written       choosing to write about that will      290-297 (until “Revising”)
         Compositions, ultimately support your argumentative
         Issues in     paper                                  - Batsell, Robert. “Quadruple-
         Reality TV                                           D: Deception, Deprivation,
                                                              Disgust, and Danger in the
                                                              Reality Show of the Future!”
                                                              The Psychology of Survivor.
                                                              BenBella Books, 2007. (PDF
                                                              on Canvas)
                                                              - Gay, Roxane. Chapter 34-35.
                                                              Hunger, 2017. (PDF on
                                                              Canvas)


                                                                                          9
                                                            - Glass, Ira. “Act One: I am the
                                                            Eggplant” from “The Human
                                                            Spectacle.” This American Life,
                                                            episode 529, 2014.
                                                            https://www.thisamericanlife.o
                                                            rg/529/human-spectacle/act-
                                                            one.
  F 8/2  Creating      Short Writing Assignment #4          - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 13 pp.
         Written       “Confessional” due by 11:59 PM       302-314
         Arguments
                                                            - Choose and read the Becoming
                                                            Rhetorical chapter that
                                                            corresponds to the type of
                                                            argument you are going to
                                                            write:
                                                                 - Ch. 9 “Defining,”
                                                                 - Ch. 10 “Evaluating,”
                                                                      OR
                                                                 - Ch. 11 “Proposing”
4 M 8/5  Peer Review   Peer Review Draft Argumentative
         Argumentative Paper
         Paper
  T 8/6  Revision      Project 3 Argumentative Paper due
                       by 11:59 PM
  W 8/7  Revision                                           - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 13 pp.
                                                            297-302
  R 8/8  Stakes of                                          - Ponzer, Jennifer.
         Reality TV                                         “Introduction: Resisting Project
                                                            Brainwash.” Reality Bites Back:
                                                            The Troubling Truth about Guilty
                                                            Pleasure TV. Seal Press, 2010.
                                                            (Electronic resource on UT
                                                            library website).
  F 8/9  In Defense of
         Reality TV
5 M 8/12 Conferences - - Complete and bring Revision Plan
         No Class      to conference
  T 8/13 Video Editing - Bring group audio/video footage to
         Workshop      class
  W 8/14 Multimodal                                         - Becoming Rhetorical, Ch. 15
         Project
         Workshop
  R 8/15 Multimodal
         Project
         Workshop
  F 8/16 Group         Project 4 Multimodal Group
         Presentations Presentation (video and written
                       components) due before class


                                    10
Project 4 Individual Written
Reflection due by 11:59 PM
Project 3.2 Revised Argumentative
Paper due by Saturday 8/17 at 11:59
PM
