AMS 3702018931230
  American Studies 370/ History 350 L: American Cultural History of Alcohol and
                                           Drugs
Fall 2018                              Dr. Mark Smith
Tuesday/Thursday 11-12:15              Office: Burdine 428
BUR 436B                               TTh 12:30-1:45
31320/39232                            Phone 512 232-2015
                                       e-mail: mcsmith@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description: Most scholars of alcohol and drug use have concentrated
upon its physiological aspects. It is clear that addiction and craving have a
physical and perhaps even a genetic basis. Yet, as many anthropologists,
sociologists, and historians have pointed out, cultures directly affect the types of
drugs used, how they are used, and for what purposes. In addition, one can
examine a culture's drug use and attitude toward it and often discover a great
deal about the functioning and values of that society. One can also note the
changes over time within a culture. Thus, drug use is not only a cultural product
but also a very useful social and historical descriptor. In this course, we will study
both how American culture affected the use of drugs and attitudes toward them
and how these serve as keys to the changing American intellectual, social, and
political landscape. Our prime goal here is to determine what use of a certain
drug at a certain time tells us about the culture.
         The study of drug use and attitudes toward it is particularly appropriate to
the United States because of its pluralism. Its settlement was roughly
contemporaneous with the first widespread European use and abuse of distilled
spirits, and different racial, ethnic, and religious groups brought their different
drug habits and attitudes with them. As each group insisted upon its own
traditional approach, the issue became one of power, control, and eventually
politics. Racial, ethnic, and class prejudices enter directly into almost every one of
the discussed issues.
         This course, and the instructor in particular, is not particularly interested in
the individual drug experience. What it is interested in why certain societies turn
to certain types of drugs at particular times and how that society responds to this
behavior. Why are opiates accepted in late 19th century America and then
demonized by the turn of the century? How can traditional societies like India


incorporate marijuana into their culture with little apparent difficulties and
powerful elites in the United States label it as a gateway drug and the basis of
American criminality? Aren’t they the same drug? Don’t they have the same
chemical properties in different cultures and different times?
        As we go through the course, the relevance to the present War on Drugs
will be obvious. I worked as an alcohol and drug counselor and have seen the
lives of many decent people shredded by the ravages of drug abuse and/or an
out-of-control legal system. While fearing both, I fear the War on Drugs more. I
believe the present policy on drugs is intellectually and ethically bankrupt and
won’t hide my beliefs. You, of course, are certainly welcome to your own and
absolutely to express them.
                            AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 2
Required texts:
Philippe Bourgois and Jeff Shonberg Righteous Dopefiend
Michael Lerner Dry Manhattan: Prohibition in New York City
Don Lattin The Harvard Psychedelic Club: How Timothy Leary, Ram Dass,
        Huston Smith and Andrew Weil Killed the Fifties and Ushered in a New
        Age for America
Article Packet from Jenn’s Copying 2518 Guadalupe • 2518@jennscopies.com
•512-482-0779
Films:
        We will use a number of documentary films in the course. Most of them
can be seen outside of class either in Netflix or YouTube. Two will be seen in
class.
Ken Burns/ PBS, “Prohibition” Three Episodes—1. “A Nation of Drunkards”; 2.
        “A Nation of Scofflaws”; 3. “A Nation of Hypocrites” (Netflix)
HBO/Addiction Project, “Addiction Why Can’t They Just Stop?” (in-class)
Hoffman’s Potion (LSD Documentary) (YouTube)
PBS Frontline “The Meth Epidemic” www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/meth
        Internet
PBS Evening News “America Addicted” (via instructor)
Heroin(e) (Netflix)
Heroin Cape Cod USA (Kanopy)
Dope( Netflix)


Best Websites
        While there is a remarkable number of websites available on the topic of
alcohol and drugs, a majority seem to be of the Just Say No variety which can’t
get it right in the present or even admit of use in the past. Even more disturbing
because of their potential danger are the amateur sites that tout various drugs as
free from all dangers. As we will see in this course, all drugs have some potential
danger.
        These are the number of sites I use most and mark on my computer.
1. Schaffer Library of Drug Policy
(www.druglibrary.org/schaeffer/misc/driving/contents.htm)
2. Drug War Chronicle (www.stopthedrugwar.org/index.shtml)
3. Erowid-Documenting the Complex Relationship Between Humans and
Psychoactives (www.erowid.org)
                              AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 3
        This class will be conducted on a seminar basis. My idea of hell is listening
to anyone (especially myself) for anything over 15 minutes. This requires regular
and on-time attendance, up-to-date reading, and informed discussion. There are
too many people in this seminar so it will be more tempting to lay back and do
nothing. That will not be acceptable. Class participation will count 25% of your
grade, and you will receive a grade for that at the end of the course. I keep track
of participation on a weekly basis and can give you an idea of your performance.
I reserve the right to give anyone who misses five or more classes without
acceptable excuses will receive an automatic F for the entire course.
Course Requirements:
Class Format: This is a seminar course and will be In addition to class
participation, your final grade will consist of two reading exams based almost
exclusively on reading and films worth 25% together—10% on the first and 15%


on the second. The exams will consist of matching and mostly short identification.
The matching will be 30% of your grade and you will have 7 out of 10
identifications. The reading exams will be held on October 11th and on the
course’s final class day of December 4th. I will provide sample questions of
matching and identification before the first exam. I reserve the right to give short
pop quizzes if I feel the class is not doing the reading, although I would prefer
not to do so. If I do so, the grades of these pop quizzes will be folded into these
grades.
Writing Assignments: This is a writing component class and half your grade will
derive from your papers.
        The first assignment will be a short, class-designed project very early in the
semester. Much of this class will depend on an understanding of the theory of
social construction and anthropology/ethnology. I will ask you to write a short
four page paper on the social construction of a non-drug. That is, how does
social perception of a phenomena, person, or event cause or at least influence
members of that society to respond in a certain way. You may take a
comparative approach. For example, how do western countries’ monogamous
marital relationships differ from, for example, African societies’ polygamous
relations. Or there are actually many polyandrous societies (one woman takes
two or more husbands). How do they make sense? If the woman marries all
brothers, they keep the family land. If more than one man is recognized as the
father of a child, there is a greater chance of the child living to adulthood.
        The paper will be due September 18th. This paper will hopefully not only
provide you with a clear understanding of the key theoretical concept of the class
but a quick understanding of my personal expectations for your writing. The
paper will count only 5% toward your final grade.
        The 2nd paper will be a paper that integrates class work and some outside
research. The topic of the paper is why was there a movement to prohibit alcohol
or, indeed, why was there a successful movement to abolish alcohol when drugs
that are seen by many today as more dangerous—tobacco, opiates,
                              AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 4
cocaine, marijuana, etc.—were still widely used. While you should have most of
the material for alcohol from your reading, you will have to use outside readings
to make your comparison(s). You must have a minimum of three outside sources
although things like Wikipedia don’t count. This paper is a combination of
thought and research while the first paper is primarily thought. The length


should be from 5 to 10 pages. Longer papers aren’t, of course, always better but
they often show more thought. It will count 15% of your final grade and will be
due October 23rd.
        The third paper will be a more traditional research paper. You will examine
a particular drug during a particular time and show how its use is impacted by the
culture. For example, you might study marihuana as it came into the United
States in about 1910 through the 1920s. You would be writing about Mexican-
American use on the Mexican border and its spread into port areas like Galveston
and New Orleans and then from there to the urban north with jazz musicians.
Another well-used topic is the rise of steroid use among bodybuilders beginning
in the late 1980s and then perhaps its infiltration to athletes and other
adolescents. By October 30th a topic of a drug and a historical period or culture.
You can change these later especially the time or culture but not at the last
minute. This is the most important grade with 30% of the final grade. It is due in
my box in the American Studies office/ Burdine 432A on December 13th by 5
p.m. I will also accept final papers by e-mail.
Cultural Diversity Flag
        The cultural diversity flag refers to the various multicultural aspects of a
culture, in this case that of the United States. Drugs and alcohol are excellent
examples of this as different ethnic, gender, racial, and economic groups select
one drug over another. Any drug that has ever been prohibited in the US has
been associated with a minority cultural group. Ethnic workers and alcohol led to
Prohibition. Mexicans and Mexican-Americans in the 1930s for marijuana is
another example. Then there are hallucinogenics and the hippies of the 1960s.
U.S. HISTORY REQUIREMENT (Core Component 060)
        This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history
component of the university core curriculum and addresses the following four
core objectives established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board:
communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal responsibility, and social
responsibility.
Writing Flag
        This course like all AMS 370s and HIS 350Ls requires a writing component.
One half of this class’ final grade will come from three writing assignments, most
from the final writing paper. But it will also satisfy the writing component itself.
.
.


                               AMS SYLLABUS page 5
Students With Disabilities
       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6257.
Plagiarism
       Like my colleagues, I absolutely despise plagiarism and cheating of any
type. I will be understanding of almost anything except this. If I find you
plagiarizing, the best that can happen to you is an F in the class. The worst is
recommending to your Dean that you be dismissed from the university. I am
grateful that I have had so few cases of cheating in my career. Trying not to
sound preachy, it seems to me that this is about respect—respect in yourself, for
your fellow students, and between you and I. And, yes, I did catch someone
plagarising recently.
       One element that has emerged lately in seminars has affected me. An
occasional student tends to be on the Internet all class. It’s a bloody seminar.
Don’t take a seminar if that’s what you feel about the knowledge of your fellow
students, your own, and mine. If this continues, I’ll pull the computers. No one
needs it for a seminar.


                    AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 6
Course Calendar
August   30 Introduction
September 4 Where Are We Now?
            Stop the Drug War “The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Top 10 US
            Drug Policy Stories of 2017”
            Stop the Drug War “From Bloody Drug War to Legal Pot: The Top
            Global Policy Highlights”
            Stop the Drug War “looking Back: The Biggest Domestic Drug
            Stories of the Past 20 Years”
            Stop the Drug Wars, “Four Reasons Black Incarceration Rates Are
            Going Down While White Rates Are Going Up”
          6 Social Construction Theory
            Howard S. Becker “Deviance and the Response of Others”;
            Rudi Matthee “Exotic Substances: The Introduction and Global
            Spread of Tobacco, Coffee, Cocoa, Tea and Distilled Liquor, 16th to
            18th Centuries,”
            Jerri A. Husch “Culture and US Drug Control Policy: Toward a New
            Conceptual Framework”
          11 Cultural/Anthropological Construction of Drugs
            Ruth Benedict "Psychological Types in the American Southwest,"
            George Carstairs “Bhang and Alcohol: Cultural Factors in the Choice
            of Intoxicants
            Dwight Heath “Drinking Patterns of the Bolivian Camba”
            James Nason “Sardines and Other Fried Fish: Consumption off
            Alcoholic Beverages on a Micronesian Island,”


         13 Interpretation of Addiction
            Bourgeois and Shonberg Righteous Dopefiend, intro and chapters
            1-3
          18 Homelessness and Addiction
             Dopefiend, chpters 4-6
            First person due
           20 Addiction and Oral History
               Dopefiend chap 7-9
                           AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 7
         25 The Beginning of Temperance
            Rorabaugh, chap. 7
            William Coggshall, “Little Peleg, the Drunkard’s Son”
            Neil Dow “History of a Neighborhood”
            J. T. Crane “A True Story”
            Ian Tyrell “Temperance and Economic Change in the Antebellum
            North”
        27 The Movement toward National Prohibition
            Ken Burns “Prohibition” “A Nation of Drunkards” Part 1
            Jon M. Kingsdale “The Poor Man’s Club”
            Madelon Powers “Decay from Within: The Inevitable Doom of the
            American Saloon”
October  2 National Prohibition and the Big Apple
            Lerner, Manhattan, chap 1-4
          4 Prohibition and Its Ills
            Lerner, chap 5-8
            Burns Prohibition “A Nation of Scofflaws” part 2


          9 The End of Prohibition
            Ken Burns, Prohibition, “A Nation of Hypocrites” part 3
            Lerner, Manhattan, chap 9-12
        11 FIRST QUIZ
               Bourgeois and Schoenberg, Lerner Packet Stop the Drug War to
               Powers, Ken Burns “Prohibition”
          16 History of Marijuana Policy
               Harry Anslinger "Marihuana: Assassin of Youth" American
       Magazine (1937)
               “Marijuana and Mexican Americans: An Overview”
           18 The Triumph of the Medical Model
               HBO film “Addiction” (In-class film)
          23 The Chinese and Opium
            Jacob Riis “Chinatown”
            David Courtwright “Chinatown”
            Second Paper due
          25 Psychedlelics and the Drug War
            Lattin, Harvard Psychedelic Club, introduction and chapters 1-3
                           AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 8
        30 Psychedelics and the Generation War
            Lattin, chapters 4-6
            Film “Hoffman’s Potion”
November 1 LSD and the Class War
            finish Lattin
         6 Drugs, Media and Race in the Drug War
            William Finnegan “Deep East Texas”
            Craig Reinarmann and Harry Levine, “The Crack Attack:
             Politics and Media in the Crack Scare”


             James Orcutt and J. Blake Turner “Shocking Numbers and
             Graphic Accounts”
        8 Gender and the Bill of Rights
               Maria Keire. “Dope Fiends and Degenerates: Gendering of
             Addiction in the Early 20th Century”
              Loren Siegel “the Pregnancy Police Fight the War on Drugs”
               Newsbrief, “Texas DA Says Doctors Must Turn in Drug Using
               Women”
            Libby Copeland “Oxybots: Instead of Learning from Unfounded
            Hysteria of the Crack Baby Era”
         13 The Origins of Methamphetamines
            see “The Meth Epidemic”
            http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/meth/
         15 Legalization of Marihuana
            Michael Thomsen “Legalizing Weed Isn’t Enough” ( 2015)
            Bruce Barcott and Michael Scherer “The Great Pot Experiment”
            (2015)
             Patrick Radden Keefe “Buzzkill” New Yorker (November 2013)
         20 The Most Dangerous Drug Rises Again
            “America Addicted” (2017)
            Katherine Seelye, “In Heroin Crisis, White Families Seek Gentler
            War on Drugs”
            Katherine West Savali “Gentler War on Drugs Is a Smack in Black
            America’s Face”
         27 Heroin and the Heartland
            “Heroin(e)
            Margaret Talbot “The Addicts Next Door”
        29 Rise of the Middle Class Junkie
           “Heroin Cape Cod”
                    AMS 370 SYLLABUS page 9
December 4 Violence and the Continuing Drug War
            “Dope”


  Danielle Allen “How the Drug War Creates Violence”
 6 SECOND QUIZ
   LATTIN, PACKET, ANSLINGER TO ALLEN
 11 No Class
 13 THIRD AND FINAL PAPER-- A DRUG AND IT HISTORICAL
PERIOD AND/OR CULTURE DUE
Paper is due either in my mailbox or via e-mail. You are
responsible for insuring the e-mail arrives.


AMS 370/HIS 350L CULTURAL HISTORY OF ALCOHOL AND DRUGS
1. Stop the Drug War “The Good, the Bad, and the Ugly: Top 10 US Drug Policy
Stories of 2017” (December 28, 2017)
2. Stop the Drug War “From Bloody Drug War to Legal Pot: The Top Global Policy
Highlights”(December 28, 2017)
3. Stop the Drug War, “Looking Back: The Biggest Domestic Drug Stories of the
Past 20 Years”( December 6. 2017)
4. Stop the Drug War, “Four Reasons Black Incarceration Rates Are Going Down
While White Rates are Going Up” (December 28, 2017)
5.Howard S. Becker : Deviance and the Response of Others” Outsiders: Studies in
the Sociology of Deviance (1963)
6. Rudi Matthee “Exotic Substances: The Introduction and Global Spread of
Tobacco, Coffee, Cocoa, Tea, and Distilled Liquor. 16th to 18th Centuries,” Drugs
and Narcotics in History, ed. Roy Porter and Mikulas Teich (1995)
7. Jerri Husch “Culture and US Drug Policy: Toward a New Conceptual
Framework” Daedalus 121 (Summer 1992)
8. Ruth Benedict "Psychological Types in the American Southwest," Proceedings
(1930)
9. George Carstairs "Bhang and Alcohol: Cultural Factors in the Choice of
Intoxicants" Marihuana Papers (1966)
10. Dwight Heath "Drinking Patterns of the Bolivian Camba” Quarterly Journal
(1958)
11. James Nason “Sardines and Other Fried Fish: Consumption of Alcoholic
Beverages on a Micronesian Island,” Beliefs, Behaviors, and Alcoholic Beverages
(1979)
12. W.J. Rorabaugh The Alcoholic Republic, chapter 7, Oxford Press, 1979


13. William Coggshall, “Little Peleg, the Drunkard's Son," American Temperance
Magazine (1854)
14. Neal Dow "The Story of a Neighborhood" ibid.
15. J.T. Crane "A True Story" ibid.
16. Ian Tyrell “Temperance and Economic Change in the Ante-bellum North,”
Alcohol, Reform and Society: The Liquor Issue in Social Context, ed. Jack Blocker
(1979)
17. Jon Kingsdale “The Poor Man’s Club: Social Functions of the Urban Working
Class Saloon,” The American Man, ed. Elizabeth and Joseph Pleck (1980)
18. Madelon Powers “Decay from Within: The Inevitable Doom of the American
Saloon,” Drinking, ed. Barrows and Room (1991)
19. Harry Anslinger "Marihuana: Assassin of Youth" American Magazine (1937)
20. “Marijuana and Mexican Americans: An Overview” (unpublished)
21. Jacob Riis “Chinatown” (1890)
22. David Courtwright “Chinatown” Violent Land (2005)
23. William Finnegan “Deep East Texas” New Yorker (1994)
24. Craig Reinarmann and Harry Levine “The Crack Attack: Politics and Media in
the Crack Scare” Reinarmann and Levine Crack in America 18-50
25. James Orcutt and J. Blake Turner “Shocking Numbers and Graphic Accounts:
Quantified Images of Drug Problems in the Print Media” Social Problems (May
1993)
26. Maria Keire. “Dope Fiends and Degenerates: Gendering of Addiction in the
Early 20th Century”
27. Loren Siegel “The Pregnancy Police Fight the War on Drugs,” Reinarmann and
Levine Crack in America, 249-


28. Newbrief: “Texas DA Says Doctors Must Turn in Pregnant Women
29. Libby Copeland “Oxytots: Instead of Learning from the Unfounded Hysteria of
the Crack Era, We’re Repeating It” Slate (December 7, 2014)
30. Michael Thomsen “Legalizing Weed Isn’t Enough” Slate (December 2015)
31. Bruce Barcott and Michael Scherer “The Great Pot Experiment” Time (2015)
32. Patrick Radden Keefe “Buzzkill” New Yorker (November 2013)
33. Katherine Seelye “In Heroin Crisis, White Families Seek Gentler War on Drugs’
New York Times (2015)
34. Kristen West Savali “Gentler War on Drugs for Whites Is a Smack in Black
America’s Face” The Root (November 8, 2015)
35. Margaret Talbot “The Addicts Next Door,” New Yorker (June 5, 2017)
36. Danielle Allen “How the War on Drugs Creates Violence” Washington Post
October 16, 2015
