Research Methods Seminar II Spring                                                           2019
                ADV 392 ADVERTISING RESEARCH METHODS II
                                        (Unique #06685)
Time/Location:
In class: Wednesday, 11:00-2:00 in CMA 6.172
Experiential supplement: attendance at 3 research presentations of your choice
Professor: Dr. Angeline Close Scheinbaum
Email: angeline@austin.utexas.edu (for course content)
Office Hours: M 3:30-4:30
Phone: (512) 788-2480
Course Objectives:
    1. To demonstrate that you are familiar with advertising research methods common in
        scholarship.
    2. To evaluate and design methods sections of journal articles in advertising and related
        fields.
    3. To understand the scientific method of inquiry and how it relates to research in both
        quantitative and qualitative approaches to social science.
    4. To improve your understanding of and respect for qualitative research methods.
    5. To create awareness that ethical considerations are integral to research methods.
    6. To give you experience doing an original research project, with a focus on the methods
        section of that project.
    7. To familiarize you with methods software.
    8. To understand how to test hypotheses about the conditions under the mechanisms by
        which causal effects operate and the moderation of such.
    9. How to estimate and interpret direct, indirect, and conditional effects.
    10. To be more comfortable reading and writing methods sections.
Required texts:
Multivariate Data Analysis, 8th Edition
Joseph F Hair, Barry J. Babin, Rolph E. Anderson, William C. Black
Published: © 2018
Print ISBN: 9781473756540
Introduction to Mediation, Moderation, and Conditional Process Analysis, Second Edition: A
Regression-Based Approach, Edition 2
Andrew F. Hayes October 30, 2017
Guilford Publications
Other readings are journal articles and all readings will be available via Canvas. You will read
one chapter a week, plus journal articles.
Course Websites/Technology:
    • Canvas
                                                                                                 1


Research Methods Seminar II Spring                                                           2019
       In this class, Canvas will be used primarily for posting meeting-related assignment
       worksheets and grading. Be sure you have a valid email address connected with Canvas
       to ensure receipt of communication concerning the course. It is your responsibility to
       check Canvas regularly. http://canvas.utexas.edu. The following schedule is on canvas
       and it is important to check Canvas regularly for the modules and other required video
       content.
Schedule (See Canvas for readings)
Each week we will have an assigned discussion leader. When it is your week to be
discussion leader, pick a recent journal article employing the method/topic of the
week and give a 15 minute review of the paper, with a focus on methods, and ask
the class three interesting discussion questions to lead discussion. We then leave 15
minutes for discussion.
   1. Week 1, 1-28 (Introductions, Get books, read)
       -Seminar speaker, meet in advertising conference room 11-12:30 then in classroom
       for introductions and syllabus review
       -Read Ch 1 (Multivariate Data Analysis is our main book, we will refer to the other
       mediation book more during regression in week 5)
       Overview of Research Methods
   2. Week 2, 1-28 and 1-30 (Developing Your Paper)
       --Read Ch 2
       Examining Your Data
       Discussion Leading Begins (Focus: Exploratory Data Analysis)
       *1-30 research talk TBA
   3. Week 3, 2-4 and 1-30
       --Read Ch 3
       Factor Analysis
   4. Week 4, 2-11 and 2-13
       --Read Ch 5 and chapter 1 mediation book
       Multiple Regression
       *Experiential Learning: Methods Report #1 of 3 due
   5. Week 5, 2-18 and 2-20 (Research and Insights, cont.)
       --Read Ch 2& 3 from mediation book
       Mediation and Moderation, Conditional Process Analysis
   6. Week 6, 2-25 and 2-27
       --Read Ch 4 & 5 chapters from mediation book
       Multiple Regression, Mediation and Conditional Process Analysis cont.
                                                                                                2


Research Methods Seminar II Spring                                                          2019
    7. Week 7, 3-4 and 3-6 (Budgeting, Segmentation & Positioning, cont.)
         --Read Ch 6
         MANOVA
    8. Week 8, 3-11 and 3-13 ((Budgeting, Segmentation & Positioning, cont.)
         --Read Ch 8
         Logistic Regression
         *Experiential Learning: Methods Report #2 of 3 due
*Spring Break, 3-18-3-22
    9. Week 9, 3-25 and 3-27
        --Read Ch 9
    Structural Equation Modeling
    10. Week 10, 4-1 and 4-3
         --Read Ch 10
    Confirmatory Factor Analysis
    11. Week 11, 4-8 and 4-10
         --Read Ch 11
         Testing Structural Equation Models
    12. Week 12, 4-15 and 4-17
         --Read Ch 12
         Advanced Topics in Structural Equation Models
         *Experiential Learning: Methods Report #3 of 3 due
    13. Week 13, 4-22 and 4-24
         --Qualitative Research Methods (& Mixed Methods)
    14. Week 14, 4-29 and 5-1 (Research Presentations)
    15. Week 15, 5-6 and 5-8 (Research Presentations)
Course Requirements and Assessment
Research Paper 30%
Research Paper Presentation 30%
Experiential Learning-Based Methods Reports 30% (3 @ 10%)
Class Participation/Discussion Leading 10%
Research Paper
Throughout the semester, you will develop or continue an original research paper, and the focus
of this is the methods primarily. You will present this the last 2 weeks of the class.
                                                                                                3


Research Methods Seminar II Spring                                                              2019
Experiential Learning-Based Methods Reports
It is important to go and listen to research talks. These include seminar speakers and other formal
research presentations. These can be very impactful to your career. I will invite you to many
talks this semester, and also please keep up with them on our listserv. You must attend at least 3
of these research talks, and write a one page overview of it with a main focus on the method
employed.
Class Participation/Discussion Leading
Class participation is rooted in attendance. It is important to be engaged in class, and to be an
active participant during the discussion leader sessions of recent journal articles and during
presentations. This grade is based in leading discussions on your assigned days and participating
in the course the semester. This is a subjective grade that includes perceived effort,
improvement, attitude, willingness to learn and overall course engagement.
Grade System
Final grades will be determined based on the following scale; No grades are rounded.
                        A 93.5 to 100           A- 89.5 to 93.4
B+ 86.5 to 89.4         B 83.5 to 86.4          B- 79.5 to 83.4
C+ 76.5 to 79.4         C 73.5 to 76.4          C- 69.5 to 73.4
D+ 66.5 to 69.4         D 63.5 to 66.4          D- 59.5 to 63.4
F 59.4 or below
Student Responsibilities
Key to this course is the concept of “team”. You do not pick your teams in the real world, and
you often don’t get to pick which accounts you are assigned to. Although some team members
may wish to specialize on a particular function (e.g., media planning) each team member will be
graded on their contribution to all aspects of the campaign plan. There is no “boss” – unless the
team so selects – organization is horizontal -- ideally functioning as a working advertising
agency intent on developing a professional quality, comprehensive campaign plan and
presentation. The team “representative” is just the one the TA and I will reach out to with any
questions etc. as the go between. It is picked by Canvas by random.
Assignments:
Assignments turned in late, up to 5 minutes late, will receive an automatic 50%. Assignments
turned in after 5 minutes late will receive a zero. The work cannot be made up.
Check Canvas frequently, and make sure your e-mail address is current with the University so
that you can receive emails sent through Canvas. Any questions about grades must be submitted
in writing to the Professor within 3 days of when the grade is posted.
UT Class Related Policies
More information can be found at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/index.html
     • Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty:
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
                                                                                                   4


Research Methods Seminar II Spring                                                               2019
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
    • Religious Holy Days Observance Policy:
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in
advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment
within a reasonable time after the absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day.
    • Documented Disability Statement:
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should
contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official
accommodation letter from SSD. Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being
presented in class is not accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are
not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).Please notify me as early in the semester
as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice
will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
accessibility, etc.).Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-
329-3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
    • Q drop Policy:
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
    • Emergency Evacuation:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Additional information
                                                                                                     5


Research Methods Seminar II Spring                                                             2019
regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
    • Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
A service that provides faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss their concerns about
another individual’s behavior. This is a partnership among the Dean of Students, Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). 512-232-5050 or report their concerns using the online
submission form available at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
                                                                                                   6
