                                                                                            1
                                     GLOBAL JUSTICE
       GOV s335M ▫ Unique ▫ 81885 ▫ Meets M-F ▫ 8:30-10 ▫ Venue ▫ MEZ 0.302
                                    Flags ▫ Writing ▫ Ethics
                        Professor Gregg ▫ bgregg@austin.utexas.edu
                  Office Hours ▫ MWF 10-11 ▫ Office ▫ Mezes Hall 3.138
This writing-flag seminar provides an overview of major scholarly contributions to the
analysis of core issues of global justice today: sovereignty (Are nation states in a state of
nature?), group right to self-determination (Which peoples deserve it?), nationalism and
patriotism (Should we privilege our compatriots over foreigners?), global poverty and
international distributive justice (Should rich countries transfer wealth to poor
countries?), the social and legal status of women in different cultures (Should there be
universal norms for the treatment of women across all cultures?), terrorism (Is it ever
acceptable as a means to fight terrorism?), just war (Are preemptive strikes ever
warranted?), and human rights (Should a right to be free of torture be absolute?). The
seminar requires the close reading and careful analysis of assigned texts; active
participation in student-centered classroom debates on each issue; and the composition of
three essays, each critical, analytic, and thesis-driven.
READINGS ▫ Drawn from The Global Justice Reader, ed. T. Brooks (2008)
ATTENDANCE ▫ Required at all class discussions (i.e., every third session of each
topic; we have seven topics). Each failure will reduce a student’s final grade by one-half
letter (unless excused on the basis of medical need documented by a physician). Regular
attendance at lectures (every first and second session of a topic) is always monitored,
very strongly recommended but not required (students are responsible for whatever is
said in lecture). Attendance is also mandatory on July 29, August 12, and August 16.
Each failure to attend will reduce the student’s final grade by one-half letter.
EVALUATION ▫ A student’s final grade will be the average of three essays, each no
more than three pages, adjusted for quality of class participation (described below).
Grading: A = 4.00, A- = 3.67, B+ = 3.33, B = 3.00, B- = 2.67, C+ = 2.33, C = 2.00, C- =
1.67, D+ = 1.33, D = 1.00, D- = 0.67, F = 0.00. Final grades will include pluses or
minuses, as warranted. All essays are to be uploaded to the seminar’s Canvas site. To
pass the course, the student must submit all essays, each on time. No late essays accepted.
IN-CLASS PARTICIPATION ▫ Students will be divided into several groups such that
each student will participate in one of the seven student-organized, student-led class
discussions.
▫ The several students assigned to a particular class discussion (every third session) are
collectively in charge of that day’s discussion as the “agenda-makers” for that session.


                                                                                             2
Beginning July 17, by 6 pm the day before the discussion, each student shall submit, as a
“thread” to the following day’s “forum” on our seminar’s Canvas site, a brief, critical,
thoughtful, textually based analysis of (or questions about) both of the articles in the unit
assigned. Always cite the text with page numbers. Each failure to submit a post will
lower the student’s final grade by one-half letter. The category is: received on time/not
received, but not: received x units of time after the deadline.
▫ Beginning July 17, for each discussion session the several agenda-makers will prepare
an agenda by selecting and editing, from all class submissions, a brief list of points and
questions to direct our discussion that day. The agenda-makers will post the agenda (in a
designated file) to Canvas by 11 pm the night before the discussion session. Each failure
to submit an agenda will lower the final grade of each of the agenda-makers by one letter.
▫ On submissions ▫ Always cite and quote one or more passages from the texts, and
include the page numbers of material cited. Keep your comments brief, and never longer
than a paragraph. Always compare the two readings one with the other. You may
critically analyze the readings for the day; bring up something in the texts you found
interesting or suggestive that the class should discuss; or ask questions of the assigned
readings. Each failure to submit a post will lower the student’s final grade by one-half
letter. (If by discrimination we mean to treat different students differently, positively or
negatively, on a basis other than individual merit, then please note that I do not
discriminate.)
▫ Directions for the agenda-makers ▫ In the agenda (a) identify the author of each
submission used; (b) capture some of the diversity in perspective within each group of
submissions; (c) construct the agenda in ways that encourage student-to-student dialog;
(d) an agenda need not resemble previous agendas; be creative; (e) a useful agenda may
be larger than the time available to us in seminar: it allows us in seminar to choose from
among points. Include textual cites. Always cite the text with page numbers. Each
agenda-maker must also submit a thread.
▫ On agenda making ▫ The agenda need not be comprehensive. Keep in mind that we
have limited time to discuss the agenda, so the key is focus. For example, identify
overlaps among the submissions, or questions that come up repeatedly. The goal is to
facilitate a thoughtful, textually informed discussion among students. Organize the
agenda around a small number of questions that you think are particularly important to
our analysis of the readings. Agenda-makers should use the Doc-Cam to project their
agenda and focus discussion. Power-point presentations are very welcome.
ESSAYS ▫ For each of the essays the instructor will provide a list of topics from which
students may choose (students may also develop their own topic in consultation with the
instructor). Students may modify the topic chosen in ways that suit the logic of their
argument. Each essay should develop original insights about our authors, in the student’s
own and unique voice. Avoid glosses of our authors. (a) Formulate a clear thesis and state
it within the first paragraph of your essay, (b) then defend that thesis with clear,
discursive arguments; support both your thesis and your arguments through close textual


                                                                                             3
analyses of our assigned readings while (c) drawing on one carefully chosen concrete
examples. (d) Consider each reading or author on its own terms before submitting it to
your careful and thoughtful critique. This entails “reconstructing” the part or parts of the
theory you draw upon. (e) Define all key terms. State explicitly your interpretation of the
theorists’ concepts you use; never assume that your reader understands either the concept
or your particular interpretation of it. (f) Write as concisely and clearly as possible. Avoid
convoluted sentences and overuse of adjectives. Avoid run-on paragraphs. Be mindful of
word-choice. (g) Provide complete page references for all textual references.
WRITING FLAG ▫ This course provides students experience with writing in an
academic discipline. Students write regularly during the session, complete three
substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from the instructor to improve their
writing. The course grade is determined above all by the student's written work. Writing
Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking,
Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Toward analyzing student writing and to discussing practical means to improved writing,
the last class day will be devoted to a student organized and student led writing
workshop. Each student is to contribute something learned from either the first or second
paper (or both) from the instructor's feedback. Copy and paste a small section from one
of your papers along with a short explanation of what you learned into the “Writing
Workshop” discussion section on Canvas. The goal: thoughtful contributions to use in a
constructive, student-led class discussion. The Workshop organizers will write several
sample posts that students may consult in the “Writing Workshop” discussion section.
Post by 10:00 pm on Tuesday, August 13. Failure to submit a post will lower the
student’s final grade by one letter.
ETHICS FLAG ▫ Students analyze both sides of controversial issues. Students gain
analytic tools for applying ethical reasoning in contemporary real-life situations, in adult
and professional life, as a citizen, and as one among 7.7 billion human beings on our
planet. Students examine case studies involving ethical issues or dilemmas. And they
master course content through heightened awareness of factors relevant to ethical
decision-making.
                                          SCHEDULE
Monday, July 15 ● Introduction
 INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS AMONG NATIONS: A STATE OF NATURE?
Tuesday, July 16 ● Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan
Wednesday, July 17 ● Charles Beitz, “A State of Nature”
Thursday, July 18 ● Class discussion of sovereignty


                                                                                    4
                A PEOPLE'S RIGHT TO SELF-DETERMINATION
Friday, July 19 ● A. Margalit and J. Raz, “National Self-Determination”
Monday, July 22 ● Allan Buchanan, “Theories of Secession”
Tuesday, July 23 ● Class discussion of a right to self-determination
                        NATIONALISM AND PATRIOTISM
Wednesday, July 24 ● Robert Goodin, “What is So Special about Our Countrymen?”
Thursday, July 25 ● David Miller, “The Ethics of Nationality”
Friday, July 26 ● Class discussion of nationalism and patriotism
First essay prompts published on Canvas today
Sunday, July 28 ● Upload first essay (units 1, 2 & 3) to Canvas by 6 p.m.
Monday, July 29 ● Practical discussion of first essays: How to improve your written
work
    GLOBAL POVERTY AND INTERNATIONAL DISTRIBUTIVE JUSTICE
Tuesday, July 30 ● Peter Singer, “Famine, Affluence, and Morality”
Wednesday, July 31 ● Thomas Nagel, “The Problem of Global Justice”
Thursday, August 1 ● Class discussion of global poverty and distributive justice
                        JUSTICE FOR WOMEN GLOBALLY
Friday, August 2 ● Susan Okin, “Is Multiculturalism Bad for Women?”
Monday, August 5 ● Martha Nussbaum, “Capabilities as Fundamental Entitlements”
Tuesday, August 6 ● Class discussion of women and global justice
Second essay prompts published on Canvas today
               TERRORISM AS A MEANS TO FIGHT TERRORISM
Wednesday, August 7 ● David Rodin, “Terrorism without Intention”
Thursday, August 8 ● Saul Smilansky, “Terrorism, Justification, Illusion”
Friday, August 9 ● Class discussion of terrorism


                                                                                          5
Sunday, August 11 ● Upload second essay (units 4 & 5) to Canvas by 6 p.m.
                                     HUMAN RIGHTS
Monday, August 12 ● Practical discussion of second essays: How to improve your
written work
Tuesday, August 13 ● Charles Beitz, “Human Rights as a Common Concern”
Post by 10:00 pm today, August 13, for Friday’s student workshop on writing
Wednesday, August 14 ● David Sussman, “What’s Wrong with Torture?”
Thursday, August 15 ● Class discussion of human rights
Third essay prompts published on Canvas today
Friday, August 16 ● Student-directed Writing Workshop: each student posts on "How
I’ve improved my writing in this course"
Saturday, August 17 ● Upload third essay (units 6 & 7) to Canvas by 6 pm
                                             ▫▫▫
► Students should avail themselves of the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211,
tel. 471-6222, http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/. The Center offers free, individualized, expert
help with writing, by appointment and on a drop-in basis. Seeking critical feedback from
an informed source is a normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help
students develop strategies to improve their writing while fostering the student’s authorial
independence. The student alone determines how to use the consultant’s advice.
Consultants are trained to improve student writing while preserving the integrity of the
student’s work.
► Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
► In accordance with UT Austin policy, a student must notify me of any pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. A
student who misses a class and/or assignment will be given an opportunity to complete
the missed work within a reasonable period (as determined by the instructor) following
the absence.
► Academic dishonesty will be treated in line with the University Honor Code at
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-0/ch01/index.html
