Michael Baker            michael.baker@austin.utexas.edu       Office: DFA 4.112 Wednesday 11a-12p  Fall 2018
AET 339 GAME ART PIPELINE
 UID​: 20980                                              TA: Larkin Williams-Capone
 Meetings​: T/R 11:00a - 12:30p
 Location​: DFA 4.106
Abstract
        A introduction to creating and working with game ready assets in 2D and 3D. Students will learn
        how to manage poly counts, create LODs, retopologize models, modify existing assets, export
        content from 2D and 3D authoring tools, create efficient UVs, work with realtime shaders,
        manage textures, work with audio, and test assets in a game engine.
Objective
        Learn the fundamentals of authoring and integrating game ready assets.
Assessment
        This course is project based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on successful completion
        of project objectives. Assignments are equally weighted toward 90% of the final class grade. The
        remaining 10% of the final grade is based on professionalism which is earned by attending class
        during the scheduled meeting times and conducting oneself in a professional manner.
        No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
        complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before the
        deadline for doing so passes.
        Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send an
        email and attach any class work as needed.
        Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
        fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
        will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
        grade of A+.
        Letter grade equivalents:
         A = 94-100                           C+ = 77-79                         D+ = 67-69
         A- = 90-93                           C = 74-76                          D = 64-66
         B+ = 87-89                           C- = 70-73                         D- = 60-63
         B = 84-86                                                               F = 0-60
         B- = 80-83
Classroom Policy
        Devices
             ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
                 this with me prior to class).
             ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media (unless related to
                 class activities)
                                                                                                            1


        Food/Drink
             ●    Food is not allowed in class.
             ●    Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
                  when not in use.
Required Equipment
        All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running a game engine such
        as Unity or Unreal. Either Mac or PC is fine.
Calendar
Note – This is outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
 Week      Class Meetings                                                                      Project
 1                                                                                             Project 1
 8/30      Course Intro
           Lecture - ​Ideation​, ​mood boards
           HW​: Research/Ideation/Mood boards
 2         Demo - Research/Ideation/Comps
 9/4       HW​: Comps
           LAB
           HW​: Comp Revisions
 3         Lecture - 2D graphics: bitmaps, vector, color channels, blend modes, color modes,
 9/11      gamma v linear.
           HW​: Comp Revisions
           Demo - integration, sprites, particle FX, postFX
           LAB
           HW​: Integration first pass
 4         Demo - Audio waveforms, sample rate, bit depth, filters, sessions, levels, looping,
 9/18      formats
           HW​: Asset Revisions/Ambient audio
           Demo - animated sprites
           LAB
           HW​: Integration second pass
 5         Demo - Recording video, breakdown example
 9/25      HW​: Revisions
           LAB
           HW​: Polish
 6         Demo/LAB as needed
 10/2      HW​: Publish
           LAB
           PROJECT 1 DUE
 7         Project 1 postmortem/discussion.                                                    Project 2
 10/9      Intro to Project 2
                                                                                                          2


      HW:​ Research/Ideation/Mood boards
      Demo - Block in, mini-landscape modeling demo, landscape integration
      LAB
      HW:​ Comps/Block-ins
8     Lecture - 3D surfaces (nurbs, subd, poly (mesh)), constraints for games, anatomy of a
10/16 polygon, verts, faces, normals, UVs, colors. Modeling tools: Maya, Blender, Zbrush,
      Mudbox, Magica Voxel, assetforge.io, ProBuilder, UV Layout.
      Demo - Traditional modeling tricks
      HW:​ Hard surface model first pass
      Demo - UV projections, unwrapping, texels, checker test.
      HW:​ Finalize Hard surface model/UV first pass
9     Lecture - Surfacing: materials, lit, unlit, blend modes, textures (color, diffuse, albedo,
10/23 metal, specular, rough, gloss, normal, bump, height, emission, detail), shaders.
      Surfacing tools: Photoshop, Substance, Surforge.
      LAB
      HW​: Revisions/Finalize UVs
      Demo - Substance Painter
      LAB
      HW:​ Revisions/Surfacing first pass
10    Lecture - Lighting models, Blinn Phong, PBR, light types - point, directional, spot,
10/30 area, realtime vs baked.
      Demo - indoor, outdoor, baking, shadows.
      HW: ​Finalize surfacing
      Demo - integration, scale, materials, textures, lighting
      LAB
      HW:​ Revisions/Integration
11    Demo - sculpting, retop
11/6  HW​: Organic model first pass
      Demo - retop/UV unwrapping review
      LAB
      HW:​ Finalize organic model/retop/UVs
12    Demo - simple rigging and animation for mechanical and organic shapes, integration
11/13 HW:​ Rig and animate a model/integration
      Demo - particles review, alt examples
      HW:​ Iterate
13    LAB
11/20
      Thanksgiving (No Class)
14    Demo - props and crumbs
11/27 HW:​ Iterate
      Demo - postFX review
      HW:​ Iterate
15    Demo as needed
12/4  LAB
      HW:​ Polish
                                                                                                 3


          LAB
          HW:​ Publish
 16       FINAL DUE!!!!!
 12/10
Units of Study
    1. Working with media
            ○ Overview of the various media types used in game production including: 2D, 3D, audio,
                animation, materials, textures.
            ○ Detailed information about media structure and formats.
    2. Authoring game-ready assets
            ○ Demos of 2D and 3D asset creation and preparation for game use.
    3. Integration
            ○ Importing and integrating game assets into a project.
            ○ Scene composition, camera setup, lighting, FX, post FX
Project 1: 2D scene
       Create a layered 2D scene composition based on a theme/story of your choice (No memes, fan
       art, or replications of existing games/media). The scene should represent an important spawn
       point which communicates a strong sense of place and establishes context for beginning a level
       or segment.
       You may create original assets and/or work with asset kits. Your choice will affect the final
       deliverables thusly:
            ●   All original work: 1 scene
            ●   Original work + asset kits: 2 unique scenes
            ●   No original work (all asset kits): 3 unique scenes
       References​:
            ●   Rules of Composition
            ●   Environmental Storytelling
            ●   Scene Depth and Layers
            ●   Ori and the Blind Forest
       Requirements​:
            ●   POV: 2D Platformer/Side Scroller in horizontal HD 1080. Fixed camera!
            ●   Authored in a game engine (Unity or Unreal)
            ●   5 layers minimum (background, midground, foreground, plus intermediate layers)
            ●   One (1) particle effect - smoke, fog, fire, sparks, rain, snow, insects, birds, etc.
            ●   One (1) animated object - grass, tree, vegetation, machine, signage, etc.
            ●   Looping ambient audio
            ●   Post processing
            ●   30 second HD1080 video
            ●   High res final images
            ●   Full breakdown including:
                    ○ 3D isometric view of layers (​example​)
                    ○ Scene build-up: layers, FX, post FX
                                                                                                      4


         ●   Project images/video posted to ArtStation AND submitted through Canvas.
     Process​:
         ●   Research/Ideation
         ●   Comps (Photoshop or similar)
         ●   Revisions
         ●   Integration
         ●   Revisions
         ●   Iteration
         ●   Polish
         ●   Publish
Project 2: 3D diorama
     Create a 3D diorama scene based on a theme/story of your choice (No memes, fan art, or
     replications of existing games/media). The scene should represent an important spawn point
     which communicates a strong sense of place and establishes context for beginning a level or
     segment.
     You may create original assets and/or work with asset kits. Your choice will affect the final
     deliverables thusly:
         ●   All original work: 1 scene
         ●   Original work + asset kits: 2 unique scenes
         ●   No original work (all asset kits): 3 unique scenes
     References​:
         ●   Rules of Composition
         ●   Environmental Storytelling
         ●   Dioramas
     Requirements​:
         ●   POV: 3D birdseye/turntable view in horizontal 16:9 layout.
         ●   Authored in a game engine (Unity or Unreal)
         ●   One (1) landscape/natural surface (hillside, shoreline, meadow, clearing, etc.)
                 ○ Single low distortion UV, full PBR map set, appropriate poly count
         ●   One (1) or more organic model(s) (tree, rock, plant, etc.)
                 ○ Single low distortion UV, full PBR map set, appropriate poly count, baked normals
                      from sculpt.
         ●   One (1) or more hard surface model(s) (vehicle, building, machine, etc.)
                 ○ Single low distortion UV, full PBR map set, appropriate poly count, baked normals
                      from high poly.
         ●   One (1) prop kit (min 3 props)
                 ○ Atlased low distortion UV, full PBR map set, appropriate poly count
         ●   One (1) particle effect - smoke, fog, fire, sparks, rain, snow, insects, birds, etc.
         ●   One (1) animated object - grass, tree, vegetation, machine, signage, etc.
         ●   One (1) emissive surface
         ●   Detail “crumbs”
         ●   Looping ambient audio
         ●   Post processing
         ●   30 second HD1080 turntable video
         ●   High res final images
         ●   Full breakdown including:
                                                                                                    5


          ○   3 Images of final result from different angles.
          ○   Scene build-up: block-in, ground, primary elements, secondary elements, crumbs,
              FX, post FX
   ●  Project images/video posted to ArtStation AND submitted through Canvas.
Process​:
   ●  Research/Ideation
   ●  Block-in
   ●  Asset creation
          ○ modeling
          ○ UVs
          ○ surfacing
   ●  Integration
   ●  Lighting
   ●  Revisions
   ●  Iteration
   ●  Polish
   ●  Publish
                                                                                             6


Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns professionalism credit.
Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to attend class meetings. If attending a
scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are expected to promptly notify the instructor of
extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher
education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including
any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
academic honesty University of Texas Honor Code The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. • If you require
assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. • In the event of an
evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re
                                                                                                           7


given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
Services office.
NOTES
Expanded terminology - integration into play test forms
    - Was the core gameplay loop clear?
                                                                                                        8
