                                  Introduction to the Study of Languages
                                            (LIN306; UN 81150)
                                          Summer 2020 (Session 1)
                                        MTWThF 11:30am-1:00pm
                                    Zoom Classroom ID: 950-969-22379
Instructor: Kristie Denlinger                       Email: kdenlinger@utexas.edu
Office: Zoom 941-029-01265                Office hours: M-Th 1-1:30 (in zoom classroom);
                                                             Fr 11:30-1pm (in zoom office)
                                                                      and by appointment
Course Description:
This course will introduce you to linguistics, the scientific study of language. We will be exploring a variety
of topics within this complex subject, including: How are human languages structured? Do humans have
an innate capacity for language? How do children learn language? How is adult language learning different?
How did the languages of the world evolve? What are the differences between verbal and non-verbal
communication? Is there a "universal grammar"? How diverse and different are the languages of the world?
How does language reflect human biology and culture? How does linguistic diversity and multilingualism
factor into politics and society? In exploring these questions, we will learn and make use of many of the
tools and methods linguists use to describe and analyze individual languages and linguistic phenomena.
Course Outcomes:
By the end of the course, students will be able to:
     • Use the basic terminology of linguistics to describe language phenomena.
     • Apply the tools of linguistic analysis to the sounds, words and sentences of a language.
     • Describe the general goals and methods of different branches of Linguistics.
     • Talk about language in a principled and scientific way.
     • Describe and give examples of ways in which languages differ and change over time.
Materials:
Dawson, H. and M. Phelan. (eds). Language files: Materials for an introduction to language and
linguistics, (12th edition). Columbus: Ohio State University Press. ISBN: 978-0814252703. Make sure to
get THIS EDITION.
***The Ohio State University Press has made Language Files available online for free during the current
crisis. You can download it here: https://kb.osu.edu/handle/1811/91418***
There is a links page for the textbook here: https://linguistics.osu.edu/research/pubs/lang-files/links
Any additional readings will be made available on Canvas
Evaluation:
The final grade will be broken down as follows:
         Exams                                                        35%
         Homework Assignments                                         35%
         Lecture Quizzes & Discussion Posts                           20%
         Reflection Papers                                            10%
Exams (35%) We will have 2 exams throughout the semester. Exams will not be overtly cumulative;
however, each section of the course will build upon prior sections. There will be no cumulative final
exam for this course. Exams will be given as open book, timed Canvas quizzes. Students will have access
to the exam for the entire day on which it scheduled and will have 90 minutes to complete it once started.
Homework Assignments (35%) We will have four Homework assignments. Each assignment must be
turned in at the beginning of class when it is due. Note that these assignments are designed for students to
complete over the course of about week to accompany lectures. Do not leave these assignments to the last
minute! See Grading Policies for further details.


Lecture Quizzes & Discussion Posts (20%) Plan on (virtually) attending all scheduled classes in their
entirety on Zoom. Classes will combine both lecture and discussion. See Course Policies for more
information on Zoom expectations. We will meet for class about four times a week. After each class
meeting, you will be asked to complete a very short lecture quiz on the content that we covered. If you are
unable to attend class, you can still receive these points by watching the class recording and completing
the quiz. This quiz must be completed within a week of the class to receive credit. On certain Fridays, in
lieu of class students will have activities that they complete independently. These activities will have
accompanying discussion post requirements that will be outlined in the assignment.
Reflection Papers (10%) We will have one short reflection paper due at the end of the semester. This
assignment is aimed at giving you the chance to explore topics in linguistics that you are most interested
in. You will be asked to watch/listen to a linguistics talk, a podcast or a documentary of your choice and
then relate it to the material that we have covered in class. More details will follow.
Course Policies:
1. Student responsibility: This class is an intensive and requires daily effort. You are expected to take
responsibility for your performance in this class. You are responsible for keeping up with all the
information presented in texts, in lectures, and on Canvas, for asking questions about aspects of
assignments that you do not understand, for knowing and adhering to all course and university
policies, for managing your time effectively, and for saving written documents to minimize assignment
loss due to computer crises.
2. All students are responsible for any missed material or announcements. If you are unable to come
to a class for reasons of official university activity, illness, family emergency, religious holiday, please let
me know before the start of class by sending me an email. If you are having connectivity issues that are
preventing you from accessing Zoom, please let me know as soon as you are able to send me an email. If
you do happen to miss a class, make sure you view the class recording and complete the lecture quiz
within a week. Missing a homework announcement or submission due to an unexcused absence are
not appropriate reasons for a homework extension.
3. All assigned work must be completed on time. If you are unable to attend a lecture on the day an
assignment is due, you should make arrangements to submit your work before class. Make-up
assignments will NOT be given unless due to extreme emergency, such as documented family and
medical emergencies. Please refer to the grading policy for more information.
4. Make-Ups are not allowed on exams unless you have a verifiable emergency. You must contact the
instructor before the exam if you must miss.
5. There is a Canvas site set up for the class. It is your responsibility to check for announcements,
messages and assignments on a regular basis (at least once a day). I recommend that you configure your
Canvas settings so that you get emailed automatically when there is an announcement or message for you.
(Instructions for student notification preferences: https://community.canvaslms.com/docs/DOC-10624)
6. I ask that students share their video and occasionally sound on zoom to facilitate communication and
make it easier to transition in and out of discussion. If you are in a situation where your space or internet
prevents you from doing this, please let me know.
7. I will do my best to respond to e-mails within 24 hours. Please do not rely on a response from me
outside of business hours (M-F 9-5), especially on weekends. I am happy to field clarifying or logistical
questions via e-mail but if you have questions about linguistics, I prefer that you come to my office hours!
8. You may collaborate with other students on homework assignments, but you must write up and turn
in your own assignment individually. Using someone else’s work in a verbatim form or in paraphrased


  form without giving proper credit is plagiarism and will not be tolerated. Please refer to the UT Policy on
  Scholastic Dishonesty for more information.
  9. Please refrain from using your phone or computer for non-class related activities during the lecture.
  10. Students with Disabilities: Please notify me of any modification/adaptation you may require to
  accommodate a disability-related need. All students requiring accommodation from me must provide an
  accommodation letter from UT SSD. You may find out more information on the Services for Students
  with Disabilities website: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/ and/or
  http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/how-to-register-with-ssd/.
  11. Names and Pronouns: Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I
  will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun than the one
  provided.
  12. When in doubt, check this syllabus and Canvas first. Many of your questions can be answered in one
  of these places.
  Grading Policies:
• Final grades will be given according to the grading scale below. I reserve the right to round up (but never
  round down) grades around cutoff points (i.e. an 89.5 may be raised to a 90).
           A:       93-100                     B-:     80-82.9          D+:     67-69.9
           A-:      90-92.9           C+:      77-79.9         D:       63-66.9
           B+:      87-89.9           C:       73-76.9         D-:      60-62.9
           B:       83-86.9           C-:      70-72.9         F:       < 59.9
• Late assignments will be lowered 2 points for every calendar day they are late, unless you have received
  approval from the instructor before the deadline (note: requests are not guaranteed approval).
  Assignments are due at the beginning of class, no later than 11:30pm. Any assignment turned in after the
  start of class on the day it is due is considered late and will receive 2 points off.
• All assignments should be submitted through Canvas. If you are having technical issues and/or Canvas is
  not working properly for you, make sure to email the assignment before the deadline.
• You are responsible for turning in all written assignments in the format specified at the top of the prompt.
  Failure to do so will result in a lower grade.
• It is your personal responsibility to keep up with your grades throughout the semester. All grades will be
  posted on the Canvas site. Please expect 1-2 weeks turn-around time for grades on assignments and tests.
• Please note that due to federal privacy laws I cannot discuss grades over email or by phone or with
  another person (student, parent, etc.). If you wish to talk about a grade we can do so in a private zoom
  conference during office hours or by appointment.
• There will be no bonus or make-up assignments given to individuals; however, I may assign extra credit
  to the entire class. These opportunities will be posted on Canvas and/or announced in class.
  Additional Policies
  Religious holy days: A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations,
  for the observance of a religious holy day should inform me as far in advance of the absence as possible,
  so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
  Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are


subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students and the integrity of the
University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/. I expect everyone to follow the University of Texas Honor
Code: “As a student of the University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the university
and uphold academic integrity.
Tentative schedule (subject to change with announcements)
            Week                    Date             General Topic                        Assignment*
 1. Intro                       Th 6/4       Introduction                        Student Survey
                                F 6/5        What is Language?
 2. Sounds                      M 6/8        Phonetics (acoustic)
                                T 6/9        Phonetics (articulatory)
                                W 6/10       Phonology
                                Th 6/11      Phonology
                                F 6/12       Sounds Activity: NO CLASS           At-home activity/discussion
 3. Structure                   M 6/15       Morphology                          HW 1 Due
                                T 6/16       Syntax
                                W 6/17       Syntax
                                Th 6/18      Semantics
                                F 6/19       Pragmatics Activity: NO             At-home activity/discussion
                                             CLASS
 4. Acquisition/Variation       M 6/22       Review                              HW 2 Due
                                T 6/23       Exam 1
                                W 6/24       Language Acquisition
                                Th 3/12      Language Variation
                                F 6/26       Variation Activity: NO              At home activity/discussion
                                             CLASS
 5. Lava Lamp                   M 6/29       Language and Culture
                                T 6/30       Sociolinguistics
                                W 7/1        Language Contact/Change             HW 3 Due
                                Th 7/2       Language Contact/Change
                                F 7/3        Talking Black in America            At home activity/discussion
                                             documentary: NO CLASS
 6. Linguistics Grab-Bag        M 7/6        TBD
                                T 7/7        TBD
                                W 7/8        TBD
                                Th 7/9       Review & Wrap Up                    HW 4 Due
                                F 7/10       Exam 2
*Note that there will also be lecture quizzes after every class meeting.
