                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
                                             PED 103L:
                                   BEGINNING SOCIAL DANCE
                                        Course Information
GENERAL INFORMATION
Instructor:     Nick Enge
                nickenge@austin.utexas.edu
                (650) 814-4760
Office Hours: By appointment over Zoom
Course Numbers:
    Leads: 74410
    Follows: 74415
Course Times
    The course is taught asynchronously, so you can watch the course videos at any time.
    New course videos will be posted every Tuesday and Thursday.
Course Location
    At home
Prerequisites
    There are no prerequisites for the course, and no prior experience in dance is necessary.
Course Websites
    Announcements, assignments, and grades will be posted on Canvas.
    Course videos will be available on a course website that will be sent to registered students.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                               Summer 2020 - Page 1


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
COURSE CONTENT AND OBJECTIVES
Course Philosophy
    This is an introductory social dance course, designed for absolute beginners and taught
    with an emphasis on the social aspects of dance as a form of communication between two
    people and among members of a group. The basics of several dance styles are taught, with
    attention paid to the arts of leading, following, and co-creating a dance.
Learning Outcomes
    Upon successful completion of this course, students will be able to:
        1. Execute (lead or follow) the basic footwork, partnering skills, and variations for a
                    variety of social dances, including East Coast Swing, Rotary Waltz, Cross-
                    Step Waltz, Nightclub Two-Step, Tango, Merengue, Bachata, Salsa, and West
                    Coast Swing, and Country Two-Step.
        2. Differentiate the rhythm patterns and music appropriate for each dance style.
        3. Collaborate with future partners of all backgrounds and ability levels.
        4. Experience the benefits of social dance, such as body awareness and fitness,
                    creativity and self-expression, stress reduction, and self-confidence.
GRADING OPTIONS
Pass/Fail: Students have the option to take the class Pass/Fail. In order to pass, you must earn
at least 60 points.
Graded: If you take the class for a grade, grades will be assigned with the +/- system:
A = 93-100%, A- = 90-92%, B+ = 87-89%, B = 83-86%, B- = 80-82%, C+ = 77-79%, C =
73-76%, C- = 70-72%, D+ = 67-69%, D = 63-66%, D- = 60-62%, F = 0-59%.
GRADED ELEMENTS
This course is made up of four components:
    1.  Video lessons
    2.  At-home practice
    3.  Online quizzes
    4.  At-home assignments
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                 Summer 2020 - Page 2


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
The first three components will make up 60% of your grade, and the assignments will make up
the other 40%.
Each of these four components will be described in detail on the next few pages.
Video Lessons
Most of the course content will be presented in the form of video lessons.
At the beginning of each video lesson, we will give a brief demonstration of the dance variation
we are going to teach you.
Then, we'll break it down step-by-step. While we're doing this, we ask you to follow along
behind us, mimicking our movements to the best of your ability. It's very important that you
do this. Social dancing isn't something you can just learn by sitting and watching us dance. It's
all about muscle memory, so the more you actually dance along with us, the better you will be
able to learn.
After breaking it down, we will give you an opportunity to virtually dance the variation with us.
Follows will virtually dance with Nick, and Leads will virtually dance with Melissa.
Finally, we'll ask you to practice on your own with music. More on how to do that in just a
moment.
Half-Time Breaks
In our in-person classes, we have "half-time breaks" in the middle of class where we sit down
and talk about other aspects of social dancing, like how it can influence they way we see the
world and the way we interact with others both on and off the dance floor. Although these sit-
down breaks won't necessarily be at half-time anymore, we will still include these half-time
breaks in this online version of the course.
Many of these half-time breaks are based on chapters from one of our two books on social
dancing, Waltzing: A Manual for Dancing and Living, and Cross-Step Waltz: A Dancer's Guide.
While they aren't required, if you're interested in learning more about one of our half-time
break topics, or other ideas related to social dancing, we encourage you to pick up a copy by
clicking the links above.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                Summer 2020 - Page 3


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
At-Home Practice
Social dancing is often described as a three-way partnership between the Lead, the Follow, and
the music. For this reason, no social dance class would be complete without giving you an
opportunity to practice with music.
In both our in-person and online classes, we teach you each variation step-by-step, then set
you free to practice what you've learned with music. This not only gives you the opportunity to
bring music into the equation, but encourages you to have the confidence to execute the
moves by yourself without having the temptation to mimic the teachers. We won't be there for
you to copy when you're out on the dance floor, so we want to give you the opportunity to
practice your skills by yourself before you venture out into the world.
Practice Music Playlists
To help you practice with music, we have carefully curated a collection of music for each dance
that includes the songs that our students most enjoy dancing to—many of which have been
proposed by them! (If you ever have additional songs to propose, you can submit them here:
Music Submissions.)
By giving you a whole practice playlist, rather than just a single song, we allow you to choose
your own adventure, so to speak. We encourage you to listen to snippets of a few different
songs and see which ones really speak to you: you'll be more excited to practice when you
connect with the song you're dancing to.
Each playlist is arranged by tempo, so if you want a song that's faster, move down the playlist,
and if you want a song that's slower, move up the playlist. (Keep in mind that slower isn't
always better: in some cases, if you're having trouble, it might actually help to try practicing to
faster music.)
If you ever want to find one of the practice playlists later, they're all here: Practice Music. That
page also features second playlists for some of the dances, which include even more songs for
the dance, in case you want even more options to practice with. But in the beginning, we
recommend that you start by practicing to songs from the first playlist, which includes the all-
time greatest hits from our classes.
Connecting with Spotify
The embedded Spotify player on the course website allows you to play 30 second clips of each
song directly from each lesson page. This should be enough to practice the move we're
working on a few times to music, but if you want to hear longer portions of the songs, you can
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                   Summer 2020 - Page 4


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
click on the Spotify logo in the upper right hand corner of the player to open the playlist in
Spotify (either the app or the web player, depending in your device).
To play the full songs, you'll need a Spotify account (a free one is fine), which you can sign up
for here: Sign Up for Spotify.
If you want to get rid of the occasional ads on the free version, you can sign up for Premium
here: Spotify Premium. But this certainly isn't required to take this course. (If you're a full-time
student at an accredited college or university, you can get a discount on a Premium account by
signing up here: Spotify Student.)
Practicing with Music
At the end of each lesson, after we virtually dance with you, we'll encourage you to practice on
your own with music. It's important that you take this opportunity for solo practice because, as
we noted before, you won't have us to copy when you're actually on the dance floor.
At the beginning of each dance unit, we'll give you a lesson on how to hear that particular kind
of music, and how to count yourself in, which is another essential skill you'll need on the dance
floor. That way, when you're practicing by yourself with music (and dancing with a partner in the
future), you'll be able to count yourself in and synchronize with the beat.
While we won't specify a particular amount of time you should spend practicing, we encourage
you to practice each variation until you feel confident that you could successfully lead or follow
a partner through it on the dance floor. If at any point during your solo practice you start to feel
lost, you can simply return to the video lesson to dance it with us before trying again by
yourself.
Quizzes
At the end of each dance unit, we'll give you two quizzes: one about the dance, and another
about the music.
Don't worry, the quizzes aren't graded: they're just a way for both you and us to check your
knowledge and make sure that you're learning successfully. (After you answer, you'll see an
explanation of the correct answer, but please make your best attempt at answering it yourself
first.)
Dance Quizzes
The dance quizzes will test your knowledge of essential concepts and vocabulary related to the
dance. While we don't expect you to remember every detail we give you about every variation,
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                  Summer 2020 - Page 5


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
the questions on these quizzes will test your knowledge of the most important things we want
you to remember about that dance.
Music Quizzes
As you're practicing at home with our practice music playlists, try to develop a sense of what
the music for this particular dance sounds like, i.e., what do all of the practice songs have in
common? Do they feel fast or slow? Smooth or bouncy? How many counts are there: 3 or 4?
This skill of identifying dance music is essential for when you go out dancing and need to figure
out for yourself what dance will be best to dance to a particular song, so the music quizzes will
test your ability to identify which music is most appropriate for which dance, and vice versa.
Assignments
Together, the lessons, at-home practice, and quizzes make up 60% of your grade in the course.
(In other words, your course completion percentage on the course website will be weighted as
60% of your final grade on Canvas.)
The other 40% comes from four assignments, all of which can be completed at any time during
the course.
Ask a Question (10 points)
By the end of the course, ask a question about at least one of the lessons (although you're
certainly welcome to ask more). To ask a question, click on the box in the upper right corner of
any lesson that says "Discussions," and we'll answer it for you.
Submit Dance Music (10 points)
By the end of the course, submit 5 danceable songs along with your evaluation of what dance
you would dance to each of them. Music submission instructions can be found in the Canvas
assignment.
Submit a Practice Video (10 points)
By the end of the course, submit a short video clip of you practicing one of your favorite
dances to music. Video submission instructions can be found in the Canvas assignment.
Write a Reflection (10 points)
By the end of the course, write a short (250+ words) reflection about something you learned
during the course. Specific prompts for this reflection can be found in the Canvas assignment.
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                  Summer 2020 - Page 6


                           Department of Kinesiology and Health Education
                                  The University of Texas at Austin
UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Honor Code
   The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
   leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
   expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
   toward peers and community. (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/
   standardsofconduct.php)
Scholastic Dishonesty
   Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
   penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
   University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
   University, policies on scholastic dishonesty are strictly enforced. (http://
   deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/)
Sexual Harassment
   Sex discrimination, sexual harassment, and sexual misconduct in any form will not be
   tolerated, and individuals who engage in such conduct will be subject to disciplinary action.
   The University encourages students to promptly report sex discrimination, sexual
   harassment, or sexual misconduct to Dr. LaToya Hill, Coordinator of Student Emergency
   Services, at (512) 471-5017 or via email at lchill@mail.utexas.edu. (http://
   deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/)
Disability Accommodations
   The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
   accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
   Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone), or
   ssd@uts.cc.utexas.edu. Please notify the instructor of any special accommodations that you
   may need during the first week of class. (http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/)
PED 103L: Beginning Social Dance                                                 Summer 2020 - Page 7
