                               ADV 391K 002 ADVANCED ACCOUNT PLANNING
                                                FALL 2019
 Professor: Michael Dezso
 E-mail: Michael.dezso@gmail.com
 Office: 4.106
 Office Hours: Monday 3:00pm-4:00pm (and by appt.)
Abstract
ADV 391K 002 Advanced Account Planning.
Explores the purpose and practice of Account Planning in the agency. Covers key contributions
Account Planners make in discovering insight that informs the creative brief and creative
development. Topics will include insight mining, role of research in creative development, basic
qualitative techniques, brief writing, and tracking campaign performance. Develops
observational/analytical skills, creative brief writing technique, and strategic presentation skills
through class exercises and an agency sponsored project. Three lecture hours a week for one
semester.
Course Objectives
    1) Understand the purpose of Account Planning and responsibilities of an Account Planner:
        class will cover evolution of Account Planning, the role within the agency, interactions
        with team members, role in campaign development, performance and refinement,
        specifically briefing, testing, and tracking.
    2) Understand the role insight plays in effective creative work and the Account Planner’s
        role in discovering “insight” to inform the creative brief and the creative development
        process. Practice situational analysis and basic qualitative skills within “Discovery”:
        problem identification/definition; cultivate observations and contrarian thinking; and
        discuss and apply research techniques (observation, interviewing).
    3) Understanding elements of a successful brief and ongoing role in creative development:
        class will cover conversion of “Discovery” insight into a compelling creative brief, practice
        writing briefs, and discuss how planners help nurture young ideas through collaboration
        and/or research.
    4) Understand the Account Planner’s responsibility in the “Results” phase of a project: class
        will cover important elements of testing, tracking, and optimization that show creative
        performance and opportunities for improvement; the class will also cover key
        interactions with research partners, digital, and data analysts.
    5) Practice developing a strategic narrative for a pitch: the final assignment will be a team
        exercise to bring the elements of discovery, brief writing, and creative development into
        a single pitch-like presentation that will serve as their “final”.


COURSE MATERIALS
Readings are subject to change, and additional materials may be handed out in class or through e-
mail. Lecture material will be uploaded on the class Blackboard site. Students will be expected to
read required readings prior to attending class. Readings are intended to supplement lecture
material and provide context for class discussions, exercises, and projects.
Required
  • Klein, Gary. Seeing What Others Don’t—The Remarkable Ways We Gain Insight 2013
        (available on Kindle or at Amazon)
  • Kocek, Chris. The Practical Pocket Guide to Account Planning. Yellow Bird Press. (available
        at Co-Op Bookstore)
  • Steel, Jon. Truth, Lies and Advertising. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, 1988. (available
       at Co-Op Bookstore)
Additional Encouraged Reading
  • DeBono, Edward. Six Thinking Hats. Back Bay Books 1999 (availability Amazon)
  • Morgan, Adam. Eating Big Fish. John Wiley & Sons, Inc.: New York, 2007 (available at Co-Op
      Bookstore)
  • Morgan, Adam. Overthrow, 10 Ways To Tell A Challenger Story PhD (available on Kindle)
COURSE GRADING
Grading philosophy mirrors agency reality—a win is a team win, a loss is a team loss. There is
opportunity for students, individually, in brief writing, participation, and peer evaluations.
 Assignment                         Weight                                Number
 Class Participation                 15%                  Letter Grade Grade
 Discovery Team Exercise             15%                  A               93-100
 Creative Brief Writing              15%                  A-              90-92.9
 Exercise                                                 B+              87-.89.9
 Creative Concepting Exercise        10%                  B               83-86.9
 Midterm                             15%                  B-              80-82.9
 Semester end “Pitch”                25%                  C+              77-79.9
 Peer Evaluations                     5%                  C               73-76.9
                                                          C-              70-72.9
                                                          D+              66-69.9
                                                          D               63-66.9
                                                          D-              60-62.9


Please note that there is a catalog requirement for all advertising and public relations students to
achieve a C or better in all communication courses and courses (required and elective) for their
major.
COURSE SCHEDULE
Mondays 4:00-7:00pm
COURSE SCHEDULE
It is expected that readings for each class day have been read prior to attending class. Additional
reading and class materials will be provided in class and on Blackboard throughout the semester.
The class schedule is subject to change.
      Date    Topics                                                                    Readings/Notes
       9/9    Review Syllabus, Class Survey, Establish Teams,
              Account Planning 101: What It Is, What It Does Why It Matters And
              Where It’s Going
      9/16    The Nuts and Bolts of Planning                                            Readings: Chris Kocek
              Class Visit from Agency Planner
      9/23    Client Problems and Market Positioning                                    Readings: Adam Morgan
      9/30    Role of The Audience and Need for Insight                                 Readings: Gary Klein and
              What Are Real Insights and How to Find Them                               Tocqueville, Mead
      10/7    Role of Research in Creativity and Creativity in Research
              Qualitative Technique and Projective Exercise
              Crash Exercise 1: Discovery
     10/14    Client Briefing for Term Project                                          Visit from GSDM [or] RGA
              Hypotheses Discussion: digging “shallow holes”; important audiences, etc.
     10/21    Role of Data in Audience Segmentation, Drivers and Optimization           Class Visit
              Class Visit from Decision Science Expert
              Midterm Exams Distributed                                                 Assignment:
                                                                                        Midterm exams due in class
                                                                                        11/11
     10/28    Converting Insight into a Brief                                           Readings: Jon Steel (a)
              Brief Writing
              Crash Exercise 2: Brief Writing


 11/4 Briefing and Creative Development
      Crash Exercise 3: Concepting
11/11 Rationalization, Revision, Debate
      Crash Exercise 4: The Wall (key part of Class Participation grade)
11/18 Rise of Content and Brand Journalism: Digital and Social            Class Visit
      Class Visit from Digital Oriented Planner
11/25 Gauging Effectiveness: verifying the work works and how it can work
      better
 12/2 Personal Branding
      Class Exercise: Brand You
 12/9 Pitching                                                            Readings: Jon Steel (b)
 TBD  Final Project Consultations: GSDM [or] R/GA


RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused
under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable
time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence
as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable
time after the absence.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance for
more.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's
Office in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized
services are available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ for more.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php for more.
