                                                               Shamanism & the Idea of the ‘Primitive’
                                                                 Dr. Jason Roberts & Dr. Craig Campbell
                      Shamanism and the Idea of the ‘Primitive’
                                              Syllabus
Instructors: Dr. Jason Roberts                          Office hour: F 3:00-4:00
j.roberts@austin.utexas.edu                             Listed as R S 352 • Shamanism & The
Office: Burdine 474                                     Primitive 42970
Office hours: TTh 10-AM & by appointment                (Also as ANS 340, ANT 324L, REE 345)
Dr. Craig Campbell                                      Meets MW 2:00-3:30PM RLP 0.118
craig.campbell@austin.utexas.edu
Office: SAC 4.122
     All over the world, we find people who are called (and who call themselves) “shamans.” But
what does the term really tell us about the people to whom it is applied? The word itself probably
originated in the Tungusic Evenki language of North Asia, and may have already been in use for
more than a millennium when it was introduced to the West after Russian forces conquered the
shamanistic Khanate of Kazan in 1552. Yet in anthropology and the study of religion – let alone in
popular culture – the use of the word “shaman” extends well beyond the Tungusic Siberian context
from which it was borrowed. It has assumed the form and function of a universal category even as
it has come to refer to people whose beliefs, practices, and even appearances are wildly varied.
So, what makes a shaman a shaman? And what, moreover, constitutes “shamanism?”
          This upper division course draws on anthropological scholarship and methods as well as
historical and contemporary literature focusing on shamans and shamanism in Central Asia to
examine such beliefs and practices as three-worlds symbolism, divination, spirit helpers,
drumming, chanting, dancing, hallucinogens, trance, and soul retrieval. However, it also examines
the ways in which various theories of shamanism constitute and appropriate the exotic in a variety
of broadly construed religious settings – the ways in which westerners, from missionaries to social
scientists, have viewed the beliefs and practices of the shaman as an “ism” analogous to a religion
even when that is not necessarily the case. Students of this course will learn to identify the major
theories of “shamanism” along with the inherent biases of those theories in order to better read
accounts of shamans and “shamanism” (from historical to modern, anthropological to popular)
against the grain and discern when collected data reveals as much about the observers as it does
about the shamans they observe.
Flags: Global Cultures & Independent Inquiry
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your major.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the independent
investigation and presentation of your own work.
                                                                                                     1


                                                                                Shamanism & the Idea of the ‘Primitive’
                                                                                   Dr. Jason Roberts & Dr. Craig Campbell
Required Texts:
      •     Buyandelger, Manduhai. Tragic Spirits: Shamanism, Memory, and Gender in Contemporary Mongolia. Chicago &
            London: Univercity of Chicago Press, 2013.
      •     Znamenski, Andrei A. The Beauty of the Primitive: Shamanism and the Western Imagination. Oxford: Oxford
            University Press, 2007.
Attendance
If you must miss class for any reason, please let me know as soon as possible and arrange with a classmate to find out what
was covered in the day's class. Your progress in the class and your preparation for the writing assignments rely heavily on
class discussion. Being both present and prepared are crucial to your success in the class. You are allowed two (2)
undocumented absences without attendance repercussions. Each further undocumented absence lowers your
course grade by one point (i.e., after the second absence 100 – 1.0 = maximum grade of 99, etc.).
Basis for Grading:
      •     Weekly analytic précis/annotated bibliography entries (15) = 60%
      •     Final Project Proposal & Presentation = 5%
      •     Completed annotated bibliography = 20%
      •     Final project = 15%
Weekly Bibliography Annotations:
Before each class students are expected to complete assigned readings. This is absolutely integral both to the discussion
format of the class and to the student’s ability to complete the annotated bibliography which constitutes 85% (75% + 10%) of
his or her final grade. The weekly assignments constitute 75% of the final grade, collectively but without them Each week
students will prepare a one-page written précis which will serve as the basis his or her bibliographic annotation. The
instructor will assign (roughly) half of the class to prepare précis for the Tuesday readings and the other half to prepare précis
for the Thursday readings in order to ensure that adequate attention is devoted to each reading. In addition to preparing
précis on every other reading, students will comment on the précis of 3 of their classmates using the peer review function of
Canvas.
Annotated Bibliography Assignment:
For this assignment, students will compile the finished versions of all of the bibliographic citations and annotations they have
produced over the course of the semester.
      •     During the first 2/3 of the semester, we will work through the two required (core) texts, producing citations and
            annotations as we go. Additionally, each student will comment on the citations and annotations of three of their
            classmates using the peer review function of Canvas.
      •     On alternating class days (probably Tuesdays) during the final 1/3 of the semester, students will produce citations
            and annotations for sources they have individually chosen in support of their specific final projects. Additionally,
            students will share their findings, briefly describing these sources during class and make these project-specific
            bibliographic annotations available to their classmates through a shared Canvas document. On Thursdays,
            students will continue to produce bibliographic citations and annotations chosen by the instructor in support of the
            final projects that the students have chosen.
Final Project Proposal:
The final project proposal, which counts for 15% of the student’s final grade, consists of an abstract outlining your proposed
project and a tentative bibliography of primary and peer-reviewed scholarly sources. The abstract should include detailed
focus and logic statements (Swaffar-Arens précis model) and an assessment/implication statement outlining your hypothesis
and its potential significance to the broader study of shamanism(s) and related topics.
                                                                                                                                 2


                                                                                Shamanism & the Idea of the ‘Primitive’
                                                                                    Dr. Jason Roberts & Dr. Craig Campbell
Final Project:
The final project, which accounts for 15% of the student’s final grade, consists of a five-slide, professional-quality PowerPoint
presentation to be submitted (as opposed to presented) at the end of the semester. The topic of each student’s final project is
determined individually based on the student’s research interests should follow logically from the student’s particular
annotated bibliography.
Class Discussion:
I foster a classroom atmosphere in which everyone is treated respectfully. Classroom discussion of the material is an
important part of the learning process and it is important for you to feel safe and relaxed so that you can speak up in front of
the class without any anxiety, even if you are not certain that your contribution is correct. Please do not hesitate to contact
me if there is anything in the classroom that prevents you from speaking in class.
Questions? Comments? Concerns?
I value your feedback. If you enjoy your class, let me know. If there are any aspects of the class that you do not feel
comfortable with, please inform me.
Additional course offerings from the Department of Religious Studies
      ! If you would like information about majoring or minoring in Religious Studies, see Cyndi Goodson, Undergraduate
            Advisor for Religious Studies (BUR 531; cyndigoodson@austin.utexas.edu)
      ! or visit the department’s webpage https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/rs/index.php
Use of e-mail for official correspondence to students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-
mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
The class will be using its Canvas site, accessible to each of you at https://canvas.utexas.edu/ or through your UT Direct
account. E-mail reminders and updates will be sent though Canvas. The instructor and TA answers university e-mail during
business hours (M-F 8am-5pm). Do not expect a response after hours, immediately before class time or on weekends.
Documented disability statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Details of a student’s disability are confidential. Faculty
do not ask questions related to a student’s condition or diagnosis when receiving an official accommodation letter.
      •     Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g., instructional
            videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
      •     Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are
            required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation,
            site accessibility, etc.).
      •     Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or reference
            SSD’s website for more disability-related information: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior concerns advice line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of
the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The
University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                                                                                  3


                                                                                       Shamanism & the Idea of the ‘Primitive’
                                                                                          Dr. Jason Roberts & Dr. Craig Campbell
       Emergency evacuation policy
       Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
       activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
             • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may
                   not be the one you used when you entered the building.
             • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
             • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
       Do not re-enter a building unless instructed to do so by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the
       Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                       University of Texas Honor Code
        The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
          responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness,
                                                   and respect toward peers and community.
       (1) Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted by a student
       in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work, unless the instructor explicitly allows collaboration.
       (2) You are encouraged to study together and to discuss information and concepts covered in lecture and the sections with
       other students. You can give "consulting" help to or receive "consulting" help from such students.
       (3) Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave material to be
       copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to
       include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
       (4) During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the examinations, nor may
       you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during the examinations will
       result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
       Semester Schedule
        Monday                                                           Wednesday
Week 1  MLK Day - no class                                               Introduction to the course
Week 2  January 28                                                       January 30
        “Enlightenment and Romantic writers Look at                      “From Siberia to North America: Regionalists,
        Shamans” p. 3 The Beauty of the Primitive                        Anthropologists, and Exiled Ethnographers” p. 39 The
                                                                         Beauty of the Primitive
Week 3  February 04                                                      February 6
        “Neurotics to Tribal Psychoanalysts: Shamans                     “Power Plants: Psychedelic Culture Meets Tribal
        through the Eyes of Psychology” p. 79 The Beauty                 Spirituality” p. 121 The Beauty of the Primitive
        of the Primitive
Week 4  February 11                                                      February 13
        “Shamanism Goes Global: Mircea Eliade and                        “Anthropology, Castaneda’s Healing Fiction, and Neo-
        Carlos Castaneda” p. 165 The Beauty of the                       Shamanism Print Culture” p. 205 The Beauty of the
        Primitive                                                        Primitive
Week 5  February 18                                                      February 20
        “Toward the Ancient Future: Shamanism in the                     “Sources of Inspiration: From Native Americana to
        Modern West” p. 233 The Beauty of the Primitive                  European Pagan Folklore” p. 273 The Beauty of the
                                                                         Primitive
Week 6  February 25                                                      February 27
        “Back to Siberia: Adventures of the Metaphor in                  “Introduction: The Return of the Suppressed,” p. 1 Tragic
        Its Motherland” p. 321 The Beauty of the Primitive               Spirits
Week 7  March 04                                                         March 06
        Ch. 1 “Mobile Histories,” p. 39 Tragic Spirits                   Ch. 2 “Technologies of Forgetting, State Socialism, and
                                                                         Potential Memories” p. 67 Tragic Spirits
Week 8  March 11                                                         March 13
        Ch. 3 “Genealogies of Misfortune,” p. 99 Tragic                  Ch. 4 “Thriving and Silenced Stories,” p.131 Tragic Spirits
        Spirits
               March 18-22 SPRING BREAK • FINAL PROJECT PROPOSAL DUE BY END OF BREAK
                                                                                                                                        4


                                                                              Shamanism & the Idea of the ‘Primitive’
                                                                                  Dr. Jason Roberts & Dr. Craig Campbell
Week 9  March 25                                                 March 27
        Ch. 5 “Ironies of Gender Neutrality” p. 169 Tragic        Ch. 6 “Persuasion and Power,” p. 203 Tragic Spirits
        Spirits
Week 10 April 01                                                 April 03
        Ch. 7 “Incomplete Lives,” p. 233 Tragic Spirits          Readings for Dr. Campbell’s presentation (TBA)
Week 11 April 08                                                 April 10
        Student-selected readings (TBD) students present         Reading from: Znamenski, Andrei A. Shamanism and
        annotations of their specific readings to class for      Christianity: Native Encounters with Russian Orthodox
        discussion                                               Missions in Siberia and Alaska, 1820-1917. Westport,
                                                                 Conn: Greenwood Press, 1999.
Week 12 April 15                                                 April 17
        Student-selected readings (TBD) students present         Reading from: Balzer, Marjorie M. Shamanism: Soviet
        annotations of their specific readings to class for      Studies of Traditional Religion in Siberia and Central Asia.
        discussion                                               S.l.: Routledge, 2017.
Week 13 April 22                                                 April 24
        Student-selected readings (TBD) students present         Instructor-selected readings (TBD) pending students’
        annotations of their specific readings to class for      choice of projects
        discussion
Week 14 April 29                                                 May 01
        Student-selected readings (TBD) students present Instructor-selected readings (TBD) pending students’
        annotations of their specific readings to class for      choice of projects
        discussion
Week 15 May 06                                                   May 08
Last    Student-selected readings (TBD) students present Instructor-selected readings (TBD) pending students’
Week    annotations of their specific readings to class for      choice of projects.
        discussion
                  FINAL PROJECT DUE BY THE END OF UNIVERSITY-SCHEDULED EXAM TIME
        Additional Reading Suggestions:
        You may choose some of your individual readings from these sources, and you are encouraged to add to the list!
        •   Baldick, Julian. Animal and Shaman: Ancient Religions of Central Asia. London: I.B. Tauris, 2012.
        •   Balzer, Marjorie M. Shamanic Worlds: Rituals and Lore of Siberia and Central Asia. London: Routledge, 2015.
        •   Balzer, Marjorie M. Shamanism: Soviet Studies of Traditional Religion in Siberia and Central Asia. S.l.: Routledge,
            2017.
        •   Czaplicka, Marie A. Shamanism in Siberia. Whitefish, MT.: Kessinger Publishing, 1914 (reprint 2010). [public
            domain]
        •   Diószegi, Vilmos, and Mihály Hoppál. Shamanism: Selected Writings. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, 1998.
        •   Fowles, Severin M. An Archaeology of Doings: Secularism and the Study of Pueblo Religion. Santa Fe: School for
            Advanced Research Press, 2013.
        •   Greenwood, Susan. The Anthropology of Magic. Oxford: Berg, 2010.
        •   Harvey, Graham. Shamanism: A Reader. London: Routledge, 2003.
        •   Hirsch, Francine. Empire of Nations: Ethnographic Knowledge & the Making of the Soviet Union. Ithaca, N.Y:
            Cornell University Press, 2005.
        •   Jacobson-Tepfer, Esther. The Hunter, the Stag, and the Mother of Animals: Image, Monument, and Landscape in
            Ancient North Asia. Oxford; New York, NY: Oxford University Press, 2015.
        •   Jakobsen, Merete D. Shamanism: Traditional and Contemporary Approaches to the Mastery of Spirits and
            Healing. New York: Berghahn, 1999.
        •   Lewis, Ioan M. Ecstatic Religion: A Study of Shamanism and Spirit Possession. London: Routledge, 2003.
        •   Van, Deusen K. Singing Story, Healing Drum: Shamans and Storytellers of Turkic Siberia. Montréal: McGill-
            Queen's University Press, 2014.
        •   Znamenski, Andrei A. Shamanism and Christianity: Native Encounters with Russian Orthodox Missions in Siberia
            and Alaska, 1820-1917. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press, 1999.
                                                                                                                             5
