 ADV 392                                   Semester: Spring 2020
                                           Class Meets: F 10:00 am – 1:00 pm in BMC 4.212
 Ad Theory
                II
Instructor:        Dr. Natalie Devlin
                   Office: BMC 4.318
                   Phone: (256) 872-7898 (cell)
                   Email: nataliebdevlin@utexas.edu
Office Hours: F 9:00 am – 10:00 am and by appointment
       Course Description                     Course Requirements                     Policies and Resources
 1. Course Objectives and                 1. Required Readings                    1. Classroom Policies
    Learning Outcomes                     2. Classroom expectations               2. University Policies and
 2. How to succeed in this                3. Major Course Assignments                Resources
    course                                4. Course Schedule                      3. University Resources for
                                                                                     Students
                                                                                  4. Safety information
                                            COURSE OBJECTIVES
1) Course Learning Outcomes:
         •    Understand the world of academia, and more specifically, the communication-oriented field.
         •    Practice reading, evaluating, critically analyzing, and critiquing mass communication and advertising-
              related theories.
         •    Prepare for academic research, both in presenting a specific research project and presenting their
              program of research.
         •    Write an original research proposal that possesses a strong theoretical foundation
2) How to succeed in this course:
         Come Prepared to Participate: Come to class having prepared for the day by completing and analyzing
         all readings, and be ready to discuss the day’s material.
         Speak Up in Class: A doctoral seminar is only successful if there is insightful, interesting discussion about
         the week’s readings. I want to hear your thoughts and questions about the material!
         Begin working on your research paper ASAP: Solid research takes time. Begin developing a topic as
         soon as possible.
         Perfect your craft—writing: Becoming a good writer takes a lot of practice, especially when it comes to
         academic writing. I’m here to help however I can.


        Develop pedagogically: You will have to lead discussion with a teammate twice this semester. This
        provides you with an opportunity to develop teaching techniques that you can later utilize when you are an
        instructor of record.
                                        COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
1) Required Readings and Materials:
             o Selected Chapters from Books and Journals Available Online through Library
             o Optional Reading:
                       § Booth, W. C., Colomb, G. G., Williams, J. M., Bizup, J., & Fitzgerald, W. T. ( 2016). The
                           Craft of Research.
        * Additional readings will be made available through Canvas.
2) Major Course assignments:
        Discussion Questions: Students will offer a discussion question about each of the week’s readings. The
        discussion questions should be open-ended and spur interesting discussions on that week’s theory, and
        poses an idea for how the theory can be applied in research, etc. In addition to the discussion question,
        each student should note what they believe the “primary takeaway/learning” from each reading is and
        identify the reading to which the question is related. All discussion questions are due to me by 11:59 PM on
        the Wednesday before they will be discussed in class. If there is a discussion leader assigned to that week,
        you should email your questions to both the discussion leader and me. You are allowed to skip two
        readings/discussion questions during the semester without penalty.
        Student-led Class Discussion: Students will work in teams of 2-3 to lead class discussion for one class
        meeting this semester.
        Research Prospectus: Students should write a 2-3-page prospectus for their research proposal. The
        prospectus should include a title for your project, a brief summary of your proposed theoretical and
        methodological approach, an overview of the literature you will include, your proposed research questions
        and hypotheses, and mention what conference and journal to which you would like to target the project.
        Research Proposal: Students must write an original, empirical research paper that has a solid theoretical
        foundation. The theoretical framework can be a theory discussed in this course or another theory that
        pertains to your research interest area. The paper should include an introduction, literature review, method
        section, and reference list using APA format. The paper should not exceed 20 pages.
        Peer Review Assignment: As a component of the research proposal assignment, students will experience
        the reviewing process. Each student will receive a classmate’s proposal draft (with the classmate’s name
        blinded from the manuscript). They will anonymously complete a thorough review of the manuscript as
        they would review for a journal.
        Research Proposal Presentation: Each student will have 15 minutes to present their research proposal to
        the class. The presentation should prepare students for possible future conference presentations. A more
        detailed assignment sheet will follow.
        Research Program Presentations: Each student will give a presentation that provides the class with an
        overview of their research focus and agenda. This presentation is meant to prepare students for the types of
        presentations that they might be required to give on an academic job interview. A more detailed assignment
        sheet will follow.


        Course Participation, Attendance, and Professional Conduct: Students are expected to have completed
        all readings before each class meeting. A successful doctoral seminar requires thorough, intelligent
        discussion, and this objective cannot be met without being prepared for class.
3) Course grades:
                                                                             Due
                                Assignment                                                   % of Grade
                                                                             Date
                           Discussion Questions                           Each week              15%
                                                                      Will sign up for
                       Student-Led Class Discussion                                              10%
                                                                         date in class
                            Research Prospectus                            Feb. 14               5%
                                                                        Draft: April 3
                             Research Proposal                                                   25%
                                                                      Revision: May 8
                             Peer Review Letter                            April 17              10%
                      Research Proposal Presentation                  April 17/April 24          15%
                      Research Program Presentation                         May 1                10%
                                                                           Assessed
          Course Participation/Attendance/Professional Conduct                                   10%
                                                                    throughout semester
4) Course Reading List:
Please Note: The course schedule is subject to change. Students are responsible for changes that are
announced in class and by email.
                                             Week One, January 24:
                                               Course Introduction
                                             Week Two, January 31:
                  Defining Communication & Advertising + Finding Your Research Interests
               •   Turow, J. (1992) On Reconceptualizing Mass Communication. Journal of Broadcasting &
                   Electronic Media, 36(1), 105-110.
               •   Chaffee, S. H., & Metzger, M. J. (2001). The End of Mass Communication? Mass
                   Communication & Society, 4(4), 365-379.
               •   Dahlen, M., & Rosengren, S. (2016). If advertising won’t die, what will it be? Toward a
                   working definition of advertising. Journal of Advertising, 45(3), 334-345.
               •   Avant, J.A., Kim, K, & Hayes, J. L. (2016). Thirty years of advertising research in leading
                   communication and marketing journals: Learning from the parent disciplines. Journal of
                   Current Issues & Research in Advertising, 38(1), 44-64
                                            Week Three, February 7:
                          Theoretical Foundations + Identifying an Interesting Theory
               •   How to Build Social Science Theories – Chapter 2
               •   Bryant, J., & Miron, D. Theory and Research in Mass Communication. Journal of
                   Communication, 4(54), 662-704
               •   Nan, X. & Faber, R. (2004) Advertising Theory: Reconceptualizing the Building Blocks.
                   Marketing Theory, 4(1/2), 7-30.
               •   Thorson, E., & Rodgers, S. (2019). Advertising Theory in the Digital Age. In Advertising
                   Theory.


                              Week Four, February 14:
                     Theory Building + Asking Good Questions
•   How to Build Social Science Theories – Chapter 9
•   Corley, K. & Gioia, D. (2011) Building Theory About Theory Building: What Constitutes a
    Theoretical Contribution? Academy of Management Review, 36(1), 12-32.
•   Sutton, R. & Staw, B. (1995) What Theory Is Not. Administrative Science Quarterly, 40(3),
    371-384.
•   Colquitt, J. & Zapata, C. (2007) Trends In Theory Building and Theory Testing: A Five-decade
    Study of the Academy of Management Journal. Academy of Management Journal, 50(6), 1281-
    1303.
                               Week Five, February 21:
              Cultivation & Spiral of Silence + Making an Argument
•   Gerbner, G., & Gross., L. (1976). Living with Television: The Violence Profile. Journal of
    Communication, 26(2), 172-199.
•   Morgan, M. & Shanahan, J. (2010) The State of Cultivation. Journal of Broadcasting &
    Electronic Media, 54(2), 337-355.
•   Noelle-Neumann, E. (1974). The spiral of silence: A theory of public opinion. Journal of
    Communication.
•   Stoycheff, E. (2016). Under surveillance: Examining Facebook’s spiral of silence effects in
    wake of NSA internet monitoring. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 93(2), 296-
    311.
                               Week Six, February 28:
         Agenda Setting, Priming, & Framing + Reviewing the Literature
•   Scheufele, D.A., & Tewksbury, D. (2007). Framing, Agenda Setting, and Priming: The
    Evolution of Three Media Effects Models. Journal of Communication, 57,9-20.
•   McCombs, M. & Shaw, D. (1972) The Agenda-Setting Function of Mass Media. Public
    Opinion Quarterly, 36(2), 176-187.
•   McCombs, M. (2005) A Look at Agenda Setting: Past, Present, and Future. Journalism Studies,
    6(4), 543-557.
•   Neuman, W.R., Guggenheim, S., Jang, M., Bae, S.Y. (2014). The Dynamics of Public
    Attention: Agenda-Setting Theory Meets Big Data. Journal of Communication, 64, 193-214.
                                Week Seven, March 6:
                          Individual Meetings about Paper
                               Week Eight, March 13:
 Uses and Gratifications and Diffusion of Innovations + Explaining your Method
• Rogers, E. (1962) Diffusion of Innovations, 4th Ed., 1-37.
• Katz, D., Blumler, J.G., & Gurevitch, M. (1973). Uses and gratifications research. Public
    Opinion Quarterly, 37(4), 509-523.
• Phua, J., Jin, S. V., & Kim, J. J. (2017). Uses and gratifications of social networking sites for
    bridging and bonding social capital: A comparison of Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and
    Snapchat. Computers in Human Behavior, 72, 115-122.
• Sundstrom, B. (2016). Mothers “Google It Up:” Extending communication channel behavior in
    diffusion of innovations theory. Health communication, 31(1), 91-101.
                                Week Nine, March 20:
                                    Spring Break


                                  Week Ten, March 27:
           Being an Academic Part II: Journal Submissions, R&Rs, Etc.
•  Austin, A. (2002) Preparing the Next Generation of Faculty: Graduate School as Socialization
   to the Academic Career. The Journal of Higher Education, 73(1), 94-122.
•  DeFleur, M. (2007) Raising the Question #5 What is Tenure and How Do I Get It?
   Communication Education, 56(1), 106-122.
•  Wang, Y., Rodgers, S., Wang, Z., & Thorson, E. (2016). A seventeen-year study of graduate
   student authorship in advertising journals. Journalism & Mass Communication Educator, 71(1),
   69-83.
•  Neuman, W., Davidson, R., Joo, S., Park, Y., Williams, A. (2008) The Seven Deadly Sins of
   Communication Research. Journal of Communication, 58, 220-237.
                                  Week Eleven, April 3:
  Social Identity Theory & Social Learning Theory + Analyzing your Results
•  Bandura, A. (1978). Social learning theory of aggression. Journal of Communication, 28(3), 12.
•  Tajfel, H., Turner, J. C., Austin, W. G., & Worchel, S. (1979). An integrative theory of
   intergroup conflict. Organizational identity: A reader, 56-65
•  Schulz, A., Wirth, W., Muller, P. (2018). We are the people and you are fake news: A Social
   identity approach to populist citizens’ false consensus and hostile media perceptions.
   Communication Research.
•  Kim, J., & Kim, J. (2018). Effects of social identity and schadenfreude on attitude toward brand
   sponsoring an instant replay review: The moderating role of rivalry and suspense. Journal of
   Consumer Behaviour, 17(6), 542-552.
•  Qin, Y., & Men, L. R. (2019). Exploring negative peer communication of companies on social
   media and its impact on organization-public relationships. Public Relations Review, 101795.
                                 Week Twelve, April 10:
  Public Relations & Crisis Communication Theories + Defining Your Impact
•  Coombs, W.T., & Holladay, S.J. (2002). Helping crisis managers protect reputational assets:
   Initial tests of the situational crisis communication theory. Management Communication
   Quarterly, 16(2), 165-186.
•  Austin, L., Fisher Liu, B., & Jin, Y. (2012). How audiences seek out crisis information:
   Exploring the social-mediated crisis communication model. Journal of Applied Communication
   Research, 40(2), 188-207.
•  Ciszek, E. L. (2015). Bridging the gap: Mapping the relationship between activism and public
   relations. Public Relations Review, 41(4), 447-455.
•   Brown-Devlin, N. (2018). Experimentally examining crisis management in sporting
   organizations. In Billings, A.C., Coombs, W.T., & Brown, K.A. Reputational challenges in
   sport: Theory and application, 41-55.
•  Schoofs, L., Claeys, A. S., De Waele, A., & Cauberghe, V. (2019). The role of empathy in
   crisis communication: Providing a deeper understanding of how organizational crises and crisis
   communication affect reputation. Public Relations Review, 45(5), 101851.
                                Week Thirteen, April 17:
                            Research Proposal Presentations
                                Week Fourteen, April 24:
                           Individual Meetings about Projects
                                  Week Fifteen, May 1:
         Being an Academic Part III: Defining Your Research Program
                           (Research Program Presentations)
                                  Week Sixteen, May 8:
                      Final Paper Draft and R&R Response Due


POLICIES AND RESOURCES
1) Classroom Policies:
        A. Grading Policies: In this course, grades are not given. They are earned. Therefore, I do not give you
             a grade; rather, you earn your grade.
        B. Policy on late work: Late Work will not be accepted. Exceptions will be made under extreme
             circumstances, if the student discusses the issue with the instructor ahead of time, either in person or
             via e-mail/phone.
        C. Plagiarism: In accordance with the UT Honor Code, Plagiarism will not be tolerated in this course. If
             words are not your own or are taken from another source, they must be properly quoted and cited. If
             you have any questions about plagiarism, proper citations, etc., please see me. Please read the
             http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct
        D. Policy on absences: Attendance is mandatory. In order to be successful in this course, it is
             imperative that you attend every single class. If attendance becomes a problem, it will impact your
             participation grade.
        E. Course Communication: If you send me an email during business days, please expect a response
             within 24 hours. All emails should be written in a professional manner. I will not respond to emails
             that are not properly formatted and/or include severe spelling/grammatical errors. I will assume that
             your email is spam if it is poorly written. If you are unsure as to how to properly format an email,
             please visit: http://smallbusiness.chron.com/proper-business-email-format-40878.html.
2) University Policies and Resources:
        A. University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning,
             discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
             University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
             toward peers and community.
             Mandatory reading: All students agree to read then abide by the University of Texas at Austin’s
             Standard of Academic Integrity and understand the nature of Academic Dishonesty as defined by UT-
             Austin at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php and
             http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
        B. Student Accommodations: Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
             accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
             with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
             http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
                  l    Please request a meeting as soon as possible for us to discuss accommodations
                  l    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
                  l    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you.
        C. Accommodation of Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending
             absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
             class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will
             be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
3) University Resources for Students:
        A. University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/grad/.


4) Safety Information:
          A. Behavior concerns advice line: If you’re worried about the behavior of a classmate, roommate,
               friend, etc., please call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050. For more
               information, please visit: https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php.
          B. Emergency Planning: In case of emergency, proper plans can be found online at
               https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/plans.php.
          C. Counseling & Mental Health Center: Provides confidential individual and group counseling for
               students. (512) 471-3515
          D. Student Emergency Services: Provides outreach, advocacy, intervention, support and referrals for
               students and their families in difficult situations. (512) 471-5017.
          E. Interpersonal Violence Peer Support: Provides expertly trained students who provide private, peer-
               based support for students impacted by interpersonal violence. (512) 471-6147
          F. Advocates: Professional staff who provide support for students who have been impacted by
               interpersonal violence by exploring resources, reporting options, and accommodations. 512-232-
               2860/512-232-6953
5) Title IX Information:
   A. What is Title IX? Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
        harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
        educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
        discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
                    1.Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
                    2.Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
                    become involved in a Title IX investigation.
                    3.Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
        The University of Texas is committed to providing a safe learning environment for all students that is free of
        all forms of discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, domestic violence, dating
        violence, and stalking. If you (or someone you know) has experienced or experiences any of these incidents,
        know that you are not alone. The university has staff members trained to support you in navigating campus
        life, accessing health and counseling services, providing academic and housing accommodations, helping
        with legal protective orders, and more.
   B. Mandatory Reporters: Please be aware all UT faculty members are “responsible employees,” which means
        that if you tell me about a situation involving sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, domestic
        violence, or stalking, I am legally required to share that information with the Title IX Coordinator. Although
        I am required to make that notification, you will control how your case will be handled, including whether
        or not you wish to pursue a formal complaint. Our goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options
        available to you and that you have access to the resources you need.
   C. Who do I contact if I want to file a report? If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies
        without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information
        about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
        titleix@austin.utexas.edu
