                                 The University of Texas at Austin
                                       Educational Psychology
                                EDP F384C: Multicultural Counseling
                                          Unique # 73920
                                           Summer 2020
Class meets: Summer Session I June 4 - June 25 online
                 Daily zoom course meetings Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday 1-3
Instructor:      Delida Sanchez, PhD
Pronouns:        she/her/hers
E-mail:          delida.sanchez@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Zoom by appointment
TA:
Pronouns:
E-mail:
Office hours: Zoom by appointment
                                Course Description and Objectives
Course Description:
This course is an introduction to topics of cultural diversity and multiculturalism in counseling.
This course will help students to gain basic knowledge of important cultural issues and various
cultural groups as well as foster one’s self- awareness as a cultural being influenced by one’s
own values and experiences.
Course Objectives:
This course is designed to enhance your multicultural counseling competencies for providing
psychological services to culturally diverse populations. Specific objectives of this course include
the following:
    •   Develop an awareness of the ethics of providing culturally competent services
    •   Increase your knowledge of multicultural constructs and theories
    •   Develop an awareness, sensitivity, and understanding of the experiences of diverse
        racial, ethnic and cultural groups
    •   Understand how culture has shaped your worldview and how this impacts your
        understanding of and interactions with others


     •   Facilitate personal growth through increasing awareness of your assumptions, values,
         and biases
The web-based course will have synchronous and asynchronous components. Students will
complete modules and attend live Zoom course meetings Monday through Thursday.
Course Expectations:
Required Devices:
Access to the internet is required for success in this course. All assignments, lectures, and
course materials will be accessed and submitted on Canvas. Students will be required to use
their UT Zoom account. Please let your instructor know ASAP if you encounter technical
difficulties that might delay your completion or submission of a course expectation. Contact IT
Services for assistance resolving technical issues at help@utexas.edu or (512) 475-9400.
Class Attendance:
Our Monday through Thursday Zoom course meetings will begin promptly at 1:00pm. Please
plan to the best of your ability to ensure that you are ready to learn at the beginning of class.
Consistent tardiness will negatively impact your final grade. Due to the abbreviated nature of
the course, and the didactic and experiential components to learning that will take place, all
students must attend each Zoom course meeting. An absence jeopardizes your ability to pass
the class. You must notify the instructor at least 24- hours prior to any absence, except in cases
of emergency.
An excused absence will not result in a five-point deduction if you e-mail me a quality 1-2-page,
double spaced thought paper on the readings you missed that day within 24 hours of the class
you missed (unless you make other arrangements with me in advance). The thought paper
should include your reactions to the class readings for the day you missed. Students who are
consistently late will also have points deducted from the class participation grade.
Zoom Etiquette:
     • Try to log online to our class meeting from a quiet, distraction-free environment. We
         have little time together; let’s try to maximize it!
     • Keep your Audio on mute until you want to speak. We must work together to limit
         background noise. When you want to speak, be sure to unmute yourself to talk.
     • Enable Video so that we can see you. Seeing who’s in the meeting matters in
         conversations, a lot, and facial cues are important. Zoom for the smartphone is very
         user-friendly.
     • Remember that Chat is public, and may be recorded, and archived.
         • Have a plan for taking notes (paper and pencil, digital notepad, Word/Pages doc).


                                    Course Requirements
1. My Culture Paper:
   This paper is an exploration into the nature of your own family history, personal values
   and cultural identity. Using Hays’ ADDRESSING framework, please write a 7-8 page
   cultural autobiography that addresses the components of your cultural identity (age,
   ethnicity, race, culture, spirituality, class, gender identity, sexual orientation, ability,
   etc.). PLEASE FILL IN ALL OF THE REFERENCE GROUPS LISTED. The paper is to be written
   from a multigenerational perspective and should address how your familial, ethnic, and
   cultural influences and life experiences have led to your current sense of self, yourself as
   a psychologist/counselor-in-training, and your ability to work with different groups.
   When writing the paper, please include the following:
       1) Attach (or insert within text) a photograph of yourself to the paper and answer
           both parts of this question: a) When you look at your photograph, what do you
           think others see in terms of your cultural background based purely on your
           physical features? b) What do you see about yourself?
       2) Describe yourself in terms of each component of the ADDRESSING Framework.
       3) How many people are in your family? Where were you born? Where were your
           parents and grandparents born? What generation (e.g., immigrant, 1st
           generation U.S. born, etc.) in the U.S. do you represent? Note: If you or family
           were adopted, you may want to include information for both your biological
           family and your adopted family, depending on the level of contact (if any) you
           have with your biological family.
   A) Group Awareness
       1) Describe your earliest recollection of learning your race or ethnicity.
       2) When did you recall learning about your gender? How did you learn this? What
           gender assumptions/biases are common in your cultural group?
       3) When do you remember learning about what your sexual orientation is and how
           did you learn this? How did your family help shape your attitudes about sexual
           orientation?
       4) When did you find out what religion (if any) your family practiced? How did your
           family feel about people who had a different religion? Did you have similar
           feelings?
       5) How often did your family talk about your ethnic heritage and in what context?
           What message did you receive about other cultural or ethnic groups?
       6) What cultural values do you currently hold? Are they similar to or different than
           those of your family? Which of these values will be different from the common
           values of other cultural groups?
   B) Social Awareness and Present Views
       1) Discuss your earliest recollections of learning that people are “different.”
       2) How did you first come to understand that racism existed? What did you learn
           from this experience?
       3) What has been the major source of information that has shaped your
           perceptions of ethnic or cultural minorities?


        4) How do you plan to manage value conflicts with your client/students?
        5) What groups do you think that you will have most difficulty working with? The
            least difficulty? Why?
        6) What are the implications of these answers for your work with individuals and
            groups from both similar and dissimilar cultural backgrounds?
   All students must submit a typed, double-spaced paper. It should be in the form of
   question and answer, as presented above. Papers uploaded late will be penalized
   (lowered five points per class session late).
2. Reaction Paper:
   There will be 1 reaction paper between 2 - 3 pages in length in response to the video
   Cracking the Codes. Your reaction paper should include a discussion of your emotional
   reactions to the video assigned (e.g., did you find yourself feeling sad, angry, happy, or
   anxious during part of the video and if so why?) as well as a reflection of how the topic
   matter relates to your own identity (e.g., race, gender). Reaction papers will be graded
   primarily on your communication skills, and only secondarily on the content and
   originality of your ideas. Although the reaction paper should not summarize the entire
   video, it should include enough information about the video to make your ideas or
   criticisms well-grounded.
3. Case Conceptualization:
   Please write a 3-4 page case conceptualization on one of the main characters from the
   movie Pariah (e.g., Alike, Laura, Bina, Alike’s mother) to be shown in class. Your case
   conceptualization should incorporate a multicultural framework that addresses some of
   the institutional, structural and systemic cultural issues (e.g., homophobia, racism,
   sexism) presented in the movie. You may use the following questions as a guide:
   1. Define the presenting problem. What are the salient cultural issues facing the main
        character you are focuses on (e.g., Alike, Laura, Bina, Audrey)?
   2. What are some of the racial/cultural considerations that the counselor should be
        aware of in working with Alike? What systemic factors are contributing to or
        sustaining the problem?
   3. What might be some of the challenges in working with Alike (e.g., racial, sexuality,
        gender) based on your own identities?
   4. What specific steps would you take to make ensure that your clinical work is
        culturally responsible and responsive? Please include a sample dialogue between
        you and the character of the movie that you chose to write about.
   5. Please include 3 citations to support your work.


   4. Take Home Final Exam: There will be a final exam based on the Cornish et al. textbook,
       the canvas readings, and the powerpoint presentations. The exam will consist of
       multiple-choice questions and two-three short essays.
   5. Daily discussion board posts
       Students not facilitating the group discussion of the daily readings will share their
       reflection (thoughts/reactions) of the day’s assigned reading for class. Your initial post
       must be made by 11am M-Th. Read all Module components before posting your initial
       thoughts. You then must respond to two other classmates on two different days, final
       posting by Thursday at midnight. Participation in discussion activities will be measured
       by the content and dates on the discussion postings. Please do not wait until the last
       minute to post your ideas. Posting early gives others the opportunity to give you
       feedback on your thoughts and ideas. All postings must support the day’s topic and
       assigned readings. When responding to others, provide ideas of why you agree or
       disagree related to the topic. See the rubric on Canvas.
   6. Group Facilitation of Daily Readings
       Beginning June 9th, the class discussion of the readings will be led by pre-assigned
       groups of 2-3 students. Please come prepared with 2-3 questions to guide our
       discussions and engage your peers. Unless otherwise instructed, class discussions will
       focus on the day’s readings. Reflection and discussion points should respond to the
       following three prompts:
   1) What do you think were the main “take-home” points of the readings assigned?
   2) What is 1 (or more) thing(s) that you related to or reacted to (e.g., emotionally) from
       the readings/exercise and why?
   3) What are 2 questions you were left with or issues you need clarifying after completing
       the readings/exercise?
   7. Course Participation
       This course is 100% online. You will participate in live Zoom online course meetings
       Monday through Thursday from 1pm-3pm. Participation points will include punctual
       attendance, engaged in discussions, asking relevant questions, participating in the live
       meeting with no outside use of technology. Tracking will occur using the Roll Call
       Attendance function within Canvas.
Required Text:
Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.) (2010).
Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken: NJ.
Additional required readings will also be posted to Canvas.


Breakdown of Grades:
             Assignment                   Points Possible     Percent of Total Grade
 My culture paper                         100 points          15 %
 Reaction Paper                           100 points          10 %
 Case Conceptualization                   100 points          20 %
 Final Exam                               100 points          25 %
 Weekly Discussion Board Posts            20 points x 10 =    10%
                                          200 points
 Group Facilitation                       10 points x 2 = 20 10%
                                          points
 Attendance/Participation                 3 points x 12       10 %
                                          course meetings =
                                          60 points
Grades: 100 points total:
94-100 = A      90 - 93 = A-    87-89 = B+     84-86 = B      80-83 = B-    77-79 = C+
74-76 = C      70 -73 = C-     67-69 = D+      64-66 = D      60-63 = D-    Below 60= F
                         CLASS SCHEDULE/READING AND ASSIGNMENTS
                                        (Subject to Revision)
June 4         Introductions and Syllabus Overview
               Overview of multicultural counseling competencies
               Required Readings: Sue Chapter 2. The superordinate nature of
               multicultural counseling and therapy. In Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2012). Counseling
               the culturally diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Ventura, CA: John Wiley &
               Sons. (Canvas)
June 8         Practitioners’ self-awareness of values, beliefs and biases
               Understanding the constructs of multicultural counseling and social justice in
               counseling
               Required Readings: Hays (2008) (Canvas); Sue & Sue, Chapters 3-4.
               Multicultural Counseling Competence for Minority Group Counselors/Therapists
               & The Politics of Counseling and Psychotherapy: Social Justice in Counseling
               (Canvas)
June 9         Becoming a Racially Competent Therapist: Multicultural Counseling Broaching
               Skills


        Required readings:
        Day-Vines, Ammah, Steen, & Arnold (2018). Getting comfortable with
        discomfort: Preparing Counselor Trainees to Broach Racial, Ethnic, and Cultural
        Factors with Clients during Counseling. Int J Adv Counselling, 40-89, 89-104. DOI
        10.1007/s10447-017-9308-9.
        Cornish pp. 267-290 (CHAPTER 9): Sanchez, D., & Davis III, C., (2010). Becoming
        a racially competent therapist. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I.,
        Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
        Competencies. (267-290).
        Please download and watch:
        Video: Cracking the Codes
        Assignment for June 12: 3-page reaction paper to Cracking the Codes.
        Suggested Reading:
        Douglass, S. Wang, Y., & Yip, T. (2016). The everyday implications of ethnic-racial
        identity processes: Exploring variability in ethnic-racial identity salience across
        situations. Journal of Youth and Adolescence, 45:1396-1411.
        Cornish pp. 231-265 (CHAPTER 8): Dixon-Peters, A., (2010). Developing
        multicultural competency in clinical work with people of mixed ancestry. In
        Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R.,
        (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies (231-265).
        Day-Vines, N. L., Cluxton-Keller, F., Agorsor, C., Gubara, S., & Otabil, N. A. A.
        (2020). The Multidimensional Model of Broaching Behavior. Journal of
        Counseling and Development, 98(1), 107-118.
June 10 White Identity and Privilege
        Required Readings:
        Dressel, Kerr, & Stevens. In Cornish et al. chapter 15
        Stewart et al. (2012). White Privilege Awareness and Efficacy to Reduce Racial
        Inequality Improve White Americans’ Attitudes Toward African Americans.
        Journal of Social Issues, 68 (1), pp. 11-27.
        Please download and watch:
        Video: Tim Wise: Race & Whiteness in the Era of Trumpism:
        https://youtu.be/6myUwP3wPfs.
        Suggested Readings:


        Applebaum, B. (2003). White privilege, complicity and the social construction of
        race. Educational Foundations, 17, 5-20;
        Devos, T. & Banaji, M. (2005). American=White? Journal of Personality and Social
        Psychology, 88, 447-466.
        McIntosh, P. (1988). Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack
June 11 Microaggressions and Internalized Oppression
        Hook, J. N., Farrell, J. E., Davis, D. E., DeBlaere, C., Van Tongeren, D. R., & Utsey,
        S. O. (2016). Cultural humility and racial microaggressions in counseling. Journal
        of counseling psychology, 63(3), 269-277.
        Sue et. al. (2019). Disarming Racial Microaggressions: Microintervention
        Strategies for Targets, White Allies, and Bystanders. American Psychologist         ,
        74(1), 128-142
        Suggested Reading:
        Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G. C., Bucceri, J.M., Holder, A. M., Nadal, K.
        L., & Esquilin, M. (2007). Racial microaggressions in everyday life: Implications
        for clinical practice. American Psychologist, 62(4), 271-286.
        REACTION PAPER DUE Friday, June 12 at 11:59pm
June 15 Acculturation: Competencies with immigrant communities and linguistically
        diverse populations
        Required Readings:
        Nassar-McMillan, S. C., Nour, M. D., & Al Qimlass, A. M. Counseling:
        Settings, clinical considerations, and counselor cultural competence. In Amer &
        Awad. (Chpt. 21)
        Viruell-Fuentes, E. A., Miranda, P. Y., & Abdulrahim, S. (2012). More than culture:
        Structural racism, intersectionality theory, and immigrant health. Social Science
        & Medicine, 75(12), 2099-2106.
        Suggested Readings:


        Schwartz, S. J., Unger, J. B., Zamboanga, B. L., & Szapocznik, J. (2010).Rethinking
        the concept of acculturation: Implications for theory and research. American
        Psychologist, 65(4), 237-251.
        MY CULTURE PAPER DUE
June 16 Ethnicity
        Required Readings:
        Sanchez, del Prado, & Davis (2010). Broaching Ethnicity Competently in Therapy.
        In Cornish Chpt 4.
        El-Jamil, F., & Ahmed, S. Psychotherapy Models: Cultural Applications of
        Psychodynamic, Cognitive Behavioral, Family Systems, and culture-specific
        approaches. In Amer & Awad (Chapt. 22).
        Suggested Readings:
        Haboush, K. L., & Alyan, H. School Psychology: Enhancing School Climate and
        School Connectedness. In Amer & Awad (Chpt. 23)Ethnicity: Competencies with
        immigrant communities and linguistically diverse populations
June 17 Gender
        Required readings:
        Chang et al. Chapter 11. Know options for Social, Medical, and Legal Transition,
        in Chang et al. (2018). A clinician's guide to gender-affirming care: working with
        transgender and gender nonconforming clients
        Singh, Boyd, & Whitman (2010), Counseling and Psychotherapy with transgender
        and intersex persons, in Cornish, Chapter 14
        -Smart (2010). Counseling competencies with women, in Cornish, Chapter 16
        Stevens & Carlson (2010). Psychotherapy with men, in Cornish, Chapter 7
        Suggested reading:
        Chang, S. C, Anneliese, & dickey (2018). A clinician's guide to gender-affirming
        care: working with transgender and gender nonconforming clients
        Suggested film: My Life in Pink
June 18 Sexual Orientation
        Required reading:


               -Schreier & Lassiter (2010). Competencies for working with sexual orientation
               and multiple cultural identities, in Cornish, Chapter 10
               -Lemoire, S. J., & Chen, C. P. (2005). Applying person-centered counseling to
               sexual minority adolescents (Canvas).
               Recommended readings:
               Adames, H. Y., Chavez-Dueñas, N. Y., Sharma, S., & La Roche, M. J.
               (2018). Intersectionality in psychotherapy: The experiences of an AfroLatinx
               queer immigrant. Psychotherapy, 55(1), 73-79.
               Simoni & Walters (2001). Heterosexual identity and heterosexism: Recognizing
               privilege to reduce prejudice. Journal of Homosexuality, 41(1), 157-172.
               Movie: Pariah
June 22        Social Class
               Required reading: Ming Liu, Corkery, & Thome (2010). Developing competency
               in social class and classism in counseling and psychotherapy. In Cornish
               Chapter12
               CASE CONCEPTUALIZATION PAPER DUE
June 23        Ability/Disability/Ableism
               Required reading: Palombi (2010). Disability: Multiple and intersecting
               identities-developing multicultural competencies, In Cornish, Chapter 3
               Olkin, R. (2001). Could you hold the door for me? Including disability in diversity,
               Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 8(2), 130-137.
June 24        Religion/Spirituality
               Required readings: Savage & Armstrong (2010). Developing competency in
               spiritual and religious aspects of counseling, In Cornish Chpt 13
June 25        Take Home Exam
               You must complete final exam DUE MONDAY, June 29th.
                                               Policies
Personal Pronoun Use
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to me with your legal name. I will
gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than what appears on the roster,


and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this early in the semester so that I
may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holidays:
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day
you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after
the absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of
your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be
absent to observe a religious holy day.
UT Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
Academic Integrity
You and other students are expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of
individual honor in scholastic work" undertaken at the University (Sec. 11-801, Institutional
Rules on Student Services and Activities). This is a very basic expectation that is further
reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any
assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires
you to: (1)acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts; (2)
complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
assistance in preparing them; (3) follow instructions for assignments and exams, (4) observe the
standards of your academic discipline and (5) avoid engaging in any form of academic
dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
Students found guilty of academic dishonesty (including all forms of cheating) will receive a
grade of 0 (note the academic dishonesty policy refers to all work and tests in the course, not
just exams). For further information about academic dishonesty, please visit:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We all need accommodations because we all learn
differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you,
please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your
needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a variety of resources on campus:
Accessibility and Inclusion:
The university is committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment
consistent with university policy and federal and state law. Please let me know if you


experience any barriers to learning so I can work with you to ensure you have equal
opportunity to participate fully in this course. If you are a student with a disability, or think you
may have a disability, and need accommodations please contact Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD). Please refer to SSD’s website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered with SSD, please deliver
your Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the semester so we can discuss your
approved accommodations and needs in this course.
Counseling and Mental Health Center:
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle during this class by eating well, exercising, avoiding
drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep, and taking some time to relax. This will help you
achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle.
You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important
part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather
than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like
anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. 24/7 Crisis Line at (512) 471-
2255; Web address: http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
More than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year
to improve their academic performance. All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic
coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more
information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc, call 512-471-3614, or visit their office
in JES A332.
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050, or submit your concerns on their
web form at https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line. Your
call/submission can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust
your instincts and share your concerns.


Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs
in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
    have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to
the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or
with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they
are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies
without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title
IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Recording Policy
Excluding students with a documented disability, the use of electronic recording devices in class
are prohibited without prior permission of the instructor.
Course Readings:
Applebaum, B. (2003). White privilege, complicity, and the social construction of race.
         Educational Foundations, 17(4), 5-20.
Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). (2010).
         Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
         Inc.
Chapters assigned in Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies:
         Dixon-Peters, A., (2010). Developing multicultural competency in clinical work with
                 people of mixed ancestry. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I.,
                 Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
                 Competencies. (231-265). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
         Dressel, J. L., Kerr, S., & Stevens, H. B., (2010). White identity and privilege. In Cornish,
                 J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.).


                Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (443-474). Hoboken: NJ:
                John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Ming Liu, W., Corkery, J., & Thome, J., (2010). Developing competency in social class
                and classism in counseling and psychotherapy. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A.,
                Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural
                Counseling Competencies. (351-378). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Palombi, B. J., (2010). Disability: Multiple and intersecting identities – developing
                multicultural competencies. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I.,
                Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
                Competencies. (55-92). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Sanchez, D., & Davis III, C., (2010). Becoming a racially competent therapist. In Cornish,
                J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.).
                Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (267-290). Hoboken: NJ:
                John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Sanchez, D., del Prado, A., & Davis III, C., (2010). Broaching ethnicity competently in
                therapy. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., &
                Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (93-
                116). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Savage, J., & Armstrong, S., (2010). Developing competency in spiritual and religious
                aspects of counseling. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger,
                L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
                Competencies. (379-413). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Schreier, B. A., & Dudley Lassiter, K., (2010). Competencies for working with sexual
                orientation and multiple cultural identities. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A.,
                Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural
                Counseling Competencies. (291-316). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Singh, A. A., Boyd, C. J., & Whitman, J. S., (2010). Counseling competency with
                transgender and intersex persons. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L.
                I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
                Competencies. (415-441). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Smart, R. (2010). Counseling competencies with women: Understanding gender in the
                context of multiple dimensions of identity. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A.,
                Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural
                Counseling Competencies. (475-512). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Stevens, M. A., & Englar-Carlson, M., (2010). Psychotherapy with men: Building practice
                competencies. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., &
                Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (195-
                230). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Articles Assigned:
Devos, T., & Banaji, M. R. (2005). American = White? Journal of Personality and Social
        Psychology, 88(3), 447-466.


Hays, P. A. (2008). Addressing cultural complexities in practice: Assessment, diagnosis, and
        therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lemoire, S. J., & Chen, C. P. (2005). Applying person-centered counseling to sexual minority
        adolescents. Journal of Counseling & Development, 83(2), 146-154.
McIntosh, P. (2003). White privilege and male privilege. Privilege: A reader, 147-160.
Olkin, R. (2002). Could you hold the door for me? Including disability in diversity. Cultural
        Diversity & Ethnic Minority Psychology, 8(2), 130-137.
Simoni, J. M., & Walters, K. L. (2001). Heterosexual identity and heterosexism. Journal of
        Homosexuality, 41(1), 157-172.
Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G. C., Bucceri, J. M., Holder, A. M., Nadal, K. L., & Esquilin,
        M. (2007). Racial microaggressions in everyday life: Implications for clinical practice.
        American Psychologist, 62(4), 271-286.
Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2012). Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.).
        Ventura, CA: John Wiley & Sons.
