AET 323         The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | Center for
(20629)         Integrated Design
Spring 2019     Syllabus
Course          Screen Scoring
Information     Monday and Wednesdays 11:00am -12:30pm in DFA 4.126
                Course website at http://canvas.utexas.edu
Instructor      Sam Lipman, M.Mus., Lead Composer and Developer at Sam Lipman Music
                samuel.lipman@utexas.edu
                (512) 296 9117
                Office Hours: Wed 10:00am - 11:00 in 4.132E
Catalog         Exploration of film and game play situations requiring music in the form of an
Description     instrumental score or created with virtual instruments. Comparative study of
                music tracks in popular film genres, documentary films, television and games
                as a reference for original works.
Course          This course is designed to introduce students to concepts of music and sound
Overview        for a variety of media with a primary focus on creating original music and/or
                soundtracks. Topics include music structures, sound and editing, film and
                video synchronization, game audio and other sound for screen related topics.
Prerequisite(s) AET 305 Foundations of Music Technology, graduate standing, and consent of
                instructor and the graduate adviser.
Objectives &    By the end of the course, students should be able to:
Assessment      1) Identify the several different functions of film music.
Instruments
                2) Be familiar with the digital audio environment with focus on screen
                   scoring.
                3) Compose basic soundtrack elements in several different styles and
                   functions.
                4) Emulate and improve upon ‘temp’ tracks.
                5) Develop and expand musical themes across a large structure.
Course          I will post reading materials as necessary.
materials
Supplies        Over-the-ear headphones and external hard drive. REQUIRED every class
Needed          meeting!
Software        Logic X, NI Komplete
Optional        On the Track, A Guide to Contemporary Film Scoring - Fred Karlin, Rayburn
Textbooks       Wright
                A Composer’s Guide to Game Music - Winifred Phillips


Course        Assessment of each project will be undertaken on the basis of each
Content       assignment plus a small component for originality and creativity. For the
              Final Project, you will score a short film that I will provide or of your own
              choosing, for which you will create a music track, and if needed, additional
              creative sound design elements. Music must total 3-4 minutes minimum.
              There will also be a weekly student presentation. The dates will be assigned
              at the start of semester. Each student will bring in two examples to
              demonstrate and describe what is in their opinion, a) a superb example of
              the role of music as a dramatic agent b) a superb example of the use of
              sound with NO music as a dramatic agent.
UT Electronic Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor
Mail          communication to students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a
Notification  frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University- and
Policy        course-related communications, recognizing that certain communications
              may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at
              a minimum, twice per week.
              It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor
              informed of changes in his or her official e-mail address (do so at https://
              utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-
              mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable
              excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages
              returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered
              delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
              (see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-
              notification-policy)
Use of Class  The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams,
Materials     quizzes, and homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any
              unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law and
              may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
              Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express
              approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student
              Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further
              disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class
              materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other
              current or future students.
              (from https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/
              Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Attendance    You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you
              will likely miss points for in-class assignments or activities as a result, and
              these generally cannot be made up. However, if a serious medical or personal
              crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance,
              please inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below
              for religious holy days.
              Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a
              break, leaving class without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal
              for the day all count as being tardy. Three tardies equals an absence. Four
              absences will lower your course grade by one letter grade. Additional
              absences may result in failure of the course.


Religious Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be
Holidays  excused from attending classes or other required activities, including
          examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for
          that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may
          not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
          examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused
          within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
          students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the
          date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy
          day.
          (from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/
          1555_001.pdf)
Classroom Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow
Etiquette students and the instructor.
          1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must
          come in late at the beginning of class, please enter the room and seat
          yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t hold up
          the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an announced
          break, since often the second part of the class period is when we will engage
          in group activities.
          2) Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the
          classroom. If you forget to do so, and your phone rings, chirps, or vibrates
          loudly during class, turn it off immediately and discreetly. I reserve the right
          to penalize repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s
          assignment.
          3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of
          distracting sights, sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your
          Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music, polish your nails,
          doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.
          4) Consider bringing earphones and/or earplugs to class for work sessions. If
          you like to listen to music while you work, you are welcome to do so, so long
          as no one else can hear it. And if you are easily distracted by noise/
          conversation, please bring earplugs to wear so that the conversation from
          desk critiques will not bother you.


Grading   Course work will be weighted as follows in calculating the final grade:
                  1. Assignments/Studio Projects 50% (your best five out of six grades)
                  2. Movie Presentation 10%
                  3. Final Project 30%
                  You will score a short film, demonstrating your mastery of concepts
                  learned throughout semester.
                  4. Class participation/attendance/discussion 10%
          Late assignment submissions will receive a maximum grade value of 50%.
          No late assignments after the last day of class.
          A    94-100
          A-   90-93
          B+  87-89
          B    84-86
          B-   80-83
          C+  77-79
          C    74-76
          C-   70-73
          D+   67-69
          D    64-66
          D-   60-63
          F   below 60
Academic  The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of
Integrity Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
          academic integrity.” You are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a
          high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the
          University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and
          other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
              • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic
                   efforts;
              • complete your assignments independently unless expressly
                   authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing them;
              • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the
                   standards of your academic discipline; and
              • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of
                   yourself or another student.
          (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)


Academic      In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly
Dishonesty    defines academic dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair
              or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
                  • Cheating
                  • Plagiarism
                  • Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
                  • Falsifying Academic Records
                  • Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone
                       an exam, obtain an extended deadline for an assignment, or even
                       gain an unearned financial benefit)
                  • Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written
                       assignment for two courses without authorization to do so)
                  • Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of
                       academic integrity
              (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
              Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to
              disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
              dismissal from the University.
              (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism    “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying,
              receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any means material that is attributable in
              whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas, illustrations,
              structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting
              that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
              conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402, http://
              catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-
              discipline-and-conduct/).
Copyright and Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical
Fair Use      importance to designers. Many of the uses we will make of texts, images,
              and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine of fair use.
              However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright
              holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and
              others’ works. We will discuss these issues during the semester as needed,
              but when you have questions about whether or when you can appropriate
              someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K. Harper’s Copyright
              Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Services for  The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
Students with academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
Disabilities  information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259,
(SSD)         ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone
              512-471-6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first
              week of class, if possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations
              promptly.


Student      There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to
Support      students at UT. They include (but are not limited to) the following:
Services
             Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers)
             provides a full range
             of services and resources to support students and alumni.
             The Undergraduate Writing Center
             (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing
             assignments for
             their courses.
             The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides
             study skills,
             time-management, and note-taking courses.
             University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu)
             provides medical and health promotion services for currently enrolled
             students and some non-students who are
             officially enrolled in certain University programs.
             The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu)
             helps students with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily
             challenges of student life.
Emergency    Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be
Procedures   used to provide students, faculty, and staff with information regarding
             potential threats to the safety and security of the campus community. E-
             mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff of
             emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency
             officials also have the ability to disseminate important information via text
             message directly to the cell phones of users subscribed to the service. Please
             consider subscribing to this service at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/
             main/.
             (adapted from http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/
             EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf)
Campus Carry The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in
             outdoor areas, as well as buildings and spaces that are accessible to the
             public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms.
             It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their
             handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus. “About” the
             person means that a license holder may carry a holstered handgun in a
             backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough
             that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The
             holster must completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to
             keep the gun in place if jostled. A license holder may not carry a partially or
             wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway,
             street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking
             area.
             The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an
             openly carried gun on campus should immediately call 911. (from https://
             campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)


Overview of   Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course
Schedule      schedule may need to be altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor
              illness, student needs/interests, and design program workshop opportunities
              and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be announced
              via Canvas.
              Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to
              Canvas. Use the numbers in the left-hand column of this schedule (01, 02,
              03,...30) to locate the Canvas module that corresponds to a given day of
              class (e.g., if you are looking for the reading assignment for the seventh day
              of class, T 4 Feb, it will be posted to module 07 in Canvas).
                            Tentative Course Schedule
                         (May Change depending on student skillset)
Wee    Date             Topic                               Assignment                %Value
 k
 1    01/23 Course Introduction,           Class film presentation assignments, on       10
            Syllabus,Goal setting          Mondays.
 2    01/28 Types of Film Music            Quiz - Identify Music Use in Film             10
      01/30
 3    02/04 Introduction to the DAW -      Composition 1 Opening Credits
      02/06 Setting the scene
 4    02/11 cont.                          cont.                                         10
      02/13
 5    02/18 Themes and Developing          Composition 2 - Compose a group of
      02/20 Them                           Character Themes
 6    02/25 cont.                          cont.                                         10
      02/27
 7    03/04 Underscore and Transition      Composition 3 - Underscore with
      03/06                                transition
 8    03/11 cont.                                                                        10
      03/13
 9    03/18 Spring Break
      03/20
 10   03/25 Action Sequence                Composition 4 - Action Sequence
      03/27
 11   04/01 cont.                          cont.                                         10
      04/03
 12   04/08 Beating the Temp               Composition 5 - Replace a temp track
      04/10
 13   04/15 Score a Short Film             Composition 6 Final Project - Score a
      04/17                                short film, including a minimum of 3 - 5
                                           minutes of music
 14   04/22 cont. in class work on final cont
      04/24 projects
 15   04/29 cont                           cont
      05/01
 16   05/06                                  Final Project Due, uploaded to Canvas       30
      05/08                                 by day assigned for final exam. We will
                                               not meet for the final exam period
