The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | Department of AET
AET COLLOQUIUM I (20360) I Fall 2019 Syllabus
RLP 0.126
TH 05:30 p.m. - 06:20 p.m.
Instructor: Yuliya Lanina
yuliya.lanina@utexas.edu
TA: Miguel Menéndez-Pidal
miguel.mpt.2015@gmail.com
Course Description:
The purpose of the class is to introduce you to the many aspects of arts and entertainment
technologies and to expand awareness of issues affecting women, people of color and other
underrepresented communities in the creative and technological fields.
Course Overview
The format of our meetings will vary between in-class discussions, guest presentations and group
projects presentations. We will be looking at the current trends, examining our own attitudes and
biases, and coming up with solutions. In addition to AET instructors we will have nationally and
internationally renowned guests from various fields at the intersection of art and technology. This
would be a great opportunity to see a variety of creative practices utilizing technology, and make
contact with other professionals within and beyond your interests. As a part of the class you will
be working on a collaborative project with the assigned group. All groups are required to present
their project at the end of the class.
Course Requirements + Grading:
    1. Blog Entry. After each class I will be posting a question on the Canvas Discussion page
        related to the material we discussed. Everyone is required to post their response, at least 1
        paragraph in length, and to comment on at least one response by another student. If you
        are uncomfortable with publicly posting your opinion, you can submit it directly to me by
        email. Your posts and responses will be due the following Tuesday, 11:59 pm.
    2. Group Work/Final Assignment. The class will break into groups of five. Each group will
        come up with a collaborative project utilizing various forms of art and technology.
        Groups will present the completed project to the class at the end of the semester. You are
        welcome to use material you previously created as long as it is relevant in this new
        context.


Evaluation
This is a pass/fail course.
In order to pass this class you need to accumulate 65 points or more.
Points breakdown is as follows:
Blog Entry: 6 points each, 4 points for answer and 2 points for comment (60 points total)
Group project: 40 points (Contract 10 points, Presentation 30 points)
Course materials
There is no required text or readings. Some days we will be posting material related to the topics
we cover. You are encouraged to look deeper into the subjects that pertain to your interests.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (email) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
students. Students are expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that email be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
in his or her official email address
(do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX (Links to an external
site.)).
Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable
excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full
inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the
University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-
policy (Links to an external site.))
Use of Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.


Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the
instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic
dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things,
uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other
current or future students.
Attendance
You are allowed two absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss
points for in-class assignments or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up.
However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.)
impacts your attendance, please inform us as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception
below for religious holidays.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class
without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy.
Three tardies equals an absence. Four absences will lower your course grade by 10 points.
Religious Holidays
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior
to the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
Classroom Etiquette
Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and instructors:
1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the
beginning of class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as
possible. And please don’t hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an
announced break, since often the second part of the class period is when we will engage in group
activities.
2) Turn off your cell phone’s notification sounds upon entering the classroom. If you forget to do
so, and your phone rings, chirps, or vibrates loudly during class, turn it off immediately and


discreetly. We reserve the right to penalize repeat offenders by subtracting points from their day’s
assignment.
3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen
to loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, etc., please do so outside the classroom.
Lectures Online recording system
Your class is using the Lectures Online recording system. This system records the audio and
video material presented in class for you to review after class. Links for the recordings will
appear in the Lectures Online tab on the Canvas page for this class. You will find this tab along
the left side navigation in Canvas.
To review a recording, simply click on the Lectures Online navigation tab and follow the
instructions presented to you on the page. You can learn more about how to use the Lectures
Online system at http://sites.la.utexas.edu/lecturesonline/.
Please note that your professor decides when and for how long recordings will be available for
you to review.
You can find additional information about the lecture capture system at: http://sites.la.utexas.edu/
lecturesonline/.
Calendar
The schedule is subject to change. Any changes will be announced in class, via email or on
Canvas. You are responsible for keeping up with any changes in the syllabus.
August 29               Program Overview: Bruce Pennycook
September 5             Active Listening/Diversity/Biases
September 12            Using Game Design Techniques for Social Impact. MJ
September 19            Games and Mental Illness. David Cohen. Teams finalized
September 26            #metoo and Digital Art. Lisa LaFleur
October 3               Interactive Art Spaces. Lisa Woods Team Contracts Due.
October 10              Media and Stereotyping
October 17              Unleashing the Untapped. Preston James
October 24              Film scoring and Social Justice. Sam Lipman (Instructor away)
October 31              LGBTQ+ Visibility, Curran Nault
 November 7             Final Presentation
November 14             Final Presentation
November 28             Thanksgiving
December 5              Final Presentation


SPEAKER BIOS:
Bruce Pennycook
Bruce Pennycook was born in Toronto, Canada in 1949. He studied composition at the Faculty of
Music, University of Toronto with Gustav Ciamaga, Lothar Klein and John Weinzweig
graduating with a Master of Music in Theory and Composition in 1974. He was awarded the
CAPAC Young Composer Prize in 1973. While still a student, Pennycook was an active
performer, composer and arranger in Toronto recording studios and played regularly in the jazz
clubs in the city. In 1976 he received a Canada Council Doctoral Fellowship for graduate work at
the Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics, Stanford University where he studied
with Leland Smith and John Chowning. While at Stanford he was the Director of the Stanford
Jazz Ensemble and Assistant Conductor for the Stanford Wind Ensemble. He also performed
regularly in ALEA, the Stanford University new music ensemble.
In 1978 Pennycook became Assistant Professor of Music Composition at Queen's University in
Kingston, Ontario with a cross-appointment in the Department of Computing and Information
Science. In 1987 he accepted the position of Associate Professor of Music at McGill University
in Montreal where he developed the Music, Media and Technology degree programmes. He
received numerous grants during this period for innovative research in new media including The
Music Library of The Future project which was one of the first to utilize the WWW for audio and
MIDI data. He was the recipient of numerous commissions for his interactive compositions from
the Canada Council for the Arts, the Ontario Arts Council and from Quebec organizations and
these works have been performed internationally. In 1997 Pennycook was appointed the first
Vice-Principal of Information Systems and Technology for McGill.
Pennycook relocated to Austin, Texas in 2002 and is now Professor of Music at The Butler
School of Music at The University of Texas at Austin where he also chairs the Digital Arts and
Media Bridging Disciplines Program. At UT Austin he has developed new courses in digital
media and developed a studio and graduate program in film and media composition. In 2014 he
was appointed Director of Digital Arts for the College and Fine Arts and Director of the Center
for Arts and Entertainment Technologies.
http://www.brucepennycook.com/
Liss LaFleur is a contemporary artist, activist, and educator currently based in Denton, TX.
LaFleur considers how fantasy and technology play a vital role in representing social
movements, identity, and political change, specifically as they relate to feminism and the queer
body. Projected at a very large scale, her video installations activate the spaces in which they are
shown and play with the limits of perception by opening up an almost otherworldly sense of
reflection.
Her works have been exhibited and screened extensively including presentations at the TATE
Modern, Cannes Court Métrage, PBS, the Reykjavik Art Museum in Iceland, and the Czong
Institute for Contemporary Art in South Korea. Her recent lectures include SXSW, the College
Art Association, the School of the Art Institute of Chicago, and the MIT Media Lab, and her
recent residencies include the National Museum of Glass in Tacoma, WA, and Google Artist
Services in Oakland, CA.


She holds an MFA in Media Art from Emerson College and currently serves as the Program
Director and Assistant Professor of New Media Art within the College of Visual Art and Design
at the University of North Texas. She is currently represented by Galleri Urbane Marfa + Dallas.
https://www.lisslafleur.com
James Preston
A dynamic and creative leader with broad international experience, who prides himself on the
ability to effectively lead and collaborate to deliver strong business results on a consistent basis.
Throughout his career, Preston has flourished as a motivational and visionary leader who is
exceptional in strategic sales planning and new business development. He’s also been greatly
successful in developing highly valuable strategic partnerships and optimizing operations to
accelerate business growth.
Though he’s spent 20+ years at Dell, Preston is truly an entrepreneur spirit. Prior to Dell, he had
worked for young startups and small companies. Even at Dell, he was always drawn to new
startup initiatives or “turnaround” challenges, which is where he flourishes.
Since leaving Dell in February 2014, he’s now able to focus exclusively on his passion for
helping innovative Entrepreneurs “change the world”, by working with them in an advisory,
partner, consultant, mentor and/or investor capacity.
divinc.org
Curran Nault is the author of Queercore: Queer Punk Media Subculture (Routledge, 2017). He
holds a Ph.D. in Radio-Television-Film (RTF) from the University of Texas at Austin, where he
is a joint lecturer in RTF, Asian American Studies and Women’s and Gender Studies. His
scholarship on queer subcultural media formations has been published in Jump Cut, Feminist
Media Studies, The Journal of Film & Video and the Oxford Handbook of Queer Cinema, among
others. Curran is the Founder and Artistic Director of the queer transmedia festival, OUTsider,
and is a producer on the documentaries Before You Know It (PJ Raval, 2013) and Justice for
Jennifer (PJ Raval, 2018).
Sam Lipman
Sam Lipman has a highly varied music career that spans decades and nations. It begin in 1994,
when a teenaged Sam’s instrumental jazz group Zoophyte was discovered busking on a street
corner in his home town of Sydney, landing a single on national radio. Jazz took Sam to New
York City, where he spent 10 years studying, playing jazz tenor saxophone and MC’ing in the
many clubs there. Hungering for ever-wider experiences, Sam relocated to Austin, TX to explore
the rock scene, where he fronted his own group as well as performing in others, touring,
producing, eventually earning a record deal, a video on MTV and recording sessions with Justin
Timberlake. At the same time, Sam got started in short-form advertising jingles, earning several
national credits including Land Rover, Southwest Airlines and a series of Super Bowl TV spots
for Wal-Mart. Eventually tiring of the touring life and with a new baby, Sam turned to the Butler
School of Music at UT to complete a Masters in his dream field of orchestral composition.
Within a few years, Sam’s works were being played by the Austin Symphony, New Jersey


Symphony Orchestra and the Pittsburg New Music Ensemble, and his career as a film composer
took off. Since 2011, Sam has scored and conducted dozens of film, theater and dance scores,
including five full-feature films, one of which shortlisted for an Oscar© for Best Original Song,
and another nominated for an Austin Critics Table Awards. He is currently scoring Richard
Linklater’s latest film, featuring Cate Blanchett. After a year of theater and ballet scoring on
faculty as Composer-In-Residence for UT’s Department of Theater & Dance, Sam will begin
teaching Screen Scoring here at AET in the spring of 2019. www.samlipmanmusic.com/!
Lisa B Woods
Lisa Woods is a user experience designer who enjoys the full range of the design process—from
research and insights, to concept development, to implementation and branding.
I earned my Masters in Design from California College of the Arts in 2013. Her thesis at CCA
focused on exploring how digital platforms can enhance the creativity of everyday people. This
work is rooted in my belief that everyone is creative and has a story to share. She is excited to
see that design is shifting away from generating closed artifacts and moving toward making more
open and collaborative systems that flex and adapt to people's needs.
Prior to attending CCA, she was a visual designer in the publishing industry. As a textbook
designer, she was passionate about bringing clarity to complex processes. As a trade book cover
designer, she loved translating ideas into compelling images and developing visual brands. (But
even then I yearned to design experiences that involved interactions between people, objects, and
spaces—I just didn't know it was called UX design!)
Her book design work has received recognition from Print Magazine as well as the New York
Book Show, and has helped propel several titles to New York Times and Wall Street Journal
bestseller lists.
When not designing, she watches sci-fi anything and thanks her lucky stars that she inherited her
mother's knack for fearless culinary improvisation.
http://lisabwoodsdesign.com/
David (D.S.) Cohen is an Assistant Professor of Practice within the Department of Arts and
Entertainment Technologies at the School of Design and Creative Technologies at the University
of Texas at Austin. He is also a games industry consultant and public speaker, with a focus on
learning through game design.
A games industry veteran, Cohen has successfully shipped a multitude of console, mobile, online
and MMO games and digital interactive experiences, with companies such as WB Games,
Disney, Oddworld Interactive, Schell Games, and National Geographic Society, and consulted as
Director of Digital Games at Mattel, Inc.
For the past decade Cohen has dedicated his career towards education and learning though games
and interactive experiences. In addition to having written hundreds of articles on the history,
culture, and industry of video games, he co-author the book "Producing Games" (Focal Press -
2009). Cohen also served as Program Coordinator at the Denius-Sams Gaming Academy at the
University of Texas at Austin, Moody College of Communication, where he trained participants
in Leadership and Management for the video games industry.


MJ is a non-binary game developer, programmer, and experience designer with a background in
computer science and a passion for teaching and public speaking. MJ has been working in the
games industry since 2011 and is credited on games ranging from AAA to VR to independent
self-published titles. MJ's game credits include Call of Duty: Modern Warfare Remastered, Mafia
III, and a number of smaller projects. In 2016, MJ founded their independent game studio Astire
Games with the goal of using games (and game development) to make the world better. Astire
Games hosts a team of 4-7 interns each semester to give game dev students a chance to work
collaboratively to ship a game. Astire Games is also currently developing a multiplayer game
that bridges the gap between cooperative and competitive gameplay. MJ has developed for a
wide range of hardware including VR, the Kinect, the Wii Fit Balance Board, mobile devices
(Android, iOS, and tablets), zSpace Semi-holographic technology, the Virtuix Omni, and hand-
and motion-tracking hardware include the Leap Motion and the PS Move.
