          ACC380K.13: Information Technology for Accounting and Controls (ITAC)
                                              Spring 2020 Syllabus
Class Hours:      TTH 2:00 - 3:30pm (Unique # 02540)           Location: GSB 2.122
                  TTH 3:30 - 5:00pm (Unique # 02545)
Professor:        Patti Brown, MPA, CPA                        Office: CBA 3.250
E-mail:           patti.brown@mccombs.utexas.edu               Phone: 512-471-0787 (email is preferred)
Office Hours: Tues 5:00 – 6:00pm and Wed 3:30-4:30pm
TA:               Tyler Pruett                                 Office:         CBA 4.304A
   E-mail:        tylerpruett@utexas.edu                       Office Hrs:     TBD
TA:               Ryan Baker                                   Office:         CBA 4.304A
   E-mail:        william.baker@utexas.edu                     Office Hrs:     M 10-11
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course explores business processes and internal controls for accounting information systems (AIS).
Students will learn fundamentals related to conceptual and computerized accounting systems, data analytics,
as well as general and application controls related to accounting information systems.
At the end of the course, students will be able to:
    • Identify the events involved in an organization’s business processes and understand how these
        processes interact with an organization’s accounting system;
    • Identify risks present in a business process and recommend internal controls to ensure that transactions
        are executed as expected and that the accounting records are reliable.
    • Analyze business transactions using technology for data cleansing (i.e. ETL) and creation of
        visualizations for data analytics on large volumes of data;
    • Identify and implement technologies used to process and analyze transactions; ensure that IT general
        and application controls are in place and operating effectively.
The course objectives are focused on 1) specific skills and concepts that are required to be successful in the
business world and 2) topics included on the CPA exam. Please read below what your peers are saying about
ITAC:
“Having taken and passed the Auditing section of the CPA exam, I can't even begin to tell you
 how much your ITAC class helped in my preparation for the exam. Everything from transaction
 processes to computerized auditing tools showed up in my review book, and I was one step
 ahead having taken your ITAC class.”
“One way your ITAC class helped during my internship was by giving me a strong knowledge
 about a firm's revenue and expenditure processes. This allowed me to have a greater
 understanding of my client’s business, and I was able to complete my work more efficiently as a
 result.”
"ITAC is undoubtedly one of the most valuable courses I took in the MPA Program. While
 interviewing for full-time employment, it impressed companies that I was technologically
 competent with software products such as Excel, Access, and SAP, and that I could streamline
 processes through the use of flowcharting. I would recommend this course to every student in
 the program because it gives you a competitive edge that is constantly demanded in the
 workplace."
Spring 2020                        Syllabus - ACC 380K.13                          Page 1


           ACC380K.13: Information Technology for Accounting and Controls (ITAC)
                                               Spring 2020 Syllabus
REQUIRED MATERIALS
The required materials for this course are outlined on Canvas: Required Course Materials and can be obtained
in three easy steps. The reading will be assigned using the Revel platform:
• REVEL for Accounting Information Systems (14th edition) by Marshall B. Romney and Paul J. Steinbart
         -- REVEL with eText: ISBN: 9780134642628
During class, we will use the Top Hat app that will help students stay engaged and is a helpful exam prep tool.
You will have the opportunity to earn points during the first day of class if you register for Top Hat prior to the
first day of class. SAM Projects 2016 access is a requirement of the course. You may already have access to
SAM Projects 2016 if you took ACE or an MIS class previously at UT.
COMPUTER SOFTWARE
All of the software required for the class is available in the McCombs Computer Labs. The assignments using
technology (i.e. MS Access, SAP, Tableau, Power BI) are tutorial-based and self-directed in nature.
JOIN THE CONVERSATION!
Discussion Boards are created for student collaboration and to answer general questions about assignments.
All questions about the course and assignments should be posted on the appropriate discussion board. I
strongly recommend that you subscribe to the discussion board forums, so you are included in the
collaboration. Private and confidential matters should be communicated directly with me during office hours or
via email. The course Canvas site will be used to post assignments and supplemental reading materials. Your
Canvas email will be used to send updates and announcements to the class.
GRADES
Final grades will be based on the total points earned in the course (as shown below). You may assess your
performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs. A plus/minus grading scale (determined at the end of the
semester) will be used for final course grades. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances
and according to university policy. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing "extra
credit" work either before, during or after the end of the semester.
         Points allocated per project:
           Opportunity for Excellence I                        100      17%
           Opportunity for Excellence II                       100      17%
           Opportunity for Excellence III (TopHat)             100      17%
           Power Query/Power BI Individual Assignments          60      10%
           Access Individual Assignments                        60      10%
           Team Project 2 – Cyber Fraud                         55        9%
           SAP ERP Assignment                                   50        8%
           Team Project 1 – Data Analytics                      45        7%
           Revel (based on % of total Revel pts earned)         30        5%
           Total Points                                        600     100%
Grade Appeals: If you wish to appeal a grade on an assignment, you must do so within one week after the
grade is posted in Canvas, Revel, SAM or Top Hat gradebooks by submitting a written explanation of your
concern, attached to the graded item in question and submitting the appeal to me via email. After one week
has passed, no appeals will be considered.
Spring 2020                         Syllabus - ACC 380K.13                             Page 2


          ACC380K.13: Information Technology for Accounting and Controls (ITAC)
                                               Spring 2020 Syllabus
No Laptops in the Classroom: No open laptop computers will be permitted during our class. You are
welcome to use iPads, smart phones, and any device that lays flat on the table during class, but no
laptop computers or other devices with a screen that rises above the desktop. This policy is based on
a body of research showing that students have a better learning experience and higher satisfaction
when they don't use laptop computers in class. Please contact your instructor to request an
accommodation if you have a unique situation which requires use of a laptop in class.
COURSE SCHEDULE
The Course Schedule, distributed separately, is an integral part of this Course Syllabus.
                                              Important Notifications
Privacy in Canvas: Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that I will use
a merged Canvas site for all sections of the course that I am teaching this semester. This will allow students in
other sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However,
they will not actually learn your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If
you have any concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from view
of other students.
Students with Disabilities: Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259 http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Diversity and Inclusion: It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives
be well served by this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that
students bring to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength, and
benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.
Religious Holy Days: According to UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination,
work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of
scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are
described in detail in the MPA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
https://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/My/MPA/Student-Codes-of-Ethics
By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in this policy. By
enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in this policy. If the
application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it
is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty
are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of
our academic brand, all policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the
Spring 2020                         Syllabus - ACC 380K.13                               Page 3


          ACC380K.13: Information Technology for Accounting and Controls (ITAC)
                                              Spring 2020 Syllabus
Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic
dishonesty. It is your responsibility, and in your best interest, to read and understand the Scholastic
Dishonesty policies. Prior to earning points towards your grade this semester, a required Honor Code
Acknowledgement is posted in the Assignments section of Canvas. Please read the policies and complete the
acknowledgement in Canvas and multiple choice questions in Top Hat by January 28th.
Campus Safety: Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu
    •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
        buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
        assembling outside.
    •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
        that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first week.
    •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    •   Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
        University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    •   Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or
        https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
    •   Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
        https://emergency.utexas.edu/preparedness
McCombs Classroom Professionalism Policy: The highest professional standards are expected of all
members of the McCombs community. The collective class reputation and the value of the Texas MPA
experience are built on these high standards. Students are expected to be professional in all respects.
Please consider the Texas MPA classroom as important as a corporate business meeting. The Texas
MPA classroom experience is enhanced when:
•   Students arrive on time and display their name cards.
•   Students do not use the classroom as a cafeteria.
•   Students are fully prepared for each class. Bring your class notes for the class topic and be ready to
    discuss and work the class exercises. Much of the learning takes place in the classroom and up to 100
    points (17% of your grade) can be earned during the time spent in the classroom. When you are not
    prepared, you cannot contribute to the overall learning process. This affects not only you, but your peers who
    count on you as well.
•   Students attend the class section to which they are registered. Important: TopHat points are earned for the
    section that you are registered.
•   Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Pay attention, listen respectfully and look
    for opportunities to build on points made in the lecture or by a classmate. Please ask questions when
    something is unclear and chime in when you think you can help or offer your own personal experience.
    Collaboration and debate in class and online in the discussion boards are encouraged. Intolerance for the
    views of others is unacceptable.
Spring 2020                        Syllabus - ACC 380K.13                               Page 4


         ACC380K.13: Information Technology for Accounting and Controls (ITAC)
                                               Spring 2020 Syllabus
•   No laptops are allowed in the classroom. Phones/tablets are allowed that lay flat on the desk for note-taking,
    answering TopHat questions, and viewing course materials ONLY with penalties assessed if there is
    abuse of this privilege – see below.
•   Use of phones for personal texts, tweets, games, Facebook/Instagram are NOT allowed during class.
    This behavior is unprofessional and never allowed in a corporate meeting. When a need to communicate with
    someone outside of class exists (e.g., a medical or family need), please inform me prior to class.
•   Penalties for online activity other than TopHat: First offence is a 20 point deduction on your next exam
    score AND your TopHat points will NOT be earned for that class. Subsequent offences will entail a letter
    grade deduction for each offense and your TopHat points will revert to zero for the course. (Note: penalty
    is double if offense is during a guest speaker or student presentation).
•   Missing guest speaker or student presentations will result in a 10 point deduction from the 100 Top Hat
    point balance.
Spring 2020                         Syllabus - ACC 380K.13                          Page 5
