         ANS 361E/ URB 330F Urban Experiences in East Asia
Fall 2019, ANS 361E/URB 330F
Instructor: Professor Youjeong Oh
Course Website: Canvas ANS 361
Course Description
Urbanization in East Asia has taken place in rapid, massive, and turbulent ways. The
purpose of this class lies in employing urbanization as an analytical category through which
we can examine development, modernization, the politics of accumulation and distribution,
state-society relations, urban struggles, and activism in East Asia. The class lectures are
organized, therefore, around topics rather than by country and/or city. For more critical
examinations, we will also learn and discuss key concepts in geography and urban studies,
such as modernity, uneven development, place-making, gentrification, cultural
agglomeration, global cities, and urban social movements. Reading various books and
articles on urban issues, this course aims to advance the understanding of East Asia’s
contemporary dynamics and East Asia in global context. We will supplement our readings
by drawing various other materials including maps and illustrations, films, and video clips
of TV programs.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Requirements
    1. Required reading and class participation (10%). Students are required to come to
        class having already done the reading for the day. This is the minimum required of
        you to be in the class. All students are expected to contribute to class discussion in a
        positive, relevant, and respectful way.
    2. Class attendance (10%). Class attendance is mandatory and will be checked
        regularly including the add/drop period. Students are allowed one absence. For
        each following unexcused absence, your final grade will be lowered by 2 points, up
        to a maximum 10 points. The only exception to this policy is health conditions. In
        order to be excused from absence due to any health issue, you must bring in a note
        from your doctor. If you come to class 10 minutes late or leave the classroom early,
        it will be considered as tardiness; three such occasions will be regarded as a full
        absence.
    3. Discussion questions (15%). Students pick three readings and post summarization
        plus discussion questions about the selected readings by 9am on each class day on
        Canvas under Discussions. Posting should have a paragraph-length writing
        consisting of some brief summarizations of author’s argument (or other critical
        points) and your question(s) about the author’s points. Please sign-up for three
                                                                                                1


           preferred readings on Canvas under Discussions. For posting your questions, go to
           Discussions on Canvas and “Reply” to the assigned reading title. Each posting
           counts for 5 points: quality matters and there is 2-point deduction for late postings.
      4. Small Research Project (35%). Students are required to write two small research
           papers (3 single-space page) about 1) Media and Place (due by October 22) and 2)
           Storytelling Urbanism (due by November 12). By picking one of the two papers,
           students need to present their research outcomes. Each paper counts for 15% and
           presentation counts for 5% of your grade. Detailed guidelines will be distributed.
           (Late or emailed papers will be accepted, but it will lower your grade by 5 points.)
      5. Take-home final exam (30%). Essay questions based on class lecture and readings. A
           hardcopy of the typed final paper should be submitted no later than December
           5th, in class. (Late or emailed papers will be accepted, but it will lower your grade
           by 10 points.)
**In any cases you cannot make the deadlines of assignments and papers, you should give
me reasonable notice at least one week prior to the deadlines.
Grading Policy
In order to pass this class, students should fulfill and submit all requirements.
Grades are assigned as follows: 93-100 = A; 90-92.5 = A-; 86-89.5 = B+; 82-85.5 = B; 79-
81.5= B-; 76-78.5= C+; 72-75.5 = C; 69-71.5 = C-; 65-68.5 = D+; 60-64.5 = D; below 60 = F.
Not curved, no round up.
Academic Dishonesty
Cheating and plagiarism are serious offences and will not be tolerated. Plagiarism is
representing someone else’s work as your own. This includes handing in another student’s
paper, and it includes using the words and/or ideas from a publication, the web or other
source without citation. Always cite your sources (in whatever format). Please refer to this
site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php.
University Notices and Policies
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your
disability from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester (within
first two weeks), so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam,
you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order
                                                                                                                          2


to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may
not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Weekly Topics and Readings
(subject to change at the discretion of the instructor).
** All readings are available on Canvas.
Week 1 Introduction
     August 29. Introduction
Week 2 Space and Commodity
     September 3. Space and Commodity
Readings:
Pattillo, Marry. (2013). “Housing: Commodity versus right.” Annual Review of Sociology 39:
509-531.
     September 5. Rentier Capitalism
Readings:
Hudson, Michael. (1998). “Financial Capitalism v. Industrial Capitalism.” Contribution to
The Other Canon Conference on Production Capitalism vs. Financial Capitalism
Oslo, September 3-4, 1998. http://michael-hudson.com/1998/09/financial-capitalism-v-
industrial-capitalism/.
Week 3 Post Socialism and Chinese Urbanization I
     September 10. Film: New Beijing: Reinventing a City (2010). 52min.
    September 12. Beijing Olympics and the City
Readings:
Broudehoux, Anne-Marie. (2007). “Spectacular Beijing: The Conspicuous Construction of an
Olympic Metropolis.” Journal of Urban Affairs 29 (4): 383-399.
                                                                                                                        3


Week 4 Post Socialism and Chinese Urbanization II
    September 17. The Politics of Metropolitan Expansion in China
Readings:
Hsing, You-tien. (2006). “Land and Territorial politics in Chinese cities.” The China
  Quarterly 187:1-18.
    September 19. Grassroots Resistance against Demolition and Displacement
Readings:
Hsing, You-tien. (2010). “Urban housing mobilizations.” In You-tien Hsing and Ching Kwan
  Lee eds. Reclaiming Chinese Society: The New Social Activism. Routledge.
Week 5 State Space
    September 24. Political Forest
Readings:
Peluso, Nancy Lee and Peter Vandergeest. (2001). “Genealogies of the political forest and
customary rights in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand.” The Journal of Asian Studies 60
(3):761-812. (p.766-771: background reading. p.777-801 must be summarized.)
    September 26. State Space
Readings:
Yeh, Emily. (2013). Taming Tibet: Landscape Transformation and the Gift of Chinese
Development. Cornell University Press. (Read Chapter 1).
Week 6 Uneven Development and Migration
    October 1. Floating Population and Space of Difference
Readings:
Zhang, Li. (2001). Strangers in the City: Reconfigurations of Space, Power, and Social
Networks within China's Floating Population. Stanford University Press. (Read Chapter 1).
    October 3. Floating Population in the Making of China’s Sunbelt
Readings:
Lee, Ching-kwan. (2007). Against the Law: Labor Protests in China's Rustbelt and Sunbelt.
University of California Press. (Read Chapter 5).
Week 7 Spectacles
    October 8. Film: Mardi Gras: Made in China (2005)
    October 10. Marketing Mardi Gras
Readings:
Gotham, Kevin. (2002). “Marketing Mardi Gras: Commodification, Spectacle and the
Political Economy of Tourism in New Orleans.” Urban Studies 39 (10): 1735-1756.
                                                                                          4


Week 8 Media, Tourism, and Place I
    October 15. Instagrammable Place
Readings:
Smith, Sean. (2018). Instagram abroad: performance, consumption and colonial narrative
in tourism. Postcolonial Studies 21(2): 172-191.
    October 17. Social Media and Tourism Promotion
Week 9 Media, Tourism, and Place II
    October 22. Student Presentation
    October 24. Student Presentation
Week 10 Speculative Urbanism
    October 29. Global City Making
Readings:
Ghertner, D. Asher. (2015). Rule by Aesthetics: World-class City Making in Delhi. Oxford
University Press. (Read Chapter 1).
    October 31. Betting on the Future
Readings:
Searle, Llerena G. (2016). Landscape of Accumulation: Real Estate and the Neoliberal
Imagination in Contemporary India. University of Chicago Press. (Read Chapter 3).
Week 11 Storytelling Urbanism I
    November 5. Spinning Tales of a Place
    November 7. Storytelling and Place Making
Readings:
Oh, Youjeong. 2018. Pop City: Korean Popular Culture and the Selling of Place. Cornell
University Press. (Read Introduction, pp. 14-20).
Week 12 Storytelling Urbanism II
    November 12. Student Presentation
    November 14. Student Presentation
Week 13 Mobility and Place
    November 19. Film: B.A.T.A.M. (2005)
                                                                                         5


Readings:
Lindquist, Johan A. (2008). The Anxieties of Mobility: Migration and Tourism in the
Indonesian Borderlands. University of Hawaii Press. (Chapter 1&2 Read p.24-53).
   November 21. The Anxieties of Mobility
Readings:
Lindquist, Johan A. (2008). The Anxieties of Mobility: Migration and Tourism in the
Indonesian Borderlands. University of Hawaii Press. (Read Chapter 4).
Week 14 Rethinking Peripheries
   November 26. Struggles in Okinawa
Readings:
Inoue, Masamichi. (2017). Okinawa and the U.S. Military: Identity Making in the Age of
Globalization. Columbia University Press. (Read Chapter 2.)
   November 28. Thanksgiving Holiday
Week 15 Urban Experiences in East Asia
    December 3. Jeju Free International City
Readings:
Oh, Youjeong. (forthcoming). Seeing the Development of Jeju Global Education City from the
Margins. In J. Song & L. Hae (Eds.), Situating Urban Korea: Core Locations and Asia as
Method in Knowledge Production. Toronto, Canada: University of Toronto Press.
    December 5. Wrap-up discussions
   * Final Exam Due
                                                                                           6
