      HDF 340: Ethical, Philosophical, and Professional Development
                                    Issues | Unique #86505
                                    M-F 1-2:30 pm | GEA 100
Instructor​: Dr. Michelann Quimby
Email​: mquimby@utexas.edu
Office​: SEA 2.412
Office Hours​: Weds from 11-12:30 Texas Coffee Traders in GDC
Mobile Phone​: 512.789.3063 - only use cell for short texts and emergencies, M-F 9-5
Twitter: ​@Dr_Quimby
Teaching Assistant: ​Christine Gwillim
Email:​ cgwillim@utexas.edu
Office Hours:​ Tues from 2:45pm - 3:45pm Collaborative Commons at the Perry-Castañeda
Library (5th floor)
Student Information Website: ​https://drmichelannquimby.com/
REQUIRED​ ​TEXTS:​ All course readings and assignments are on CANVAS
COURSE​ ​DESCRIPTION:​ Explores ethical and philosophical issues; personal values and
choices; professional development and leadership; and career goals, opportunities, and
challenges as they relate to human development and family sciences.
ETHICS​ ​AND LEADERSHIP FLAG​:
This course carries the Ethics and Leadership flag. Ethics and Leadership courses equip you
with skills that are necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. A
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues and the
process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations
OBJECTIVES:
     ● Students will demonstrate the ability apply multiple ethical philosophies to real-world
          situations, case studies, and personal decisions. This will be evaluated through
          discussion, essay, and presentation activities.
     ● Students will identify and analyze the role of their values in personal behavior and
          decision making. This will be evaluated through discussion, reflective exercises, and
          assignments.
     ● Students will apply organizational and leadership theories to enhance their
          understanding of past work experiences, current events, and aspirational ideas. This will
          be evaluated through presentations and short writing assignments.
     ● Students will prepare for post-graduate and/or professional careers through researching
          and evaluating career activities, creating a professional social media presence, resume,
          curriculum vitae, cover letter, follow up letter, and interview preparation.
     ● Students will reflect and synthesize learning about ethics, leadership, and career through
          a final reflection paper.
Writing assignments are a major source of points for your grade. In general, writing assignments
will follow the following rubric. Any exceptions will be noted in the assignment description:
     ● 10% Mechanics - spelling, punctuation, grammar, & proofreading


      ●  15% Composition - clarity of writing, style, readability, and ability to engage the reader
      ●  5% APA - Formatting, in-text citations, bibliography, writing style
      ●  15% Organization - Essay is written in a logical format with clear transitions and
         delineation between sections.
      ● 45% - Content - Evidence of critical thinking, ability to synthesize theory and concepts
         learned in course with personal experience or anecdotal data (such as current events)
      ● 10% - Scholarliness - Ability to differentiate between different types of data and
         methodologies, and to write appropriately for each type of assignment
Your final grade is determined by total points within three categories, which are then weighted
accordingly:
30% Attendance and Participation (25 class meetings)
20% Online Discussion (5 online discussions)
50% Assignments (essays, presentations, and employment materials)
Attendance is mandatory and cannot be made up. I will consider extra credit assignments in
extraordinary circumstances provided there is adequate documentation and, if possible,
advanced notice.
Writing Center
I ​strongly​ encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center (UWC), FAC 211, 471-6222:
http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/​). The UWC offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for
any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Feedback from an informed
audience is a crucial part of a successful writing project. Consultants help students develop
strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is intended to foster
independence. The consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that
preserve the integrity of your work. In previous semesters students who visited the UWC tended
to have higher scores in the course. Please give them my email address: mquimby@utexas.edu
when you visit because they will send me a synopsis of your discussion. ​I consider UWC visits
when grading writing projects.
UT Honor Code:
It is expected that the instructor, teaching assistant, and all class members in HDF 347 will
follow UT Austin’s honor code. In 2004, The University of Texas adopted the following honor
code, which was written in consultation with several student, faculty, and staff representatives:
“The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.”
Scholastic Dishonesty
Scholastic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this class. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and dismissal from The University of Texas at Austin. Any such situations will be
handled through the Dean of Students at UT.
Because dishonesty harms the individual, fellow students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty are strictly enforced. The complete definition of scholastic
dishonesty is in the Institutional Rules, but dishonesty includes cheating, plagiarism, collusion,


misrepresentation of facts (lying) and falsifying academic records, or the attempt to do these
things. Cheating includes copying assignments, in whole or in part, completed by and/or with
another student or individual and then submitting them for grading as a student’s own individual
work. Please be aware that false excuses for not coming to your scheduled time commitments
are also considered scholastic dishonesty by UT.
Students must follow University procedures concerning scholastic dishonesty. All students are
expected to conduct themselves in an ethical manner. An individual’s worth to herself/himself
and to society demands no less. You are expected to have read and understood the sections of
the General Information Catalog on scholastic dishonesty. Penalties for scholastic dishonesty
are outlined in this publication and will be enforced. Because students in past semesters have
indicated that they did not fully understand the concept of plagiarism, we will spend some time
discussing this important topic in class. Please read the information at the following URLs
before our second class meeting:
Plagiarism:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_plagiarism.php
Academic Integrity
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/sjs/sjs-output.htm
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All emails to the TA or instructor should include “HDF 347” in the subject line to help us organize
course-related emails.​ I will respond to emails within 24hrs, but at high volume email times, such
as before assignments are due, please allow 48 hours. All students should be familiar with the
University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to ​keep the
University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check
e-mail on a frequent and regular basis​ in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. Undeliverable
messages sent by the professor or TA and returned because of either a full inbox or use of a
"spam" filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html​.
In this course, e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be
responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class assignments, readings, and
announcements.
Absences & Student Needs
Academic performance is generally related to classes attendance and/or being attentive while in
the classroom. You are expected to arrive on time to each class and may not receive your
participation points for the day if you are more than 10 minutes late. If you are late or miss class,
you are expected to make your own arrangements to obtain class notes, changes to
assignments, etc. If illness or a family emergency causes you to miss class, please e-mail Dr.
Quimby and the TA before the class is missed if at all possible. By UT Austin policy, you are
supposed to notify instructors of your pending absence ​at least fourteen days prior to the


date of observance of a religious holy day.​ If you must miss a class, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
The only legitimate reasons for missing your scheduled commitment times are illness, religious
holidays, or family emergencies​.​ Non-legitimate excuses include but are not limited to: car
trouble, you are tired, you have to study, your alarm did not go off, you bought a last minute
airline ticket to visit your family, etc. ​Verification of absences can be referred to the Office of
Dean of Students and can require documentation such as a doctor’s note, police reports,
fire reports, or obituaries.​ Should you be absent for a non-legitimate reason that you feel
should be excused, you must bring your case and documentation to the Office of the Dean of
Students – they will tell me their decision as to whether I can excuse the absence. Any
non-legitimate absences will be considered an unexcused absence.
In addition please contact the Dean of Students 512-471-5017 (Mon.-Fri., 8-4:30),
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/​, for issues related to personal or family
emergencies, and medical excuses including depression or other mental issues. ​Please seek
help immediately from the Dean of Students​ for issues of this nature. They will help you find
resources and work with faculty to assist you during a difficult time. If you are going through a
personal crisis, please talk with me as well.
Classroom Behavior
Students will only earn participation points for each class by meeting class expectations
including behavior expectations. ​The TA and/or instructor will keep a record of behavior
infringements. Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss assigned readings
and participate in all class activities or assignments. You are expected to be courteous and
respectful of your fellow students, guest speakers, instructor, and teaching assistant. Disruptive
behavior (e.g., talking, reading the newspaper, sleeping, being on the internet, checking your
smartphone, etc.) is rude and distracting to your fellow students and the instructor.
Class Participation
Your active participation in class is welcome and encouraged. Participation credit will be based
on completing activities in class, answering questions, making helpful comments, and preparing
high-quality feedback (including constructive, positive suggestions for future improvement)
during activities and discussions in class. The quality of your feedback is important and will
count toward your participation grade in the course. Missed participation work cannot be made
up or turned in late unless there are extenuating circumstances that merit prior approval by the
instructor.
Disability Accommodations
If you require special accommodations, you must obtain a letter that documents your disability
from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, email ssd@austin.utexas.edu or (512-471-6259 or 1-866-329-3986, Video Phone,
470-6644 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). Present the letter to me at the
beginning of the semester so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five
business days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will
need. For more information, visit​ ​http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)


If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit​ ​http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
     ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
     ● Inform the instructor and TA in writing if you require assistance to evacuate.
     ● In the event of an evacuation, follow instructions of class instructors or emergency
        personnel.
     ● Do not re-enter a building unless instructed to do so by the Austin Fire Department, the
        UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Course Requirements
Classroom Expectations
Students will only earn participation points for each class by meeting class expectations,
including behavior expectations. ​The TA and/or instructor will keep a record of behavior
infringements. Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss assigned readings
and participate in all class activities or assignments. You are expected to be courteous and
respectful of your fellow students, guest speakers, instructor, and teaching assistant. Disruptive
behavior (e.g., talking, reading for other classes, sleeping, being on the internet, checking your
smartphone, etc.) is rude and distracting to your fellow students, your TA, and the instructor.
Assignments
Students will complete a series of assignments pertaining to topics in the course that provide an
opportunity for composition, reflection, critical thinking, synthesizing, and demonstration of
knowledge. Assignments will be graded for quality as well as for clarity of content.
Assignments will be ​due at the beginning of class (1pm)​ on the specified date and will be
considered late 15 minutes after the beginning of class. Assignments are turned via Canvas
unless otherwise specified. ​No late assignments will be accepted for grading without proper
documentation. Please allow time for printer problems, traffic jams, etc. If you suspect you may
be late to class, please still send the assignment electronically and then turn in the hard copy
upon your arrival.
Assignments are usually available on Canvas one week before they are due. Students are
asked to completely and concisely fulfill requirements and submit completed assignments on
the date shown on the course calendar. Unless otherwise specified on the assignment,
assignments must be ​typed, double-spaced, Times New Roman, 12-point font, and 1-inch
margins. Length specifications (if applicable) will be given when assignments are distributed.
Class Participation/Analysis


Your active participation in class is encouraged. Participation credit will be based on completing
activities in class, answering questions, making helpful comments, preparing high-quality
feedback (including constructive, positive suggestions for future improvement) during activities
and discussions in class, and completing the reflective note at the conclusion of each class. The
quality of your feedback is important and will count toward your participation grade in the
course. ​Missed participation work cannot be made up or turned in late unless there are
extenuating circumstances that merit approval by the instructor.
Course​ ​Grades ​are determined based on the percentage of total points available earned. Letter
grades are given based on the university’s grading policies for letter grades (A-F). The highest
overall average for the term is 100 points (A).
A = 94-100                         C = 74-76
A- = 90-93                       C- = 70-73
B+ = 87-89                       D+ = 67-69
B = 84-86                          D = 64-66
B- = 80-83                       D- = 60-63
C+ = 77-79                       F = 0-59
I will only consider giving and incomplete if the student has a documented emergency or special
need and/or consultation with the Dean of Students has been done. To be eligible for an
incomplete, the student must have completed at least half of the coursework with the grade of
C- or better.
  Date                     Details
                              ​Student Questionnaire (Please complete before              due by
  Thu Jun 7, 2018
                             first class)                                                   1pm
  Sun Jun 10, 2018             ​Online Discussion: Week 1 Summary               due by 11:59pm
                                ​Reflection on In-Class Video Discussion                due by
  Mon Jun 11, 2018
                             (due after class on Monday)                              11:59pm


                  ​In-Class Group Project (You will start this
                                                                         due by
Wed Jun 13, 2018 project in class on Monday, so please do the
                                                                           1pm
                 reading over the weekend)
                   ​In Class Presentation: Personal Ethics              due by
Thu Jun 14, 2018
                 Statement                                                6pm
Sun Jun 17, 2018    ​Week 2 Summary                           due by 11:59pm
                     ​Fictional Character Leadership Analysis         due by
Tue Jun 19, 2018
                 Presentation                                           6pm
                      ​Ethical Leadership Analysis                  due by
                 Presentation                                         10am
Fri Jun 22, 2018
                       ​Personal Ethical Leadership Essay       due by 1pm
Sun Jun 24, 2018        ​Week 3 Summary                   due by 11:59pm


Tue Jun 26, 2018 ​Job Search Assignment                   due by 11:59pm
                                                                  due by
                  ​LinkedIn Profile Assignment
                                                                    1pm
Wed Jun 27, 2018
                   ​Provide a link to your LinkedIn profile       due by
                 here                                               1pm
                    ​Mid-Semester Feedback (Optional)            due by
Fri Jun 29, 2018
                 1 pt extra credit                             11:59pm
Sun Jul 1, 2018      ​Week 4 Summary                  due by 11:59pm
Tue Jul 3, 2018       ​Cover Letter                     due by 10am
Fri Jul 6, 2018        ​Resume & CV Assignment         due by 10am
Mon Jul 9, 2018
                        ​Week 5 Summary            due by 11:59pm


Tue Jul 10, 2018 ​Job Interview Preparation        due by 1pm
Wed Jul 11, 2018  ​Follow-up Letter               due by 1pm
Thu Jul 12, 2018   ​Reflection Paper             due by 1pm
Mon Jul 16, 2018    ​Attendance             due by 11:59pm
