 ADV 392                                 Semester: Spring 2019
                                         Class Meets: TH 3:30 pm – 6:30 pm in BMC 3.204
 Ad Theory
              II
Instructor:       Dr. Natalie Devlin
                  Office: BMC 4.318
                  Phone: (256) 872-7898 (cell)
                  Email: nataliebdevlin@utexas.edu
Office Hours: T-TH 11:00 am – 12:00 pm and by appointment
       Course Description                    Course Requirements                     Policies and Resources
 1. Course Objectives and               1. Required Readings                     1. Classroom Policies
    Learning Outcomes                   2. Classroom expectations                   a. Grading Policies
 2. How to succeed in this              3. Major Course Assignments                 b. Policy on late work
    course                              4. Course Schedule                          c. Plagiarism
                                                                                    d. Policy on absences
                                                                                    e. Course Communication
                                                                                 2. University Policies and
                                                                                    Resources
                                                                                    a. UT Honor Code
                                                                                    b. Student Accommodations
                                                                                    c. Accommodations for Religious
                                                                                       Holidays
                                                                                 3. University Resources for
                                                                                    Students
                                                                                    a. Counseling & Mental Health
                                                                                 4. Safety information
                                                                                    a. Behavior concerns advice
                                                                                       line
                                                                                    b. Emergency Planning
                                           COURSE OBJECTIVES
1) Course Learning Outcomes:
         •   Understand the world of academia, and more specifically, the communication-oriented field.
         •   Practice reading, evaluating, critically analyzing, and critiquing mass communication and advertising-
             related theories.
         •   Prepare for academic research, both in presenting a specific research project and presenting their
             program of research.
         •   Write an original research proposal that possesses a strong theoretical foundation


2) How to succeed in this course:
        Come Prepared to Participate: Come to class having prepared for the day by completing and analyzing
        all readings, and be ready to discuss the day’s material.
        Speak Up in Class: A doctoral seminar is only successful if there is insightful, interesting discussion about
        the week’s readings. I want to hear your thoughts and questions about the material!
        Begin working on your research paper ASAP: Solid research takes time. Begin developing a topic as
        soon as possible.
        Perfect your craft—writing: Becoming a good writer takes a lot of practice, especially when it comes to
        academic writing. I’m here to help however I can.
        Develop pedagogically: You will have to lead discussion with a teammate twice this semester. This
        provides you with an opportunity to develop teaching techniques that you can later utilize when you are an
        instructor of record.
                                         COURSE REQUIREMENTS:
1) Required Readings and Materials:
        Selected Chapters from Books Available Online through Library in e-book format:
             o Shoemaker, P. J., Tankard, J. W., & Lasorsa, D. L. (2012). How to build social science theories.
             o Hogg M.A. (2016) Social Identity Theory. In: McKeown S., Haji R., Ferguson N. (eds)
                  Understanding Peace and Conflict Through Social Identity Theory. Peace Psychology Book
                  Series. Springer, Cham
             o Stacks, D. W., & Salwen, M. B. (Eds.). (2008). An integrated approach to communication theory
                  and research.
             o Fortner, R. S., & Fackler, P. M. (Eds.). (2014). The Handbook of media and mass communication
                  theory.
             o Bryant, J., & Oliver, M. B. (Eds.). (2009). Media effects: advances in theory and research.
        Optional Reading:
             o Booth, W. C., Colomb, G. G., Williams, J. M., Bizup, J., & Fitzgerald, W. T. ( 2016). The Craft of
                  Research.
        * Full reading list to be made available and discussed first week of class
        * Additional readings will be made available through Canvas.
2) Major Course assignments:
        Discussion Questions: Students will offer a discussion question about each of the week’s readings. The
        discussion questions should be open-ended and spur interesting discussions on that week’s theory, and
        poses an idea for how the theory can be applied in research, etc. In addition to the discussion question,
        each student should note what they believe the “primary takeaway/learning” from each reading is and
        identify the reading to which the question is related. All discussion questions are due to me by 11:59 PM on
        the Wednesday before they will be discussed in class. If there is a discussion leader assigned to that week,
        you should email your questions to both the discussion leader and me. You are allowed to skip two
        readings/discussion questions during the semester without penalty.
        Student-led Class Discussion: Students will work in teams of two to lead class discussion for one class
        meeting this semester. On the student’s assigned date, the discussion leader will be required to find one
        journal article that utilizes the theory that will be discussed in class. This reading should be emailed to me
        to distribute to the class no later than the Monday before the class meeting to which you are assigned. The
        discussion leaders should prepare a brief summary (handout or PowerPoint) of the readings for the day to


      review at the beginning of class. The discussion leaders should also be prepared to facilitate the class
      discussion and handle discussion questions from your classmates.
      Research Prospectus: Students should write a 2-3-page prospectus for their research proposal. The
      prospectus should include a title for your project, a brief summary of your proposed theoretical and
      methodological approach, an overview of the literature you will include, your proposed research questions
      and hypotheses, and mention what conference and journal to which you would like to target the project.
      Research Proposal: Students must write an original, empirical research paper that has a solid theoretical
      foundation. The theoretical framework can be a theory discussed in this course or another theory that
      pertains to your research interest area. The paper should include an introduction, literature review, method
      section, and reference list using APA format. The paper should not exceed 20 pages.
      R&R Process Assignment: As a component of the research proposal assignment, students will experience
      the reviewing process. Each student will receive a classmate’s proposal draft (with the classmate’s name
      blinded from the manuscript). They will anonymously complete a thorough review of the manuscript as
      they would review for a journal. Then, students can utilize this feedback to revise their proposals and will
      craft a response letter to submit along with their revised proposal.
      Research Proposal Presentation: Each student will have 15 minutes to present their research proposal to
      the class. The presentation should prepare students for possible future conference presentations. A more
      detailed assignment sheet will follow.
      Research Program Presentations: Each student will give a presentation that provides the class with an
      overview of their research focus and agenda. This presentation is meant to prepare students for the types of
      presentations that they might be required to give on an academic job interview. A more detailed assignment
      sheet will follow.
      Course Participation, Attendance, and Professional Conduct: Students are expected to have completed
      all readings before each class meeting. A successful doctoral seminar requires thorough, intelligent
      discussion, and this objective cannot be met without being prepared for class.
3) Course grades:
                                                                             Due
                               Assignment                                                   % of Grade
                                                                            Date
                          Discussion Questions                           Each week               15%
                                                                      Will sign up for
                      Student-Led Class Discussion                                               10%
                                                                        date in class
                          Research Prospectus                              Feb. 14               5%
                                                                        Due: April 4
                            Research Proposal                                                    25%
                                                                      Revision: May 2
                           R&R Review Letter                               April 18
                                                                                                 10%
             R&R Revision/Response (due with final draft)                   May 2
                     Research Proposal Presentation                   April 18/April 25          15%
                     Research Program Presentation                          May 9                10%
                                                                          Assessed
        Course Participation/Attendance/Professional Conduct                                     10%
                                                                    throughout semester


4) Course Topics:
Please Note: The course schedule is subject to change. Students are responsible for changes that are
announced in class and by email.
                                              Week One, January 24:
                    Course Introduction, Being an Academic Part I: From Dissertation to Tenure
                                              Week Two, January 31:
                                        Communication Research Discipline
                                             Week Three, February 7:
                               Theoretical Foundations and Beginning Your Research
                                             Week Four, February 14:
                             Theory Building & Supporting Your Argument in Research
                                              Week Five, February 21:
                                       Cultivation Theory & Spiral of Silence
                                              Week Six, February 28:
                                       Agenda Setting, Priming, and Framing
                                               Week Seven, March 7:
                                Uses and Gratifications and Diffusion of Innovations
                                              Week Eight, March 14:
                                          Individual Meetings About Paper
                                               Week Nine, March 21:
                                                    Spring Break
                                                Week Ten, March 28:
                            Being an Academic Part II: Journal Submissions, R&Rs, etc.
                                               Week Eleven, April 4:
                                  Social Identity Theory & Social Learning Theory
                                              Week Twelve, April 11:
                                 Public Relations & Crisis Communication Theories
                                             Week Thirteen, April 18:
                                           Research Proposal Presentations
                                             Week Fourteen, April 25:
                                           Research Proposal Presentations
                                                Week Fifteen, May 2:
                                      Final Paper Draft and R&R Response due
                                                Week Sixteen, May 9:
                           Being an Academic Part III: Defining Your Research Program
POLICIES AND RESOURCES
1) Classroom Policies:
        A. Grading Policies: In this course, grades are not given. They are earned. Therefore, I do not give you
             a grade; rather, you earn your grade.
        B. Policy on late work: Late Work will not be accepted. Exceptions will be made under extreme
             circumstances, if the student discusses the issue with the instructor ahead of time, either in person or
             via e-mail/phone.
        C. Plagiarism: In accordance with the UT Honor Code, Plagiarism will not be tolerated in this course. If
             words are not your own or are taken from another source, they must be properly quoted and cited. If
             you have any questions about plagiarism, proper citations, etc., please see me. Please read the
             http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct


         D. Policy on absences: Attendance is mandatory. In order to be successful in this course, it is
              imperative that you attend every single class. If attendance becomes a problem, it will impact your
              participation grade.
         E. Course Communication: If you send me an email during business days, please expect a response
              within 24 hours. All emails should be written in a professional manner. I will not respond to emails
              that are not properly formatted and/or include severe spelling/grammatical errors. I will assume that
              your email is spam if it is poorly written. If you are unsure as to how to properly format an email,
              please visit: http://smallbusiness.chron.com/proper-business-email-format-40878.html.
2) University Policies and Resources:
         A. University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning,
              discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
              University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
              toward peers and community.
              Mandatory reading: All students agree to read then abide by the University of Texas at Austin’s
              Standard of Academic Integrity and understand the nature of Academic Dishonesty as defined by UT-
              Austin at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php and
              http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
         B. Student Accommodations: Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
              accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
              with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
              http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
                   l    Please request a meeting as soon as possible for us to discuss accommodations
                   l    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
                   l    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you.
         C. Accommodation of Religious Holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending
              absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss
              class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will
              be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
3) University Resources for Students:
         A. Moody College Writing Support Program
         The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC
         3.322, https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting offers one-on-one assistance without charge to
         students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have specialists
         in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer workshops to strengthen
         core-writing skills in each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-
         hour appointments on our website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing process.
4) Safety Information:
         A. Behavior concerns advice line: If you’re worried about the behavior of a classmate, roommate,
              friend, etc., please call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050. For more
              information, please visit: https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php.
         B. Emergency Planning: In case of emergency, proper plans can be found online at
              https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/plans.php.
