Introduction to Health & Society
HS f301 (77898) | SOC f308S (82353)
Summer 2020
PROFESSOR
N i n a Pa l m o, P h . D.
Email: npalmo@utexas.edu
O ff i c e h o u r s : S i g n u p at p a l m o. a s . m e
Pro n o u n s : s h e / h e r
T E AC H I N G A S S I STA N T
Upasana Garnaik, LL.M.
Email: ugarnaik@utexas.edu
O ff i c e h o u r s : M o n d a y 1 1 a m - 1 2 p m & Th u r s d a y 2 - 3 p m
Pro n o u n s : s h e / h e r
T E AC H I N G A S S I STA N T
Pat r i c k S h e e h a n , M . A .
E m a i l : p at r i c k s h e e h a n @ u t e x a s . e d u
O ff i c e h o u r s : Tu e s d a y 3 - 4 p m & Th u r s d a y 9 - 1 0 a m
Pro n o u n s : h e / h i m
Office hours
The TAs will hold office hours via Zoom during the hours listed below. I use an online
scheduling system available at palmo.as.me. One of the things I enjoy most about teaching
is getting to know students, so I welcome you to “stop by” my office hours to chat informally
or to discuss sociological or health-related topics. If you cannot find a time that works for you,
please email me directly and I will add some availability at a time when we are both free.
What is this course about?
This course provides an introduction to the social forces that shape health and illness, both
historically and in the present-day United States. What diseases killed people ten thousand
years ago? Two hundred years ago? Today? What explains these changes? Why do women
live longer than men? Why do African American moms die in childbirth three times as often
as white moms? Why has the anti-vaccination movement gained steam and what how should
we address it? Why does American life expectancy rank 29th in the world and why is it falling?
By the end of the semester, you will have a better understanding of the complex realities that
underlie these phenomena.


How is the course structured?
This course consists of three units: 1) Theoretical frameworks for understanding health and
health care, 2) Social determinants of health, and 3) Health policy and current topics. Each of
these three units covers six topics, for a total of 18 topics this semester. For each of the three
units, there are two essay assignments and one quiz, for a total of six essay assignments and
three quizzes for the semester. The due dates are listed in the course calendar on the last
page of the syllabus.
What do I need to buy?
                       We will be using an online learning platform called Kritik this semester.
                       You must register for Kritik in order to submit assignments. You can
                       sign up and learn more at www.kritik.io.
                       Cost: $24 for the semester
                       Close to the end of the semester you will be assigned to watch the
                       documentary, In Defense of Food: An Eater’s Manifesto. The film
                       features bestselling author Michael Pollan as he sifts through the
                       conflicting messages we receive today about how and what to eat.
                       Cost: Approximately $3 to rent online
                       There is one required book for this course: Being Mortal by Atul
                       Gawande. Dr. Gawande is a practicing surgeon and the author of
                       several popular books reflecting on the science and art of medicine.
                       Being Mortal reflects on death and dying and the ways in which
                       medicine can improve life until its very end.
                       Cost: Approximately $10


What is Kritik?
On the first day of class you will receive an invitation to join Kritik. The cost for a one-semester
subscription is $24. Kritik is a peer-to-peer learning platform that allows you to submit short
essays or other assignments, and then review the work submitted by your fellow students.
This requires a deeper level of engagement with the material than simply writing an essay.
There are three steps involved in each Kritik assignment:
Step 1
Submit a short essay about 300-500 words long. A list of three questions will be provided.
You should choose one of these questions to answer.
Step 2
You will be assigned five assignments to review. All reviewing will be completely anonymous,
so you will not know whose paper you are grading or who is grading you. You will be asked
to provide both numerical feedback and written feedback. The numerical feedback is out of
10 points -- up to five points for the accuracy of the content and up to five point for the clarify
of the explanation and quality of writing. You should also provide written two comments to
each author. Provide one comment to say what the essay does well and one comment to
suggest improvement.
Step 3
The final step is to rate the quality of written feedback that you received. You will be asked to
rate each grader’s feedback based on how motivational it is and how critical it is.
Motivational refers to how encouraging the feedback is, whereas critical refers to how well it
made suggestions for improvement.
Your grade using Kritik
Your grade will be based on the three components. First, your essay will be given a grade
based on the average score assigned by your peer reviewers. Second, you will get points
simply for completing the peer reviews (evaluating the work of your peers) and the feedback-
on-feedback (evaluating the comment you received on your work) components. Finally, Kritik
uses an algorithm to figure out the quality of your grading, based on how well your scoring
matches up with the rest of the class, and how your feedback is evaluated.
What if I disagree with my grade?
If you believe your overall grade does not fairly reflect your submission, you can use Kritik’s
“dispute grade” feature. You will be prompted to provide the reason you are disputing the
grade. The TA and I will be alerted and will review the submission. We can override the grade
you received if we believe there is reason to do so.


Summary of Assignments
  Description                                                                 Percent of
                                                                              final grade
  Intro survey
  Kritik essays                                                                     1%
    Sign up for Kritik                                                              1%
    Essay questions (6 total submitted on Kritik)                                  30%
    Peer reviews (6 total submitted on Kritik)                                     12%
    Feedback on feedback (6 total submitted on Kritik)                              6%
    Kritik score (your skill as an evaluator)                                       5%
  Canvas quizzes
    Quiz 1                                                                         15%
    Quiz 2                                                                         15%
    Quiz 3                                                                         15%
  Total                                                                           100 %
Quiz info
The quizzes will open for 24 hours on the scheduled day, from 12:00am to 11:59pm. You
may consult any resources you want (books, notes, etc.) except other people, including
classmates, friends, or family members. The quizzes will be a combination of true/false,
multiple choice, and short answer questions. Once you begin, you will have 3 hours to
complete the quiz. A review guide will be posted on Canvas before the quiz.
Late essays
Late assignment submission is not possible on Kritik, as this would disrupt the peer review
process. However, I understand that emergencies and extenuating circumstances may arise
during the semester, especially during a pandemic and an era of social change.
If you find that you cannot submit an assignment on time, please email me for approval of a
late submission. If approved, you will submit your essay directly on Canvas instead of through
Kritik. Also, to make up for the missed learning that happens through the peer review
process, you should answer TWO of three essay question options, instead of just one, as
required for timely submissions. No late assignments will be submitted after the last day of
classes.


The University Writing Center
A significant part of your grade in this course is based on your writing. An excellent resource
that you can use free of charge as a student is the University Writing Center. They are offering
online consultations to help students with their writing at any stage of the process, whether
you are struggling to begin, would like a second pair of eyes on the a nearly finished product,
or something in between. You can book an appointment for an online consultation at
uwc.utexas.edu.
The fine print
Course description
The principle objective of Introduction to Health & Society is to offer students a broad
overview of health and society from a variety of disciplinary perspectives. We will examine
how social forces influence health and disease, including cultural, economic, and
demographic considerations. We will explore why rates of disease vary among different
populations and how cultural and structural inequalities affect morbidity and mortality rates
and determine access to healthcare. How do economic factors, politics, and historical biases
against specific populations shape modern-day experiences of health and illness? We will
also examine how social forces shape the very definitions of health, illness, and disease
categories, and thereby medical diagnoses and treatments. Finally, we will explore
contemporary issues in health and health care and how these issues affect us as individuals
and as a society. This course is built around lectures (including guest lectures), class
discussion, and film screenings.
Course objectives
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
    • Analyze contemporary health issues from a variety of disciplinary and professional
        perspectives.
    • Explain how one’s social location, the media, and economic forces shape health
        behaviors and outcomes.
    • Explain how social and cultural factors shape contemporary understandings and
        experiences of health and illness and death and dying in the U.S.
    • Critically evaluate the assumptions, motives, and evidence that individuals and groups
        use to make specific claims about health and illness.
Grading scale
    Final letter grades will be assigned using the scale below.
    A     94.0-100          B     84.0-86.9        C     74.0-76.9        D   64.0-66.9
    A- 90.0-93.9            B- 80.0-83.9           C- 70.0-73.9           D-  60.0-63.9
    B+ 87.0-89.9            C+ 77.0-79.9           D+ 67.0-69.9           F   0-59.9


Course calendar
 Date                 Topic                                         Assignment
 Thursday, June 4     Introduction to the course
 Friday, June 5       1 – Upstream and downstream perspectives      Sign up for Kritik
 Monday, June 8       2 – Social causes of health & longevity       Intro survey due
 Tuesday, June 9      3 – Social construction of health & illness   Essay 1 due
 Wednesday, June 10   4 – Medicalization                            Peer reviews due
 Thursday, June 11    5 – Epidemiological transition theory         Feedback due
 Friday, June 12      6 – Role and limits of medical care           Essay 2 due
 Monday, June 15      Canvas Quiz 1 (topics 1-6)                    Quiz due
 Tuesday, June 16     7 – Gender & health                           Peer reviews due
 Wednesday, June 17   8 – Race & health                             Feedback due
 Thursday, June 18    9 – Social relationships & health             Essay 3 due
 Friday, June 19      10 – Childhood & adulthood health             Peer reviews due
 Monday, June 22      11 – Socioeconomic status, stress, and health Feedback due
 Tuesday, June 23     12 – Immigration and health                   Essay 4 due
 Wednesday, June 24   Canvas Quiz 2 (topics 7-12)                   Quiz due
 Thursday, June 25    13 – The U.S. health disadvantage             Peer reviews due
 Friday, June 26      14 – Models of health care coverage           Feedback due
 Monday, June 29      15 – LGBTQ health                             Essay 5 due
 Tuesday, June 30     16 – Obesity in America                       Peer reviews due
 Wednesday, July 1    17 – In Defense of Food (film)                Feedback due
 Thursday, July 2     18 – Being Mortal by Atul Gawande (book)      Start reading
 Friday, July 3       4th of July holiday observed
 Monday, July 6       Reading day: Being Mortal                     Keep reading
 Tuesday, July 7      Reading day: Being Mortal                     Essay 6 due
 Wednesday, July 8    Review on your own                            Peer reviews due
 Thursday, July 9     Review on your own                            Feedback due
 Friday, July 10      Canvas Quiz 3 (topics 13-18)                  Quiz due
Notes:
All deadlines are at 11:59pm.
There is no final exam in the course.
