           Integrated Communication Campaigns
                                            ADV 373 / PR 377K
                                 Unique Course Number: 06615 / 07075
                                                Spring 2020
                                                BMC 4.206
                                         T/Th 12:30 pm – 2:00 pm
PROFESSOR:               Dr. Lucy Atkinson
                         Office BMC 4.346
                         lucyatkinson@austin.utexas.edu (best way to reach me – or better yet, stop
                         by during office hours!)
                         471-6665
                         Office Hours: Tuesdays 10:00 – 12:00 and by appointment
TA:                      Michaela Hartnett
                         Office: BMC fourth floor, Cubicle #19
                         hlm.2164@gmail.com
                         Office Hours: Wednesdays 12:00 – 2:00 and by appointment
REQUIRED TEXTBOOK:
Steel, Jon. (2007). Perfect Pitch: The Art of Selling Ideas and Winning New Business (1st edition).
Wiley.
•    I may periodically post additional required readings to the class Web site at Canvas. These
     readings will be short articles in mainstream publications, such as newspapers and magazines,
     that help shed contemporary light on issues in advertising and public relations.
COURSE OVERVIEW AND OBJECTIVES:
This is the final course in your PR/ADV degree program. Prerequisites for this combined course
include introductory advertising and marketing, research, media, and communication management.
It requires you to integrate all the pieces of your education experience to solve real-world marketing
communication problems. This class is less about learning new information and more about
synthesizing and applying what you have learned so far. This class will reveal how much you know
about integrated brand promotion and how well your knowledge can be applied to specific problem-
solving situations.
The major focus of this course is the two campaign plans your group will prepare and present to
clients. Although I will be assisting you and directing your work throughout the course, individual and
group work is a very important part of your grade. It is also instrumental in training for real world
agency/client conditions.
You are required to perform work as members of an "agency" team. You will be graded for your
participation as group members, your individual contribution to the plans book, and also for the
group's work. Your individual grade on the campaign can be significantly affected by your
performance on the team. Individuals who go above and beyond their teammates may earn a higher
grade than the rest of the team.


The course is demanding and requires a considerable amount of individual and group effort. The
reward, however, will be an appreciation for the complexity and hard work necessary to survive in
the business.
REQUIREMENTS/EXPECTATIONS
1. Attendance: Attendance is required at all class, presentation, client and team meetings. We
    may also have a significant number of meetings that are off site and/or outside the scheduled
    class time. There will be no excused absences. Failure to attend any of these meetings will affect
    your grade and could reduce your final grade by as much as two letter grades. Attendance
    means showing up to the class or meeting on time. Habitual lateness will affect your grade.
2. Teamwork: This course is primarily structured around teamwork. You will be assigned to groups
    or “agency teams,” and the bulk of your work in the course will be carried out and evaluated
    based on these teams. Teams will consist of varying personalities, skills and interests (ex:
    media, account planning, creative, public relations) and you must find a way to manage these
    differences. The ability to cooperate, to communicate and to work effectively is essential to
    creating successful campaigns, both in this class and in the real world. Once students have been
    assigned to teams, I will not adjust the membership of these teams. Although I don’t anticipate
    any problems, if issues do arise I expect you to resolve them yourselves, just as you would in a
    real-world job situation.
3. Deadlines: Deadlines are sacrosanct and inviolate. All assignments must be handed in on time.
    Late assignments or projects will not be accepted and you will not earn any points (i.e. you will
    receive a grade of 0) for that assignment. This class simulates the real world, and in the real
    world, deadlines are non-negotiable. The usual litany of excuses (I slept through my alarm, I
    missed the bus, I have a cold, my grandmother died) won’t work. In the real world, failure to meet
    a deadline could result in you losing your job. Now is the time to practice time management and
    adherence to deadlines.
4. Time management: Since this course frequently is taken in the last semester of a college
    career, it is not uncommon for a student to be job hunting at the same time. It also is not
    uncommon for students to hold jobs and/or internships. Be aware that this can be a very bad
    idea, depending on your courseload and personal energy level. Campaigns is a course that is
    very demanding on your time. It can easily dominate twice or even three times as much of your
    life as other courses. Trying to balance this time demand with other obligations can be
    overwhelming. Your teammates in this class will judge you not on how well you’re doing your
    internship, they’ll judge you on how much, and the quality of, work you contribute to your class
    project. Do not lose track of what is most important.
5. Communication: The primary way I will communicate with you outside of class is through
    e-mail via Canvas. You are responsible for making sure you get any messages from me and you
    are responsible for the content of those announcements. I may notify you via e-mail about a
    change in meeting times or assignment deadlines. Failure to check your e-mail does not excuse
    you from meeting the responsibilities outlined in the message. At a minimum, you should check
    your e-mail once every day.
6. Ownership and confidentiality: The bulk of your work in this class consists of creating
    advertising and public relations campaigns for real clients. Our clients agree to form a temporary
    client-agency relationship with the class in the spirit of academic learning. As an incentive to our


    clients for volunteering, all materials presented to the clients automatically become their
    property. As well, any and all information our clients provide to you is strictly confidential and
    must not be discussed or shared with individuals who are not related to the projects.
7. Plagiarism: Everything you produce in this class must be your original work. If you have help
    from anyone outside this class it will be considered a breach of UT’s policy on Scholastic
    Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING:
Essay
You will be required to write a brief paper (3 pages, single-spaced) about the Steel book, Perfect
Pitch. The question will be posted online and you will have a week to write it.
In-class Activities
There will be several in-class activities and exercises meant to lay the foundation for your two
professional campaign proposals. Some of these activities are graded, others are for credit. Failure
to participate in any of the activities (or to participate with lackluster enthusiasm and
professionalism) will knock your final grade down a letter.
Campaigns
You will carry out two campaigns plans. You will be placed in groups of four or five students at the
beginning of the semester, and this will be your group for both campaigns. For each campaign, you
and your teammates will work as an agency team to compete with other student groups to win the
account. You will pitch your campaign to the client on the dates indicated in the syllabus.
Weekly meetings and participation:
We will not meet during every scheduled class time. Instead, you will be meeting in your groups to
work on your proposals or with me to keep me posted on your progress. Your attendance, attitude,
contribution and participation in these meetings will be assessed and will contribute to your final
grade.
Attendance, Participation and Professionalism
Attendance at all classes and meetings is required. There are no excused absences. It is also
assumed that students will be active participants in class. Simply being present in the room is not
sufficient; you must also be engaged and involved scholars. Participation – not just attendance – is
integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to you earning a high grade. Active participation means
contributing to the discussion, listening to what your colleagues have to say and engaging with the
readings and in-class activities. It means showing up on time, not checking Facebook or email on
your computer, not texting on your phone. NOTE that if you do not participate in class discussions,
you will not earn full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
Peer Evaluations
You will be asked to provide an assessment of your and your teammates' contributions to the
campaigns. They will be taken into account in final assignment of grades.


Grading Breakdown:
                         Assignment                   Points         Grade Percentage
                 In-class exercise #1                 Credit            (not graded)
                 In-class exercise #2                 Credit            (not graded)
                 Crash Exercise #1                  10 points               10%
                 Crash Exercise #2                  10 points               10%
                 Campaign #1                        20 points               20%
                 Campaign #2                        35 points               35%
                 Steel Essay                        10 points               10%
                 Class Participation                10 points               10%
                 Peer Evaluations                    5 points                5%
                 Total                             100 points              100%
Some Words on Grading:
• I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6% that translates
   into a B+ and will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
•  Any questions or comments about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7) days
   after the grade is announced or posted.
•  When I grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the
   work and the accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100
   points and then lose them based on mistakes you make. Your final points represent the total
   points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
Grading System:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s
provost office (http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/) and described below:
                                                                   And the GPA
                      To earn an:      You must earn:              equivalent of:
                           A               94-100                      4.00
                           A-              90-93.9                     3.67
                           B+              87-89.9                     3.33
                           B               84-86.9                     3.00
                           B-              80-83.9                     2.67
                           C+              77-79.9                     2.33
                           C               74-76.9                     2.00
                           C-              70-73.9                     1.67
                           D+              67-69.9                     1.33
                           D               64-66.9                     1.00
                           D-              60-63.9                     0.67
                           F                 0-59.9                    0.00
Advertising and PR majors are required to have a minimum grade of C in all communication courses
and in all required and elective courses in order to continue in the program.


ACADEMIC INTEGRITY:
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission
of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to
them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the
future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from
the University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial
Services Web site at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs
UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES:
1. Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail
address. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at: http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
2. Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone). Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation
letter from SSD.
     ▪ Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not
         accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for
         proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
     ▪ Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
         phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
         http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
3. Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of observance of a religious holy day.
4. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
5. Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons
to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
         “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
         permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any
         course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the
         student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”


6. Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside
when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following
policies regarding evacuation:
        ▪ Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
             the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
        ▪ If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
        ▪ In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or
the Fire Prevention Services office gives you instructions to do so.
7. Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are
options available for support.
    ▪   Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                 | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
    ▪   CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    ▪   CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW|CMA
        4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
    ▪   FREE Services at CMHC:
        o Brief assessments and referral services
        o Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
        o MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
        o Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
8. Title IX
The University of Texas is committed to providing a safe learning environment for all students that is
free of all forms of discrimination and sexual harassment, including sexual assault, domestic
violence, dating violence, and stalking. If you (or someone you know) has experienced or
experiences any of these incidents, know that you are not alone. The university has staff members
trained to support you in navigating campus life, accessing health and counseling services, providing
academic and housing accommodations, helping with legal protective orders, and more.
Please be aware all UT faculty members are “responsible employees,” which means that if you tell
me about a situation involving sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating violence, domestic
violence, or stalking, I must share that information with the Title IX Coordinator. Although I have to
make that notification, you will control how your case will be handled, including whether you wish to
pursue a formal complaint. Our goal is to make sure you are aware of the range of options available
to you and have access to the resources you need.


                                            TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE: SUBJECT TO CHANGE
 Wk   Date    TUESDAY                                                  Date THURSDAY
 1    1/21    Course overview and introductions                        1/23 Crash Exercise #1 (hand out)
 2    1/28    Crash Exercise #1 PITCH                                  1/30 Crash Exercise #2 BRIEF
 3    2/4     Campaigns Office Hours                                   2/6  Crash Exercise #2 PITCH
 4    2/11    Campaign #1A CLIENT BRIEF (half of class)                2/13 Campaign #1B CLIENT BRIEF (half of class)
 5    2/18    Campaigns Office Hours                                   2/20 Campaigns Office Hours
 6    2/25    Campaigns Office Hours                                   2/27 Campaigns Office Hours
 7    3/3     Campaigns Office Hours                                   3/5  Campaigns Office Hours
 8    3/10    Campaign #1A PITCHES (half of class)                     3/12 Campaign #1B PITCHES (half of class)
      3/17    SPRING BREAK (NO CLASS)                                  3/19 SPRING BREAK (NO CLASS)
 9    3/24    Campaign #2A CLIENT BRIEF (half of class)                3/26 Campaign #2B CLIENT BRIEF (half of class)
 10   3/31    Campaigns Office Hours                                   4/2  Campaigns Office Hours
 11   4/7     Campaigns Office Hours                                   4/9  Campaigns Office Hours
 12   4/14    Campaigns Office Hours                                   4/16 Campaigns Office Hours
 13   4/21    Campaigns Office Hours                                   4/23 Campaigns Office Hours
 14   4/28    Campaigns Office Hours                                   4/30 Campaigns Office Hours
 15   5/5     Campaign #2A FINAL PITCHES (half of class)               5/7  Campaign #2B FINAL PITCHES (half of class)
NOTE: We do not meet as a class on days marked “Campaigns Office Hours.” These are for you to meet and work as a group. I will be
available in my office if you have questions.
Other Deliverables:
    • Resume and job selections: Tuesday, Jan. 28 (by 5:00 pm)
    • Steel Essay #1: Sunday, March 1 (by 5:00 pm)
