Syllabus                                            ACCOUNT PLANNING // SPRING 2019 1
Account planning //                                  ADV 327 & 385
Professor:              Robert J. Lewis, roblewis@utexas.edu, 512-590-9903
Office:                 BMC 4.380 (hours: Thursdays 3-5pm)
Class location:         BMC 4.206
Class time:             Wednesdays 5:30-8:30
COURSE OBJECTIVES // ADV 327 & 385
  1.   To promote the understanding of account planning as part of a well
       established process of observation and analysis by describing its intellectual
       roots and discussing its place in the agency culture.
  2.   To present an up-to-date review of the disciplines and techniques of
       account planning as currently practiced in leading advertising agencies and
       by major advertisers. Emphasis will be placed on those who formulate – if
       not initiate – strategic thought with the single purpose being to make the
       advertising/PR better.
  3.   The contribution of planning to overall strategic direction will be explored,
       as well as the important relationship between planners and members of the
       creative staff, PR staff, etc.
  4.   Using these foundations and principles, we will illustrate with practical
       experience that the planner’s work is interactive with consumers, and with
       pretty much all other stakeholders.
  5.   Develop the realization that advertising is more than a compelling message
       about products and services in its representation of our culture and values.
  6.   Learn to build an argument.
  7.   Nourish and instill in the students a passion for advertising, a desire for
       excellence, a reverence for great creative and a maturity of thought process
       that will continue during their professional life and be recognized by those
       who will work with them in the future.
Part of succeeding in any business that requires making pitches and competing
for new business is the ability to present your ideas in an engaging and
convincing manner. While the value of your ideas is, of course, extremely
important (a prerequisite, if you will), so is the manner in which you present those
ideas. Presentation is crucial and without it, good ideas fail. Presentation grades
throughout this course will reflect the fact that it is not just about how good your
ideas are, but how effectively you can present those ideas.


Syllabus                                         ACCOUNT PLANNING // SPRING 2019 2
SCHEDULE // ADV 327 & 385
Week 1 (Jan. 23)
Intro. What is account planning? Introduce first assignment. Shopping Carts
versus messages.
Activity: Campaign insight for Ossia, Inc.
Week 2 (Jan. 30)
Quiz topics: Kocek pp. 59-70, Smith ch 1. culturalist theories
Discussion: Critical/cultural theory, qualitative-research vocabulary
Activity: Find ad, present on cultural tension (ad hoc group)
Activity: Grounded Theory (ad hoc group)
Week 3 (Feb. 6)
Quiz topics: Lewis et al. (2017)
Discussion: Reading, qualitative & quantitative experimental designs
Activity: Answer research questions with experimental designs (fish oil, running
shoes, sexuality and fear, proximity and story enjoyment, media violence and
aggression)
Guest speaker
Week 4 (Feb. 13)
Quiz topics: Ellet ch 1 & ch 2
Discussion: How to argue
Activity: First case, Strategy development, research plan
Week 5 (Feb. 20)
Quiz topics:
Activity:
Hand out rubric.
Present cases (3 minutes talk-time, up to 5 minutes post discussion)
Week 6 (Feb. 27)
Quiz topics: Murphy IBP Objectives


Syllabus                                     ACCOUNT PLANNING // SPRING 2019 3
SCHEDULE // ADV 327 & 385
Week 7 (March 6)
Quiz topics: Kocek, p. 1-51
Week 8 (March 13)
Quiz topics: Hackley, Enigma
Week 9 (March 20) SPRING BREAK
Week 10 (March 27)
Quiz topics: Berger, STEPPS & academic article
Week 11 (April 3)
Quiz topics: Smith et al. on Branding, Ch. 2
Week 12 (April 10)
Quiz topics: Klein, No Logo
Week 13 (April 17)
Quiz topics: Kocek, pp. 70-136
Week 14 (April 24)
Quiz topics: Hackley, Enigma
Week 15 (May 1)
Quiz topics: Haley, How advertising creatives define excellent planning


Syllabus                                                      ACCOUNT PLANNING // SPRING 2019 4
COURSE MATERIALS // ADV 327 & 385
Readings are subject to change, and addi3onal materials may be handed out in class, through e-
mail, or via Canvas. Lecture materials, such as PPTs (although there are few), may be uploaded on
the class Canvas site as well.
  • Assorted PDF-format readings available on Canvas
  • Chris Kocek, The Prac=cal Pocket Guide to Account Planning
Students will be expected to read required readings prior to aFending class. Readings are intended
to supplement lecture material and provide context for class discussions, exercises, and projects.
While it is not required reading for the class, I would highly recommend Jon Steel’s Perfect Pitch as
well as his Truth, Lies, and Adver4sing.          They are extremely useful books about making
presenta3ons and winning new business, as well as the philosophy behind account planning as a
whole. We’ll spend some 3me in class talking about them too.
COURSE GRADING // ADV 327 & 385
Semester project                                                 20%
Quizzes (number and weight will vary)                            50%
Active case-pitch-feedback forms                                 20%
Group case strategy pitches                                      10%
Letter Grade // Number Grade
A                  94-100
A-                 90-93.9
B+                 87-.89.9
B                  83-86.9
B-                 80-82.9
C+                 77-79.9
C                  73-76.9
C-                 70-72.9
D+                 66-69.9
D                  63-66.9
D-                 60-62.9


Syllabus                                                 ACCOUNT PLANNING // SPRING 2019 5
Do the readings …
It is expected that readings for each class day have been read prior to attending class
(hence the quizzes). During class, I hope to mostly be doing activities and applying what
you’ve read or previously discussed in class. Additional reading and class materials will be
provided in class and on Canvas throughout the semester. The class schedule is subject
to change except quiz topics.
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student
from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination
or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the
absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance for
more.
Students with Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's
Office in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized
services are available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ for more.


Syllabus                                        ACCOUNT PLANNING // SPRING 2019 6
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid
participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes,
but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a
postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and
submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the
prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to
these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both
the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-
career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject
to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
dismissal from the University.
Visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php for more.
