Micropolitan
America
Micro-urbanism in hyper-context
ksestudio
Sofia Krimizi and Kyriakos Kyriakou
Advanced Design Studio, UTSOA
                          Spring 2019
                                      1


Anton, TX
          2


Studio premise:
‘Micropolitan America’ focuses on an alternative
understanding of urbanism that studies the
American town as an instant and autonomous
urban setup, one that is simple enough to be
broken down in primary and identifiable elements,
that can be used as tools to enable micro-urban
function. The American town is seen through the
lens of remoteness. Its content is detached from
its form as it invisibly links to greater systems and
networks. The town is seen in two extreme scales.
A nationwide scale of networks and their local
built manifestations. Students, working in defiance
of a conventional academic approach will be
asked to identify, analyze and ultimately comment
and intervene on the nodes of the Texan town grid
system through real, surreal or entirely speculative
interventions. Working between and across
scales- that of the street, the town, the road, the
territory- students are going to be operating as
archeologists of the immediate future -only to
paraphrase Reyner Banham.
                                                      3


If America is the original version of modernity
according to Baudrillard, then the extremities
of the American internal territory- understood
here as a sequence of Greysvilles, Crossvilles,
Maryvilles but also Moscows, Paris, Florences
spread out in Tennessee, Texas, Louisiana or
Arizona- offer us an insight to an accelerated end
of that initial modernity.
performed trips
                                                   4


In situ, TEXAS: (local specificity)
In many ways Texas defied description. Not only in terms of its scale, or the
disconsolate vastness of the West Texan desert, but also as an idea. Larger than
any European country, yet still only one of the 50 states in the union. Texas is a
place where, as the writer Cormac Mc Carthy once suggested, we all come to be
cured of our sentiments. Mark Campbell
Because Texas is a part of almost everything in modern America - the South,
the West, the Plains, Hispanic and immigrant communities, the border, the
divide between the rural areas and the cities - what happens here tends to
disproportionately affect the rest of the nation. Lawrence Wright
We will look into the generic, the unseen, the overlooked, the
irrelevant, the unfinished, the unwrought. Between the micro-
urbanism of the Texan town and the hyper-context of the
state, we will deal with urbanism and architecture in a radically
small and vast scale respectively.
     Ed Ruscha, Drive
                                                                                   5


The Project:
Phase 1a - Aalysis:
Students will be asked to perform an in depth reading of the selected
territory aspiring to generate an understanding of the region through
the elemental notion of the town inscribed within a networked land-
scape of power. The networks at play can be physical or notional and
can be summarized as the basic requirements to organize and sus-
tain an urban community.
Landscapes of power (types):
•  Nutrition (Water network, food provision)
•  Energy (Oil/ gas- gas stations, electricity - power plants)
•  Education (Schools, universities)
•  Transportation of people and goods (Railway, highway networks)
•  Administration (Local government, state, federal)
•  Law (Legislation, police and correction)
•  Organized Religion (Temples and communities)
•  Leisure (Recreation, tourism)
Phase 1b – Trip:
Having selected an analytical lens to examine the territory through,
the students will travel long spans visiting towns on predefined cross
sections of the research regions. The area around Austin provides
a great example of extremities between the desert, countryside and
the town. The studio will establish an archive of urban and/or building
typologies and of the greater networks they serve. Both the building
types and the networks will be broken down with consecutive zoom
ins and outs until they are able to formulate a new understanding and
a critical position vis-a-vis the studio premise.
                                                                      6


Research Building Typologies:
•  The Town Hall
•  The Courthouse
•  The town Jail
•  The School
•  The Church
•  The Gazebo
•  The main street Store
•  The Water tower.
Phase 2- Dsign Interrogation:
Coming back from the road trip to the territory the students will be
asked to translate their observations into design interrogations act-
ing on the latent potential of the town constellation. The objective is
to loop the design arguments through a local intervention scale that
exemplifies and challenges the current conditions as identified during
the research. The aim is to be critical and not attempt to solve prob-
lems, rather hack the laid-out system and subvert it.
Phase 3 – Design Thesis:
During the final phase of the studio the students will be asked to se-
lect the design medium through which they are going to deliver their
thesis. The intellectual arguments produced by each project are ex-
pected to invent a format specific to each case and challenge con-
ventions of architectural representation. The studio will emphasize the
importance of dealing with the context and the design innervation on
equal terms in an attempt to elevate the existing architecture to an
unprecedented level of detail and focus.
                                                                        7


Studio methodology:
Team work is extremely important in the context of this studio. The re-
search produced in all stages is considered an open resource within
the group. What is more, students are invited to work in teams of two
or three throughout the semester.
This is a research upper lever studio meaning that the syllabus is only
providing an intellectual framework and an overall methodological
process, not a building brief.
Nevertheless, the specific and unique argument and thus thesis and
direction proposed by each team is going to be derived from their
original research and intellectual curiosity.
Deliverables
Students will be asked to produce a coherent analytical index of the
typology they have elected to work with that will seamlessly blend
into a synthetic proposal for a diversion of the current condition.
Larger analytical drawings of the town and relationship with the ter-
ritory can be produced within the groups. Archival in-situ research is
also expected in the initial stages in order to tap into local resources
(libraries, town archives, collections etc.).
As we proceed towards specific typologies, each student will develop
a body of work identifying a thesis question around the chosen type
that will be explored through a design proposal that intervenes in a
microscale while consciously affecting a much wider context.
Architecture can be vast and urbanism radically small in the context
of the studio, allowing students to work at a diversity of scales and
mediums, yet a design project is expected from each student that will
explore the thesis question asked though the initial research.
Drawing scales will range from the building element to the scale of
the country.
                                                                         8


Grading Criteria:
Thesis:
A clear and precise narrative and line of historical grounding that
delivers a critical argument about the project throughout the
semester.
Representation: The ability to challenge drawing conventions
and prepare the necessary graphic documents that both design and
communicate the thesis.
Engagement: Class attendance, participation in conversations,
creative and productive response to feedback.
Intellectual contribution: The ability to produce original
ideas and introduce findings, demonstrating a deep understanding
of both the research/ analysis, and the project thesis, as well as the
ability to develop the project accordingly.
Output: The quality and volume of final production.       Emphasis is
given to exploratory drawings, models and hybrid studies.
   Anton, TX
                                                                       9


Proposed timeline
(dates subject to change)
Phase 1:
1/23/19 Studio lottery
1/25/19 Introduction formation of
groups preparation for road trip
1/31/19 Road trip
2/4/19 Presentation of findings
Phase 2:
2/5/19 Selection of topic start of
research
3/4/19 Research presentation
3/6/19 Project proposal
3/15/19 Mid review
Phase 3:
3/18-22/19 Spring-Break
5/1/19 Pre-final review
5/8-10/19 Final review
                                   10


Selected Bibliography
Banham, Reyner. Scenes in America Deserta. Salt Lake City: Gibbs M.
Smith, Inc, 1982.
Banham, Reyner. The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment. 2.
ed. London: Architectural Press, 1984.
Baudrillard, Jean. Simulations. Foreign Agents Series. New York City, N.Y.,
U.S.A: Semiotext(e), Inc, 1983.
Baudrillard, Jean, and Chris Turner. America. 11. impr. London: Verso, 2000.
Breuer, Karin, Edward Ruscha, and Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco,
eds. Ed Ruscha and the Great American West. San Francisco: Fine Arts
Museums of San Francisco, 2016.
Buckley, Craig, Mark Wasiuta, Dan Graham, and Columbia University, eds.
Dan Graham’s New Jersey. Living Archives Series 5. Zürich: Müller, 2012.
Campbell, Mark. Paradise Lost. London: Architectural Association, 2016.
Frank, Robert, and Jack Kerouac. The Americans. 1. ed. Göttingen: Steidl,
2008.
Hirshorn, Paul, and Steven Izenour. White Towers. Rev. ed. Cambridge,
Mass.: The MIT Press, 2007.
Jackson, John Brinckerhoff. Discovering the Vernacular Landscape. New
Haven: Yale Univ. Press, 1984.
Lasansky, D. Medina, ed. Archi.Pop: Mediating Architecture in Popular Cul-
ture. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2014.
Lavin, Sylvia, MAK Center for Art and Architecture, and Schindler House,
eds. Everything Loose Will Land: 1970s Art and Architecture in Los An-
geles ; [... on the Occasion of the Exhibition “Everything Loose Will Land:
1970s Art and Architecture in Los Angeles”, Organized by the MAK Center
for Art and Architecture, Los Angles, at the Schindler House, May 9-Au-
gust 4, 2013]. Nürnberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2013.
Venturi, Robert, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour. Learning from
Las Vegas. Cambridge Mass: MIT Pr, 1972.
Kerouac, Jack. On the Road. New York, N.Y.: Penguin, 2011.
Solnit, Rebecca. A Field Guide to Getting Lost. London: Penguin, 2006.
Sontag, Susan. In America: A Novel. 1st ed. New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 2000.
Steinbeck, John. Travels with Charley: In Search of America. New York, NY:
Penguin Books, 1987.
                                                                            11


Miami, AZ
          12


Studio Culture:
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learn-
ing encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The
studio offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make
proposals, which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting profes-
sionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from
faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her criti-
cal thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic
form of education, where project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an
understanding of and commitment to the school’s core values — broadmindedness, inter-
connectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture’s fun-
damental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
collaboration, group discussions and reviews.
Grade Descriptions:
A/A- : excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and tech-
niques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B- : above average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required proj-
ects. Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C : average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with
dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- : poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are
not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowl-
edge base.
F : fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note
that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not complet-
ing work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used
after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices and with an agreement as to a new com-
pletion date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which
you are enrolling, according to School of Architecture policy.
                                                                                                  13


Collaboration:
Projects are developed in collaboration with a partner, and your performance will be evalu-
ated collectively. You should be mindful of the give and take that is associated with a collab-
orative design process. If the relationship between you and your partner becomes strained
in any way it is imperative that you bring such issues to the attention of your instructors. In
addition to the specific relation you will have with you partner, a general spirit of collabora-
tion amongst all members of the studio will be expected.
Attendance:
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Students are expected to work on their proj-
ect in the studio. Active participation in studio readings and discussions is expected.
With three (3) unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered
by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused
absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with writ-
ten documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as
one (1) unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or
absence is known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or
absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
Religious Observances:
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose.
A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which
the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires
students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so
that arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an oppor-
tunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                                                                 14


Academic Integrity:
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary pen-
alties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic integ-
rity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
University Code of Conduct:
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
Care Program:
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health profes-
sionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental
health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Laura Dannenmaier (LCSW) is the CARE Program Director and is the assigned CARE coun-
selor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE coun-
selor or students may directly reach out to her.
Laura Dannenmaier | BTL 114B | (512) 471-3115
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_dannenmaier.html
Student with Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that doc-
uments the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hear-
ing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Security, safety and the studio:
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates
the careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint or any
other substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio
that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave
your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and
your studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
                                                                                                 15


BCAL:
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
Calls can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your
instincts and share your concerns.
Emergency Evacuation
In the case of emergency evacuation:
•      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires
exiting and assembling outside.
•      Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and
building they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used
when entering the building.
•      Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty
or class instructors.
•      Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Ser-
vices offices.
                                                                                                16


17