                        COMPARATIVE PRIMATE ECOLOGY
                            ANTHROPOLOGY 346M [31205]
                                            FALL 2019
INSTRUCTOR:            Dr. Becca Lewis
                       Department of Anthropology
                       Office: SAC 5.152
                       Phone: 232-5386
                       e-mail: rjlewis@austin.utexas.edu
                       Office hours: Wednesdays 3 – 4:30 pm
LOCATION:              SAC 5.172
MEETING TIMES:         10:00 AM-10:50 AM
MEETING DAYS:          Monday, Wednesday, Friday
READINGS:              All readings will be available on Canvas or through the library e-journals
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
      All primates are a part of a broader ecological system that includes other primates as well
      as other animal and plant species. This class will cover the basics of ecology (the study of
      how organisms interact with their environment). We will examine how the basic principles
      of animal ecology can help us understand primate behavior. We will look at a wide range
      of primates from a comparative perspective as we explore primate habitats, diets, life
      histories, and communities, as well as the concept of the niche, environmental influences
      on reproductive strategies, plant-animal interactions, cognitive ecology, and much more.
      Because most primate species are threatened, endangered, or even facing extinction, we
      will also focus on how various aspects of ecology are used in the conservation of primates.
COURSE FORMAT AND REQUIREMENTS:
      Prerequisite: ANT 301
      This class will follow the general format of lecture on Mondays and Wednesdays and
      discussion on Fridays. Thus, participation is an important part of your grade. It is difficult
      to participate if you are not present in class and so attendance is highly recommended and
      will be recorded.
      Grades will also be based upon 3 in-class exams (no comprehensive final exam). Exams
      may include multiple-choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer questions. Each
      student in this class will become an “expert” on his/her species of choice. You will be
      responsible for gathering information about your species and putting it together in a visual
      format.
      Grades will be based upon                               %Grade         Due Date
      Exam I                                                  20%            Oct 9
      Exam I I                                                20%            Nov 6
                                                                                                  1


       Exam III                                              20%            Dec 11
       Poster Presentation                                   20%            Nov 18, 20-22
       Participation                                         20%
Grades will be calculated using letter grades. The letters for all of your grades are changed to
numbers following the typical 4 point scale:
A =4
A- = 3.7
B+ = 3.3
B =3
B- = 2.7
C+ = 2.3
C =2
C- = 1.7
D+ = 1.3
D =1
D- = 0.7
F =0
The 3 numeric test grades will be averaged and converted to a letter grade that will count for 60%.
The following guidelines are used to assign total test grades:
       A        90-100
       B        80-89
       C        70-79
       D        60-69
       F        59 or less
Plus and minus will be assigned, for example:
       B+       86.5-89.4
       B        83.5-86.4
       B-       79.5-83.4
RE-GRADING POLICY:
       Grade disputes must be turned in to the instructor in writing within 1 week of when the
       exam is returned. The student must include a 1 page explanation per question of why (s)he
       thinks that his/her answer is correct. Simple errors in addition can be corrected
       immediately. Students wishing to appeal a grade for one of the writing assignments, have
       1 week to appeal their grade with the professor by turning in a 1 page explanation of why
       (s)he thinks that his/her paper should be regarded.
CREDIT/NO-CREDIT:
       For those of you enrolled on a Pass/Fail basis, a requirement for receiving a passing grade
       in this course is to show up and take the exams. You may choose not to study and fail the
       exams, but you must physically turn in the exams and pass to receive credit.
                                                                                                  2


CHEATING POLICY:
      During exams, students will not be permitted to wear hats or use electronic devices of any
      kind (including, but not limited to, cell phones and smart watches).
      Be advised that on exam days, students will only be allowed to take a pen/pencil to their
      seat. All backpacks, book bags, purses, phones, etc. must be left at the front of the
      classroom.
      Students are welcome to participate in online forums for discussion and study (e.g., a
      Facebook page for this course). However, Dr. Lewis must be invited and permitted to
      join any such forum in order to monitor content. Please note that sharing information
      about an exam with a student who has not yet taken an exam will be considered cheating,
      regardless of the means by which the information is shared (e.g., verbally, on a web page,
      via email, via text message, etc.). Students who observe cheating via electronic media are
      encouraged to inform Dr. Lewis.
      Without exception, any student found cheating on an exam will receive a grade of zero
      for the exam and will be referred to the dean's office for further disciplinary action. Note
      that any attempt to alter a graded, returned exam in order to improve the score will be
      considered cheating and will result in a grade of zero for the exam.
RESPECT FOR DIVERSITY:
      I aim for students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives to be well served by this
      course, that students’ learning needs be addressed both in and out of class, and that the
      diversity that students bring to this class be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit. I
      aim to present materials and activities that are respectful of diversity: gender, sexuality,
      disability, age, socioeconomic status, ethnicity, race, and culture. If any of our class
      meetings conflict with your religious events, please let me know so that we can make
      arrangements for you.
ETC.
               While I cannot legally ban concealed guns from my classroom, I can exercise my
      first amendment right to let you know that I would strongly prefer that you NOT bring
      them into my classroom. I CAN legally ban concealed guns from my faculty office. Thus,
      this (and my reading of this statement aloud in class) is my official notification that
      you may not bring any concealed guns into my faculty office.
      Be sure to regularly check Blackboard for class materials and information. Power Point
      slides will not be made available on Canvas. Class handouts will be available on Canvas.
      Please turn your cell phones off while in class. No cell phone use during class will be
      tolerated – this includes texting.
      Hats with rims are not permitted to be worn during exams.
                                                                                                   3


       Feel free to take notes on a computer. However, no one is permitted to make audio or video
       recordings of lectures under any circumstances.
       I do not give assignments for extra credit, so please be sure to pay close attention to dates
       of exams and assignments.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
       If you are caught plagiarizing, I will be following the university guidelines for disciplinary
       actions:        (deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html),         see       also
       (www.academicintegrity.org/).
       Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University Code of Academic
       Integrity (see below). Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit
       will be the student’s own work. You are encouraged to study together and discuss
       information and concepts covered in lecture. You can give “consulting” help to or receive
       “consulting” help from such students. However, this permissible cooperation should never
       involve one student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by someone
       else, in the form of email, email attachment file, disk, or hard copy. Should copying occur,
       both the student who copied from another student and the student who gave material to be
       copied will both be automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation
       of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course and University
       disciplinary action.
       During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted
       during the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in
       any way. Any collaborative behavior during the exams will result in failure of the exam,
       and may result in failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES:
       In compliance with the UT Austin policy and equal access laws, I am available to discuss
       appropriate academic accommodations that may be required for students with disabilities.
       Requests for academic accommodations are to be made during the 1st 3 weeks of the
       semester, except for unusual circumstances, so arrangements can be made. Students are
       encouraged to register with Student Disability Services to verify their eligibility for
       appropriate accommodations (see below).
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE (see attached calendar)
     Dates                 Topic                              Work to do at home
                                                     Readings to be completed before class
 Aug 30             Evolutionary Theory Strier Ch. 4 (pp. 80-98)
 Sept 2             No class
 Sept 4-9           Primate Diversity       Fleagle Ch. 1
                                            Zinner & Roos (2014)
                                            Richard Ch. 2
                                                                                                    4


Sept 11    Biomes & Habitats    Olson et al. (2001) Terrestrial ecoregions of the world:
                                a new map of life on Earth. Bioscience 51(11):933-938.
Sept 13-18 Food                 Chapman et al. (2012) The Evolution of Primate
                                Societies
                                Rothman et al. (2015) Long-term declines in nutritional
                                quality of tropical leaves. Ecology 96(3):873-878.
Sept 20    Disc: Diet           online article: Powzyk JA and Mowry CB (2003)
                                Dietary and feeding differences between sympatric
                                Propithecus diadema diadema and Indri indri.
                                International Journal of Primatology 24(6):1143-1162.
Sept 23-25 Diet                 online article: Raubenheimer et al. (2015) Geometry of
                                nutrition in field studies: an illustration using wild
                                primates. Oecologica 177:223-234.
                                online article: Genoud M (2002) Comparative studies
                                of BMR in primates Evolutionary Anthropology
                                Supp1:108-111.
Sept 27    Disc: Energetics     online article: Emery Thompson (2017) Energetics of
                                feeding, social behavior, and life history in non-human
                                primates. Hormones and Behavior 91:84-96.
Sept 30    Activity Budgets     Dunbar Ch. 6
Oct 2      Temporal             online article: Lambert JE, Chapman CA, Wrangham
           Distribution of Food RW, and Conklin-Brittain NL (2004) Hardness of
                                cercopithecine foods: Implications for the critical
                                function of enamel thickness in exploiting fallback
                                foods. American Journal of Physical Anthropology
                                125:363–368.
Oct 4      Disc: Food           online article: Lewis RJ and Kappeler PM (2005)
           Seasonality          Seasonality, body condition and the timing of
                                reproduction in Propithecus verreauxi verreauxi.
                                American Journal of Primatology 67:347–364.	  
Oct 7      Exam I
Oct 9      Life History         Dunbar Ch. 4
                                Leigh & Blomquist (2007) Primates in Perspective
Oct 11     Disc: Life History   online article: Altman and Alberts (2003) Variability
                                and reproductive success viewed from a life history
                                perspective in baboons. American Journal of Human
                                Biology 15(3):401-409.
Oct 14     Group Size           Chapman et al. (1995) Ecological constraints on group
                                size: An analysis of spider monkey and chimpanzee
                                subgroups. Behavioral Ecology and Sociobiology
                                36(1):59-70.
Oct 16     Cognitive Ecology    online article: Di Fiore A, Suarez SA (2009) Route-
                                based travel and shared routes in sympatric spider and
                                woolly monkeys: cognitive and evolutionary
                                implications. Animal Cognition 10(3) 317-329.
                                                                                       5


Oct 18        Disc: Maps           online article: Normand E & Boesch C (2009)
                                   Sophisticated Euclidean maps in forest chimpanzees
                                   Animal Behaviour 77(5):1195-1201.
Oct 21        Spatial Distribution Schülke & Ostner (2012) The Evolution of Primate
              of Food              Societies
Oct 23        Dispersal/Philopatry
Oct 25        Disc: Intraspecific  online article: Sterck EHM, Watts DP, van Schaik CP
              Competition          (1997). The evolution of female social relationships in
                                   nonhuman primates. Behavioral Ecology and
                                   Sociobiology 41(5):291-309.
Oct 28-30     Disease Ecology      Nunn Chapters 3-4
Nov 1         Disc: Microbiome     online article: Schnorr et al. (2016) Insights into
                                   human evolution from ancient and contemporary
                                   microbiome studies. Current Opinion in Genetics &
                                   Development 41:14-26.
Nov 4         Exam II
Nov 6         Primate              Campbell et al. (2016) Ch. 6
              Communities
Nov 8         Disc: Interactions   online article: Stanford CB (1995) To catch a colobus.
              with Other Primates  Natural History 104(1):48-54.
                                   online article: Lwanga et al. (2011) Primate population
                                   dynamics over 32.9 years at Ngogo, Kibale National
                                   Park, Uganda. American Journal of Primatology
                                   73:997-1011.
Nov 11        Interactions with
              Other Animals
Nov 13        Interactions with    Chapman & Russo (2007) Primates in Perspective
              Plants
Nov 15        Disc: Primate        online article: Kamilar & Beaudrot (2013)
              Communities          Understanding primate communities: Recent
                                   developments and directions. Evolutionary
                                   Anthropology 22:174-185.
Nov 18        Disc: Seed Dispersal online article: McConkey et al. (2012) Seed dispersal
*posters due*                      in changing landscapes. Biological Conservation 146:1-
                                   13.
Nov 20-22     Poster               online article: Estrada et al. (2017) Impending
              Presentations        extinction crisis of the world’s primates: Why primates
                                   matter. Science Advances 3(1): e1600946.
Nov 25        Conservation         Wich & Marshall (2016) Ch. 1
                                   Cotton et al. (2016) Ch. 3
Nov 27-29     No class
Dec 2-4       Conservation         Groves (2016) Ch. 4
                                   Irwin (2016) Ch. 7
                                                                                          6


  Dec 6              Disc: Social Media      online article: Nekaris et al. (2013) Tickled to death:
                                             Analysing public perceptions of ‘cute’ videos of
                                             threatened species (slow lorises – Nycticebus spp.) on
                                             Web 2.0 Sites. PLoS ONE e69215.
  Dec 9              Exam III
                              STUDENT RIGHTS & RESPONSIBILITIES
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
your learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be
isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with
the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
others.
• Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring
to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone
is excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to
these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
                      PERSONAL PRONOUN USE (SHE / HE / THEY / ZE / ETC)
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
(http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly
honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official
roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise me of any
changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
                             UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Services for Students with Disabilities: This class respects and welcomes students of all
backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning
environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let
me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can
                                                                                                     7


only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center: Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this
semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking
some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit
from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful. If you or anyone you know
experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we
strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center: All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal: BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns
have the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the
power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to
build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns. The
following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
                                                                                                   8


• In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
• Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
    1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
    2.   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
         have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
    3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without
making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu . For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX
Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                                        UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at
the following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-
drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are
only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                                                                    9
