                         ANTHROPOLOGY 392J [31830]
     Introduction to Graduate Physical Anthropology Part 2:
       Behavioral Ecology, Genetics, and Biological Variation
                                         SPRING 2019
INSTRUCTOR:           Becca Lewis
                      Department of Anthropology
                      Office: SAC 5.152
                      Phone: 232-5386
                      e-mail: rjlewis@austin.utexas.edu
                      Office hours: Wednesdays 9:30-11 am
                      Class: Fridays 9-noon SAC 5.124
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
      This course is Part 2 of a two semester core curriculum in physical anthropology. All
      physical anthropology graduate students are required to take parts 1 and 2. Part 2 was
      offered in Fall 2015. Topics covered will include grouping patterns, reproductive
      strategies and mating systems, socioecology, cooperation, sex differences in behavior,
      genomics, population genetics, and evolutionary genetic theory in relation to human
      and nonhuman primates. The course also explores biological variation in genetic,
      physical, and behavioral traits within and between populations of humans and
      nonhuman primates, exploring both microevolutionary and cultural processes that
      have shaped these traits. (Part 1 emphasizes the history of the field of physical
      anthropology, evolutionary theory, primate systematics, methods of phylogenetic
      reconstruction, primate diversity and anatomical adaptations, and the human and
      nonhuman primate fossil record). The course provides an overview of behavioral
      ecology, molecular anthropology, and biological variation in human and nonhuman
      primates. The goal of the course is to give you an overview of the field, while
      allowing you to identify areas of research you might want to pursue at the master’s
      and doctoral levels.
COURSE FORMAT:
      Part 2 will consist of a combination of lectures, discussions and student presentations,
      and will cover major topics in physical anthropology. This class will primarily follow
      a seminar format. The instructor will give an introductory lecture on a new topic to be
      followed by discussion of the assigned papers. Each discussion will have a designated
      discussion leader (to be chosen by a semi-random process on the day of the discussion).
      Thus, students are expected to be prepared to lead discussion every class period.
      Students are expected to be able to provide a summary of the readings AND a critical
      evaluation of the readings each class.
COURSE READINGS:
      This course assumes that you already have the basic textbook knowledge of primates
      and evolutionary theory. Students who believe that they need to refresh their memories
      are encouraged to examine one of the following books:
                      Evolution of Primate Societies edited by Mitani et al. (2012)
                      How Humans Evolved (6th Edition) Boyd & Silk (2011)
                                                                                            1


     Readings will be available on Canvas or online via the UT Library and are to be read
     BEFORE class. A stimulating class discussion depends on students having thoroughly
     and critically read the assigned papers.
     Be sure to regularly check Canvas for class materials and information. Class handouts
     and lectures will be available on Canvas.
COURSE EVALUATION:
     Grades will also be based upon class participation, quizzes, a paper, and an oral
     presentation on that paper. The paper/presentation will be a critical review of a problem
     in human or nonhuman primate behavioral ecology, molecular anthropology, or
     biological variation.
                                            %Grade                  Date
     Participation                             30%
     Weekly synthesis of readings              15%
     Presentation                              25%                  May 3
     Paper                                     30%                  May 10 (by noon)
     (Draft of paper)                                               Mar 25
     Participation: Each student is expected (1) to ask meaningful questions during any
     lectures, (2) to be able to summarize any or all of the readings each class period, and
     (3) to thoroughly, thoughtfully, and critically discuss the readings each class period.
     Weekly Synthesis: Students are expected to write a double spaced ~1-page paper
     each week that (1) synthesizes the main ideas of the readings and (2) questions/
     critiques the ideas and/or methods of the readings. The assignment is NOT to
     summarize each paper individually. Rather this exercise is to help students (1) think
     about how the readings integrate with one another and into a whole, (2) practice
     writing synthetic research papers, such as review articles, and (3) practice concise
     writing. Students are encouraged to include a paragraph/discussion about how the
     readings relate to their own research goals.
     Term project presentation: Each student will be required to conduct a small
     research project during the course of the semester and then present the results the last
     day of class in a 10-15 minute professional-style presentation. The goal of this
     assignment is to get your “feet wet” by doing original research and learning how to
     present your data as you would at a national conference (e.g. American Association of
     Physical Anthropologists). I will meet with each student individually to help you
     figure out your research topic, and to help you identify the resources you need to carry
     out your project. If you are unable to collect original data, as an alternative you may
     compile data from the literature to analyze in a new way. ALL STUDENTS MUST
     MEET WITH ME TO DISCUSS THEIR RESEARCH PROJECTS NO LATER THAN
     THE 6TH WEEK OF CLASS (MARCH 1ST), AND FOR A SECOND TIME THE 11TH
     WEEK OF CLASS (APRIL 5th).
     Term project paper: You are also required to write a paper on your research project
     in journal article style. This paper should be approximately 20 pages long, but no
     more than 25 in 12pt font and with 1” margins. You should write a paper that is
     publishable in either the American Journal of Physical Anthropology or Evolutionary
                                                                                             2


       Anthropology. In other words, if your research project crosses the boundaries with
       physical anthropology and archeology, the paper must be written in a broadly
       comparative physical anthropology format. Similarly, if your project examines data
       on a primate(s), it is not necessarily a physical anthropology project – your paper
       must be written as a physical anthropology paper. All papers should explore a set of
       hypotheses and predictions and test these predictions using either empirical data
       collected by the student or empirical data collected from the literature. ALL
       STUDENTS ARE REQUIRED TO TURN IN A PAPER COPY OF A DRAFT OF
       THEIR PAPER NO LATER THAN MARCH 25TH. FEEDBACK ABOUT THE
       DIRECTION OF THE PAPER/PROJECT WILL BE DISCUSSED DURING THE
       MEETING THE 11TH WEEK (see above). Students should continue to work on the
       paper while waiting for feedback from the instructor.
TENTATIVE COURSE SCHEDULE:
Jan 25   Introduction, Overview of Evolutionary Theory & Primate Social Evolution
Feb 1    Ecology       Communities and Habitats
Feb 8    Ecology       Diet, Nutrition , & Energy
Feb 15   Ecology       Socioecology
Feb 22   Behavior      TBA – Guest Lecture Dr. Aaron Sandel
Mar 1    Behavior      Sexual Selection
Mar 8    Behavior      Power
Mar 15   Behavior      Intelligence
Mar 22   Spring Break
Mar 29   no class due to AAPA annual conference
Apr 5    Behavior      Culture
Apr 12   Variation Human Behavioral Variation
Apr 19   Variation Adaptation, Acclimatization, Plasticity
Apr 26   Variation Climatic Adaptation and Humans – Guest Lecture Dr. Scott Maddux
May 3    Presentations
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
       If you are caught plagiarizing, I will be following the university guidelines for
       disciplinary actions: (deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html), see also
       (www.academicintegrity.org/).
       Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University Code of Academic
       Integrity (see attached). Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic
       credit will be the student’s own work. You are encouraged to study together and
       discuss information and concepts covered in lecture. You can give “consulting” help
       to or receive “consulting” help from such students. However, this permissible
       cooperation should never involve one student having possession of a copy of all or
       part of work done by someone else, in the form of email, email attachment file, disk,
       or hard copy. Should copying occur, both the student who copied from another
       student and the student who gave material to be copied will both be automatically
       receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be
       extended to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
       During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not
       permitted during the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or
                                                                                              3


     collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during the exams will result in
     failure of the exam, and may result in failure of the course and University disciplinary
     action.
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
     The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
     freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the
     University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
     fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
ACCOMMODATIONS FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
     In compliance with the UT Austin policy and equal access laws, I am available to
     discuss appropriate academic accommodations that may be required for students with
     disabilities. Requests for academic accommodations are to be made during the 1st 3
     weeks of the semester, except for unusual circumstances, so arrangements can be
     made. Students are encouraged to register with Student Disability Services to verify
     their eligibility for appropriate accommodations.
                                                                                            4
