                                  Sociology of Race and Work
                      AAS S330 (79454) / SOC S321R (83844) / WGS S322 (84379)
                                   MTWTRF 10 AM – 11:15 AM JGB 2.202
Instructor: Kara Takasaki
Office: Jackson School of Geoscience Coffeeshop
Office Hours: Tuesday and Wednesday 11:30 AM -12:30 PM and by appointment
Email: kara.takasaki@utexas.edu
TA: Kathy Hill
Office: Jackson School of Geoscience Coffeeshop
Office Hours: Thursday and Friday 11:30 AM -12:30 PM and by appointment
Email: hillkathy@utexas.edu
Course Description
Work is a central activity in the lives of most people. Work can provide status, identity, social
interaction, skills, and cultural values. The structure of a society determines the type of work that
is available, who does what type of work, and how people are compensated for their labor. In this
course, we will become familiar with concepts of labor markets, transnational labor, the service
industry, care work, globalization, outsourcing, emotional labor, and race and gender
stratification. The purpose of this course is to understand how race and employment are related
to each other by answering the following questions.
    1. What is race?
    2. What is labor?
    3. How do race, gender, and citizenship shape contemporary labor markets?
This course is cross-listed with Asian American Studies, Sociology, and Women’s Studies. This
course also carries the Cultural Diversity in the United States flag. Cultural Diversity courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that
has experienced persistent marginalization.
https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/about/cultural-diversity
Course Expectations
Attendance
Students are expected to arrive early and attend every class on the course schedule. Please
silence and put away cell phones and other things that make noise before class starts. Role
will be taken using a sign-in sheet. If you come to class late, it’s your responsibility to contact
                                                                                                    1


the TA that same day to ensure that you’re marked present. I will allow two unexcused
absences for you to take as you need. For every class absence beyond two absences your final
grade will fall by 1/2 a grade e.g. B+ to B. If you have to miss a class beyond two absences, let
me know as soon as possible and I will work with you on a case by case basis.
Neither I nor my TA lend out our notes. If you miss class, make arrangements to copy another
student's notes. We'll be happy to go over them with you and answer any questions. You’re
responsible for any material covered, as well as any assignments and/or announcements made
during your absences.
The two exceptions to this attendance policy are religious holy days and military service. The
University of Texas at Austin policy states that you must notify your instructor at least (14) days
prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day to make
arrangements. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence. For UT Austin policy on religious
holy days and military service, please see: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/
Grading Criteria
Your final grade is composed of the following weighted percentages:
20% participation
20% 3 reflection papers + peer reviews + reading quiz
10% research proposal
20% mid-session exam
20% research paper
10% presentation
Participation (20% of final grade)
Students are expected to come to each class having completed the assigned readings for that day
on the syllabus and actively participate in class discussion. Only one person talks at a time and
deserves the attention of the entire class. We will use student/teacher participation assessments to
encourage and evaluate participation.
Some of the topics in this course are controversial. You may be exposed to arguments you do not
agree with in readings, lectures, or class discussions. It is important that this classroom is an
environment that fosters respectful dialogue. Respect others’ rights to hold opinions and beliefs
that differ from your own. Challenge or criticize the idea, not the person. I will do my best to
create a respectful learning environment and treat everyone with dignity and civility. I expect you
to do the same. Please contact me directly if you have any questions or concerns.
4 Reading Reflections (20% of final grade)
                                                                                                    2


Students are expected to complete a total of four, one-page (double-spaced) reading reflections
throughout the five-week summer session. Each reflection is a chance to thoughtfully respond
to the course question guiding that week’s course readings and activities. Please upload
reflections to Canvas under the “Assignments” tab. These reflections are intended for students
to critically interrogate the readings and raise questions that are interesting or unclear to them. I
will use reflections to assess the speed of the course and the material that students are
interested in or having trouble with.
Research Proposal (10% of final grade)
One-page (double-spaced) to help students to think about their research paper topic and start to
get feedback and look for sources.
Research Paper (20% of final grade)
This assignment offers students the opportunity to develop important academic skills such as
developing an argument and using textual evidence. References and citation should reflect the
ASA Style Guide https://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/583/01/. The canvas course has a
tab to the UT Austin reference librarian for sociology students and a link to an ASA style guide.
Please use both resources to help you with your paper.
Students are encouraged to seek assistance with their writing at the UT Undergraduate Writing
Center (http://uwc.utexas.edu).
Mid-Session Exam (20% of final grade)
The Mid-Session exam includes multiple choice and short answer questions about any of the
course readings, activities, or films that we have covered.
Presentation (10% of final grade)
Each student will do a five-minute presentation about their research paper during the last two days
of classes.
Grading Scale
This class employs a plus/minus grading system. For more information on this system,
please consult the University’s General Information Catalog. Below is the grade scale the
University employs and which will be used in this class:
   Meets major requirement                         Does not meet requirement
   Grade                    Points                 Grade                     Points
   A                        ≥93.00                 C-                        70.00-72.99
   A-                       90.00-92.99            D+                        67.00-69.99
   B+                       87.00-89.99            D                         63.00-66.99
                                                                                                      3


   B                       83.00-86.99             D-                  60.00-62.99
   B-                      80.00-82.99             F                   <60.00
   C+                      77.00-79.99
   C                       73.00-76.99
I do not curve grades. Late submissions will not receive credit. If there are extenuating
circumstances, let me know as soon as possible and I will work with you on a case by case basis.
If you are struggling in the course, worried about your grades and/or considering dropping the
course, please contact me and the TA sooner rather than later. Sooner: there’s a good chance
you can change strategies to make things better. Later: there’s a good chance you will be
stuck with a lower grade than you would have liked.
If you decide to withdraw from the course, do not miss the enforced Q Drop deadline. Under
Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
institution.                For               more               information,               see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Grade adjustments MAY be made for those on the borderline between two grades. By
borderline I mean those having points that would be rounded up using normal mathematical
conventions. For example, a student may have points equal to 79.6%. This grade will not
result in automatic “bumping up.” In these cases, I look at a variety of factors including a
student’s participation and improvement on papers and exams throughout the semester.
Please do not ask me or the TA to give you a higher grade than you earned because you are
in an honors program, need to reach a certain GPA, a senior, or are on academic probation
or other special circumstance. In general, you can expect discussions about your grade to be
explanatory, rather than a forum for negotiation.
Canvas and Readings
Informational postings and your grades can be found on Canvas at http://canvas.utexas.edu/
I suggest setting your Notifications to ASAP for Conversations. This is how I (and your TA)
will communicate with you. (Go to Settings, then click Notifications, then scroll down to
select the check mark next to Conversations.) I will post lecture PowerPoints on Canvas.
Readings are available on Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu) under the “Files” tab. You are
expected to complete assigned readings by the day that they are assigned. The course syllabus and
its readings are subject to change with fair notice.
While you are reading, think about how the articles complement each other. What is the
author’s main argument? What is most interesting to you? Is anything confusing? Come to
class prepared to participate, both in small and large groups.
Laptops
                                                                                                 4


Using your laptop is a privilege that will be taken away from you or the entire class if you
are seen surfing the web or using it to do other non-class related activities during class time. If
you are seen using the computer for non-class related activity, your final grade will drop by half
a grade e.g. B to B-.
Availability
You can refer to me as Ms. Takasaki or Kara. Please e-mail me in advance to confirm a
meeting during or outside of scheduled office hours. Office hours are an opportunity for students
to talk to TAs and Professors one-on-one and ask questions. If you have feedback about how I
can better support you in your learning of the course material, I appreciate your respectful
feedback.
I am also available over email, but do not guarantee a response over the weekend or after 6 pm
the day before an exam or the day an assignment is due. Your TA will tell you their office hours
and location. When you e-mail me or your TA please include your first and last name and the
course SOC321R.
Resources at UT
Undergraduate Writing Center
I recommend the University Writing Center to those students who wish to improve their
writing. Contact them at http://uwc.utexas.edu/or drop-in to set up an appointment. They are
located in the Learning Commons in the Perry-Castañeda library on the second floor (PCL
2.330). (You’ve already paid for it with your student fees!)
Sanger Learning Center
Academic support and services. Check them out at www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/ or
512-232-8400. They have a variety of tips about studying, test taking, and
writing.
For assistance with mental health-related issues, please contact the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC) at 512-471-3515. The CMHC Crisis Line is available 24/7 at 512-
471-2255.
Accessibility and Inclusion Statement
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities
(SSD), 512-471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (video phone). Individuals who request
accommodations are responsible for identifying themselves to the professor within the first
week of class by presenting a letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
Office. For more information, please call 471-6259(voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/ or email ssd@austin.utexas.edu.
Academic Integrity
                                                                                                    5


Academic integrity is a responsibility of all university faculty and students. Faculty members
promote academic integrity in multiple ways including instruction on the components of academic
honesty, as well as abiding by university policy on penalties for cheating and plagiarism.
Definition of Academic Dishonesty
Academic dishonesty includes both cheating and plagiarism. Cheating includes but is not limited
to (1) using or attempting to use unauthorized materials to aid in achieving a better grade on a
component of a class; (2) the falsification or invention of any information, including citations, on
an assigned exercise; and/or (3) helping or attempting to help another in an act of cheating or
plagiarism. Plagiarism is presenting the words or ideas of another person as if they were your own.
Examples of plagiarism are (1) submitting an assignment as if it were one's own work when, in
fact, it is at least partly the work of another; (2) submitting a work that has been purchased or
otherwise obtained from an Internet source or another source; and (3) incorporating the words or
ideas of an author into one's paper without giving the author due credit.
All students are expected to abide by the UT Honor Code/University Code of Conduct: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.” You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty
Policy which can be found here: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and / or dismissal from the University. Cheating
or plagiarism (including signing others’ names on attendance sheets) will not be tolerated.
Scholastic dishonest also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information
to receive a postponement or an extension on a test or other assignments, and submission of the
essential written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
All work you produce on assignments, tests and exams must be your own work (with the
exception of group activities and projects.) If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or
that you have used in a previous class), you must cite your sources otherwise you will be guilty
of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
More information on plagiarism and how to avoid it is available here:
http://liberalarts.utexas.edu/cwgs/_files/pdf-4/ai2012.pdf. An ASA Style Guide to help you to
avoid                    plagiarism                is                 available                here:
http://www.asanet.org/sites/default/files/quick_tips_for_asa_style.pdf.
Safety Information
If you have a license to carry a hand gun, you have a legal right to bring your concealed
weapon to class. However, I would prefer that you do not bring your gun to class. I do not
allow guns in my office.
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs, or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line) at 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous.
                                                                                                   6


Please familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom. Remember that the nearest exit
door may not be the one you use when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in
evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and procedures is available at
www.utexas.edu/emergency
Please familiarize yourself with the following recommendations regarding emergency
evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767,
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
requires exiting and assembling outside.
In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions and/or the instructions of the TA. Do not
re-enter a building unless instructed to do so by the Austin Fire Department, The University of
Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Course Schedule
       Class Date             Class Topic                        Reading               Assignments
                                                                                            Due
                                                  Week 1
       Monday       Course introduction               (no reading due)
        July 15     Lecture: what is race?
       Tuesday      Reading Review                    Racial Formation-Omi and       Assessment
        July 16     Cont. Lecture                     Winant Chapter 4 p.105-120
                    Activity
     Wednesday      Reading Review                    Racial Formation-Omi and
        July 17     Cont. Lecture                     Winant Chapter 4 p.121-136
                    Activity
       Thursday     Speaker: Lupe Gonzalo             How Race is Made in America-
        July 18     Coalition of Immokalee            Molina Introduction
                    Workers on Fair Food
                    Program
         Friday     Documentary film                  The Racial Triangulation of
        July 19                                       Asian Americans- Kim
                    Slavery by Another Name 90
                    minutes. (watch last 45
                    minutes) online
                                                 Week 2
                                                                                                 7


  Monday                                  Managed Hand- Kang              Reflection 1
             Lecture what is labor?
 July 22                                                                  What is race?
  Tuesday    Reading Review               From servitude to service work-
   July 23   Activity                     Nakano Glenn
Wednesday    SEED project                 India’s Reproductive Assembly
    July 24                               Line- Rudrappa in Contexts
             Cont. Lecture                2012
 Thursday    Documentary film             Disposable Women - Wright       Participation
 July 25                                  Chapter 2 (online)              assessment
             Last Train Home 87 minutes
 Friday      Finish documentary film Last Disposable Women - Wright
 July 26     Train Home                   Chapter 3 (online)
             The Double Burden: Three
             Generations of Working
             Mothers. 56 minutes
                                      Week 3
   Monday                                 On the Line - Ribas             Reflection 2
             Review readings
   July 29                                                                What is labor?
             Cont. Lecture
  Tuesday    Esther Kim- UT urban         Big Rig - Viscelli
   July 30   teachers’ program
             Finish labor lecture
Wednesday    Pay activity                 The Production of Difference – Mid-session
   July 31                                Esch and Roediger                assessment
Thursday     Lecture: How do race gender  (write your proposal)               Research
August 1     and citizenship shape                                            Proposal
             contemporary labor markets?
    Friday   Guest Lecture Gig Economy – Policy scorned
  August 2   Kathy Hill                   Malos
                                       Week 4
    Monday   Cont. lecture                Immigrant acts- Lisa Lowe        Reflection 3
    August 5                              Queer of color critique - Rod    labor markets
                                          Ferguson                         and labor
                                                                           management
                                                                                      8


 Tuesday  Cont. lecture                Prison industrial complex-
 August 6                              Haney
          John Oliver Hasan Minhaj
Wednesday Readings Review              Silicon Valley- Lisa Sun Hee
August 7                               Park
          Exam Review
          Documentary film
          Made in India (95 minutes)
Thursday  Workers Defense Project      (prepare for exam review)    Peer reviews of
August 8                                                            research
          Exam Review                                               proposal (on
                                                                    canvas)
Friday    Exam                         (study for exam)
August 9
                                      Week 5
Monday    (no scheduled class)         Emotion work professions -
August 12 Work on paper                Wingfield
Tuesday   Professional Occupations     (write your paper)           Research paper
August 13                                                           due
Wednesday (no scheduled class)          (work on presentation)
August 14 Work on presentation
Thursday  3 presentations              Excerpt from Free Time
August 15
          Review test                  Excerpt from Reworking Race
          Seth Meyers Trump and
          Trucking
Friday    3 presentations
August 16
          5-point quiz since August 8
          Course Evaluations
                                                                               9
