                 AFS 333 SYLLABUS
               Unique Number 31035
       National Security Affairs
Course Syllabus AY 18-19 (Fall Semester)
                 AFROTC Detachment 825
             The University of Texas at Austin
                 Colonel Paul A. Tombarge
                Professor, Air Force Science
                Office Phone: (512) 471‐1776
        Office: RLP 5.726 (Hours by Appointment)
                                                 1


                                                                                           Fall 2018
MEMORANDUM FOR AS 400 STUDENTS
FROM: Colonel Paul A. Tombarge
SUBJECT: Welcome to AS400 -- National Security Affairs / Preparation for Active Duty
1. Welcome to AS400 - National Security Affairs and Preparation for Active Duty. We designed
this course to equip you with the working knowledge necessary to make the transition from a
Professional Officer Course cadet to a commissioned Air Force officer. The expectations placed
upon you by the profession of arms are extraordinarily high. This is your time to think critically
about your role as a future Air Force officer.
2. The AS400 curriculum places emphasis on the basic knowledge and skills you will need as a
second lieutenant. During the fall semester, we will discuss civilian control of the military,
examine the Department of Defense structure, and delve into subjects such as the national
security policy-making process, terrorism, and joint military operations. During the spring
semester, we will focus on special topics in preparation for active duty such as ethics, military
law, civilian personnel, the enlisted and officer evaluation systems, pay and allowances, and
other current topics affecting the military as a profession. Writing and briefing assignments will
simultaneously refine your communication skills.
3. No matter what Air Force Specialty Code you are eventually awarded – pilot, space
operations, logistics, engineer, personnel, etc. – you will be first and foremost an Air Force
officer; a leader of Airmen. This is your chance to enhance your military knowledge, expand
your worldview, increase the depth and breadth of your leadership fundamentals, and honestly
assess your strengths and weaknesses. Today you are warriors in training. Soon, you will be
entrusted to lead Airmen in the world’s greatest Air Force.
                 Integrity First — Service before Self — Excellence in All We Do!
                                                       PAUL A. TOMBARGE, Colonel, USAF
                                                       Professor, Air Force Science
                                                                                                   2


                      National Security Affairs/Preparation for Active Duty
                                     Course Syllabus AY18-19
                                    AFROTC Detachment 825
                                The University of Texas at Austin
1. Instructor:                         Colonel Paul Tombarge, Professor of Air Force Science
                                       Office: RLP 5.726 – hours by appointment
                                       Phone: 512-471-1776
                                       E-mail: paul.tombarge@austin.utexas.edu
2. Class Hours and Location:           Tuesdays & Thursdays, 1230-1400, RLP 5.404
3. Course Description: Air and Space (AS) 400, "National Security Affairs/Preparation for
Active Duty," is an overview of the complex social and political issues facing the military
profession. It is designed to provide college seniors with a foundational understanding of the
role military officers play in American society.
4. Course Objectives:
    a. Comprehend the basic elements of the national security policy and process.
    b. Know the air and space power functions and United States Air Force (USAF)
        capabilities.
    c. Appreciate selected roles of the military in society and current issues affecting the
        military profession.
    d. Understand the responsibility, authority, and functions of an Air Force commander in
        what is inherently a joint-service warfighting environment.
    e. Comprehend the factors that facilitate a smooth transition from civilian to military life.
    f. Apply listening, speaking, and writing skills in Air Force-specific formats and situations
        with accuracy, clarity, and appropriate style.
                                               NOTE
  Specific lesson objectives are included with reading/lesson materials (posted in Canvas).
5. Course Textbooks: The primary textbook is AS-400 Student Study Guide, T-408.
Supplemental readings are from a variety of sources. The Tongue and Quill (AFH 33-337, 7 May
2015 edition) is the primary source to support writing/briefing assignments. All course material
will be posted on Canvas. All textbooks are available electronically via the Holm Center website
(www.holmcenter.com). You will not be required to purchase commercial texts.
                                                                                                  3


6. Attendance Policy: I expect you to attend all AS400 classes. You must be present at 80%
of class sessions to receive a passing grade. If you will be late or unable to attend a class, you
must make every effort to coordinate with the instructor in advance. In the case of unexpected
circumstances (i.e., emergencies), notify the instructor no later than 24 hours after class.
Regardless of circumstance, if you miss a class, email the course instructor within 24 hours about
the absence with “ABSENT” as your subject line. If this is not accomplished, your absence will
be “unexcused.” Opportunity for make-up assignments will be at my discretion. If approved and
you do not complete the make-up assignment within one week, I will consider the absence
unexcused. Any unexcused absence will result in a 2 percent reduction of your overall class
grade.
              Examples of Excusable                             Examples of Unexcusable
                 Tardiness/Absence                                  Tardiness/Absence
     Death in the family or family emergency            Studying for a test
     Automobile accident                                Sleeping in
     Significant illness or medical confinement         Fraternity or sorority functions
     An approved field study trip                       A “headache” from staying out late the
     A mandatory official University activity            night before
7. Timeliness: I expect students to be present and seated in the classroom prior to class start
time. If you arrive after the room has been called to attention for the start of class, you are late.
8. Preparation and Participation: We will conduct academic classes as a combination of
lecture and guided discussion. Guided discussion only works if you share your knowledge and
personal views in class. I expect you to complete reading assignments in advance and that you
come to class prepared to participate in discussion. Class preparation and participation will count
towards 10 percent of your overall class grade. I will deduct points if you are not prepared to
participate.
    a. Current Events News Briefs: Part of preparation is also being aware of current events
        and understanding how they affect the military profession. As such, I expect you to keep
        abreast of Air Force and military-related news from a variety of publicly available news
        sources. Each week, a different cadet will provide a short, informal briefing (5 minutes or
        less) on a military news item of their choice. The intent is not simply to regurgitate a news
        article, but rather to identify the key highlights and provide your assessment of why it is
        important to us as Air Force officers. These short briefings will be part of your
        participation grade.
    b. Student-Managed Lessons: The Unified Combatant Command lessons (25/27
        September and 2/4 October) will be student-managed. This means you will have an active
        role in preparing for and helping me teach these lessons. You will be assigned to one of
        four teams. Each team will research specific Unified Combatant Commands to gather
        information to answer specific questions, prepare slides, and brief the class. Detailed
        requirements will be posted on Canvas and discussed in class. These student-managed
        lessons will be part of your participation grade.
                                                                                                      4


9. Dress and Appearance: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008, POC cadets will wear the
designated UOD to their AS class and be in compliance with USAF grooming and appearance
standards. If an Operations Order does not apply on class day or does not dictate military
uniform, cadets will wear civilian attire in good taste. Note that AFI 36-2903 requires that dress
and appearance standards be followed both on- and off-duty.
10. Protocol and Classroom Conduct:
    a. Cadets will adhere to military customs and courtesies at all times. When a ranking
        officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to attention until told
        to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the classroom, the students
        will again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer leaves the classroom.
    b. Students are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class
        discussions, but must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address the
        instructor as “sir” or “ma’am” or by rank (e.g., “Captain,” “Major,” or “Colonel”) and
        address Noncommissioned Officers as “Sergeant.”
    c. The classroom is a non-attribution environment and cadets are encouraged to discuss and
        challenge any theory or opinion in order to enhance the learning process. However, non-
        attribution does not relieve cadets from the responsibility for proper respect towards one
        another, and for the military chain of command, to include the Commander-in-Chief.
    d. Students will not eat, smoke, or use other tobacco products while in class. Tobacco use
        of any kind is prohibited on the UT campus. Drinks are allowed, but containers must
        have a lid to prevent spills.
    e. Students will turn off cell phones during class.
    f. Students will only use laptops/tablets to take notes unless otherwise authorized by the
        instructor to support class objectives.
11. Assignments: Throughout your career as an Air Force officer, you will be responsible for
solving problems. You may be tasked by senior leaders to provide recommended solutions to
those problems via a decision briefing; a briefing designed to provide decision makers with the
information they need to make the best possible decision on a given subject. Your primary
assignment this semester will be to identify an issue, problem, or challenge from your AFROTC
experience that you would like to address or change. Some example topics include the fitness
program, Leadership Laboratory, field training, safety, scholarships, cadet wing structure,
professional development training opportunities, etc. You will highlight the issue to your
commander in an e-mail, provide an analysis and recommended courses of action in a decision
briefing, and prepare an official memorandum for the commander directing implementation of
your recommendation across the wing. The task will be broken into four deliverables, each being
worth 10 percent of your grade:
    a. E-mail Exercise: You will draft an e-mail message to the commander to highlight your
        selected issue/problem/challenge, providing a short background and recommending a
                                                                                                    5


        way ahead. This sounds simple, but crafting effective correspondence that is clear,
        concise, and complete is harder than it sounds. Senior leaders are very busy and their
        time is precious. When writing an e-mail, every word matters. We will discuss a
        commonly used format/strategy in class.
    b. Bullet Background Paper: Prepare a Bullet Background Paper (BBP) that mirrors your
        decision briefing in accordance with Tongue and Quill format. The BBP should clearly
        identify the problem at hand, provide background/analysis, offer three potential courses
        of action (COAs) with associated pros and cons, and provide a recommendation to the
        commander on which COA s/he should select. The BBP should be a maximum of two
        pages in length.
    c. Decision Briefing: Prepare and deliver a Decision Briefing of no more than 10 minutes
        in length. The briefing will mirror and complement the BBP. Be prepared to respond to
        any questions from the commander or staff.
    d. Official Memorandum: You will draft an official memorandum for the commander’s
        signature directing implementation of the decision across the wing.
12. Midterm and Final Exams: Exam questions are derived from each lesson’s samples of
behavior (SOB). If you can correctly answer the SOBs from the readings and class lecture, you
will do well on the exams. Some SOBs may only be covered in your readings and will not be
explicitly discussed during the class lecture while others may not be covered in the readings and
are only discussed in the lecture. If you have any questions about the SOBs, do not hesitate to
ask. Exams may include multiple choice, matching, fill-in-the-blank, and short answer
questions.
13. Grading: Your grade will be computed using the following scoring system. The total score
possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter grade/4.0 GPA scale used by The
University of Texas at Austin. Grades will be determined based on individual performance; I will
not utilize a curve system.
                              Activity                        Points    % of Overall Grade
                     Class Participation Points                 10              10%
                         E-Mail Exercise                        10              10%
                     Bullet Background Paper                    10              10%
                         Decision Briefing                      10              10%
                      Official Memorandum                       10              10%
                          Midterm Exam                          25              25%
                            Final Exam                          25              25%
                               Total                           100             100%
                                                NOTE
Cadets must pass all AS courses with a C- or better. Cadets must maintain a cumulative
GPA of 2.00 or greater to retain AFROTC membership.
                                                                                                  6


Cadets must maintain a term and cumulative GPA of 2.50 to activate or maintain a
scholarship. Should a scholarship cadet’s cumulative GPA drop below 2.50, I will issue an
Academic Conditional Event (CE). Multiple Academic CEs could result in suspension or
termination of the scholarship.
                  Score                    Letter Grade             GPA Points
                 94-100                         A                       4.00
                  90-93                         A-                      3.67
                  87-89                         B+                      3.33
                  84-86                         B                       3.00
                  80-83                         B-                      2.67
                  77-79                         C+                      2.33
                  74-76                         C                       2.00
                  70-73                         C-                      1.67
                  67-69                         D+                      1.33
                  64-66                         D                       1.00
                  60-63                         D-                      0.67
                   0-60                         F                       0.00
14. Course Outline:
              Date                         Topic                 Assignment / Task
       Thu, 30 Aug 2018 Welcome, Course Overview,           Cadet Reader: Decision
                           Decision Briefing Requirements,  Briefing Requirements
                           and Effective Communication
       Tue, 4 Sep 2018     Civilian Control of the Military Cadet Reader: Civilian
                                                            Control of the Military
       Thu, 6 Sep 2018     National Security Strategy       Cadet Reader: National
                                                            Security Strategy
                                                            NSS 2017 Fact Sheet
                                                            2017 National Security
                                                            Strategy (Introduction, pp
                                                            1-4)
                                                            Grand Strategy Reader
                                                            Joint Publication 1:
                                                            Doctrine for the Armed
                                                            Forces of the United States
                                                            (Chapter 1 only)
       Tue, 11 Sep 2018    Global “Hot Spots”               TBD
       Thu, 13 Sep 2018    U.S. Interests in Global “Hot    TBD
                           Spots”
                                                                                          7


Tue, 18 Sep 2018 Terrorism                   Cadet Reader: Terrorism
Thu, 20 Sep 2018 The Department of Defense   Cadet Reader: DoD
                                             Web-Based Training
                                             Module
Tue, 25 Sep 2018 Unified Commands: AFRICOM   * Student-managed lesson
                 and CENTCOM
                                             Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                             National Security Strategy,
                                             pp 33-55
Thu, 27 Sep 2018 Unified Commands: EUCOM and * Student-managed lesson
                 INDOPACOM
                                             Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                             National Security Strategy,
                                             pp 33-55
Tue, 2 Oct 2018  Unified Commands:           * Student-managed lesson
                 NORTHCOM and SOUTHCOM
                                             Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                             National Security Strategy,
                                             pp 33-55
Thu, 4 Oct 2018  Unified Commands:           * Student-managed lesson
                 CYBERCOM, STRATCOM,
                 TRANSCOM, and SOCOM         Cadet Reader: COCOMs
                                             National Security Strategy,
                                             pp 33-55
Tue, 9 Oct 2018  Exam #2
Thu, 11 Oct 2018 Joint Operations            Cadet Reader: Joint
                                             Operations
                                             Joint Pub 3-0, Joint
                                             Operations (Chapter 1)
                                             Web-based Module
Tue, 16 Oct 2018 Nuclear Operations          Cadet Reader: Nuclear
                                             Operations
                                             Doctrine Annex 3-72,
                                             Nuclear Operations
                                             E-Mail Assignment Due
Thu, 18 Oct 2018 Air Force Domains - Air     Cadet Reader: Air Force
                                             Domains
                                                                         8


                                                     Air Force Basic Doctrine,
                                                     Volume I, Chapter 2 and
                                                     Chapter 5
Tue, 23 Oct 2018  Air Force Domains - Space          Cadet Reader: Air Force
                                                     Domains
                                                     Cadet Reader: Space
                                                     Joint Pub 3-14, Space
                                                     Operations (Chapters 1 and
                                                     2)
Thu, 25 Oct 2018  Air Force Domains - Cyberspace     Cadet Reader: Air Force
                                                     Domains
                                                     Cadet Reader: Cyberspace
                                                     Joint Pub 3-12, Cyberspace
                                                     Operations (Chapters 1 and
                                                     2)
Tue, 30 Oct 2018* Aircraft Capabilities and          Cadet Reader: Aircraft
                  Packaging                          Capabilities and Packaging
Thu, 1 Nov 2018* How the Air Force Deploys           Cadet Reader: How the Air
                                                     Force Deploys
                                                     BBP Assignment Due
Tue, 6 Nov 2018   National Security Capstone         TBD
Thu, 8 Nov 2018   Decision Briefings 1-4             Cadet presentations
Tue, 13 Nov 2018  Decision Briefings 5-8             Cadet presentations
Thu, 15 Nov 2018  Decision Briefings 9-12            Cadet presentations
Tue, 20 Nov 2018  Decision Briefings 13-14           Cadet presentations
Thu, 22 Nov 2018  No class; Thanksgiving Holiday
Tue, 27 Nov 2018  Virtual Staff Ride                 Cadet Reader: Virtual Staff
                                                     Ride: “Operation
                                                     Anaconda: The Battle of
                                                     Roberts Ridge”
Thu, 29 Nov 2018 Virtual Staff Ride                  Cadet Reader: Virtual Staff
                                                     Ride: “Operation
                                                     Anaconda: The Battle of
                                                     Roberts Ridge”
Tue, 4 Dec 2018   Air Force Heritage Series          Official Memorandum Due
Thu, 6 Dec 2018   Exam #2
Tue, 11 Dec 2018  No Class
Thu, 13 Dec 2018  Final Exam Week – No Class
                     The syllabus is subject to change
                                                                                 9


15. Administrative Information:
    a. Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011 and detachment policy,
       each cadet will meet with their course instructor for an academic plan review and term
       counseling interview. Each cadet will schedule an appointment with their instructor to
       complete a counseling session and will bring an updated Academic Plan to the
       appointment.
    b. Academic Plan Review: All cadets must have their academic plan reevaluated and
       recertified by their university academic advisor every fall term.
    c. Office Hours: If you need my assistance or wish to discuss the course, the Air Force, or
       anything else, do not hesitate to schedule an appointment with me. An open door policy
       is always in effect; however, an appointment will ensure I am available and not
       committed to another task.
    d. Academic Integrity: Integrity is an Air Force core value. Plagiarism and cheating are
       examples of behavior that show a lack of integrity. I will not tolerate a lack of integrity.
       Academic integrity means honesty and responsibility in scholarship. Both professors and
       students must obey the rules of honest scholarship. Additionally, the core values of the
       University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
       opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
       these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
       community. For further information on academic dishonesty, please visit
       http://catalog.utexas.edu/generalinformation/the-university/
    e. Students with Disabilities: Students with Disabilities may request appropriate academic
       accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services
       for Students with Disabilities, (512) 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
    f. Accommodations for Religious Holidays: In accordance with UT policy, you must
       notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
       of a religious holy day. If you must miss class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
       project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will have an opportunity to complete
       the missed work within a reasonable time following the absence.
    g. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about your safety or the
       safety of another student, please call the BCAL at (512) 232-5050.
16. Additional AFROTC Cadet Responsibilities and Standards: Cadets must be aware of
AFROTC standards (refer to AFROTCI 36-2011). While not all-inclusive, the following are key
reminders. Cadets must:
    a. Report ALL negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72
       hours. If the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets
       will report the involvement not later than 72 hours after their return following the break.
                                                                                                    10


b. Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours (exceptions for final semester).
c. Maintain a cumulative GPA of 2.00 or greater to retain AFROTC membership.
d. Maintain a term and cumulative GPA of 2.50 to activate or maintain a scholarship.
   Should a Scholarship Cadet’s cumulative GPA drop below 2.50, I will issue an
   Academic Conditional Event (CE). Multiple Academic CEs could result in suspension
   or termination of the scholarship.
e. Pass all AS courses with a C or better and no F or incomplete grades in any of your
   classes. Correspondence courses must have prior approval to be counted towards full-
   time status.
f. Remain in good standing at your institution.
g. Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with your course instructor in
   advance.
h. Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
i. Meet medical standards and advise cadre of any changes in your status.
j. Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
k. Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all
   military officers outside, and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all
   ranking cadet officers, of all military services, when in uniform.
l. Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming
   and weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and
   appearance standards are followed both on- and off-duty.
m. Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008, cadets will wear their
   uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and
   for Practical Military Training (PMT). GMC cadets will wear appropriate civilian attire
   to their AS class. POC cadets will wear UOD to their AS class. Cadets may wear
   appropriate civilian clothes at other times while in CLA. Cadets will not wear any hats
   inside the building at any time.
n. Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with
   military order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of, or inflict
   cruelty on subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or
   privilege to which they are legally entitled. Be honorable and be respectful.
                                                                                             11


    o. Drugs and Alcohol: Using prescription drugs without a prescription or using illicit drugs
       is illegal. No drugs, period. Drinking alcohol while under age is illegal. No drinking
       alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be responsible; do not abuse alcohol and never drive
       while under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
17. Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
    1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
       evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
       requires exiting and assembling outside.
    2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
       Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
       building.
    3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
       the first week of class.
    4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of
       Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office. Other important
       Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                                                                                 12
