                                                                       The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325} Fall 2019
                         Visual Anthropology in Practice:
                  THE PHOTOGRAPHIC IMAGE
                                       This is a preliminary syllabus.
                     Critical information will be posted and updated on Canvas
                             ANT 325J (31155) - Location: SAC 4.120
Seminar: Mondays: 2:00-4:00 p.m.
Lab: Fridays: 2:00-4:00 p.m.
Instructor: Craig Campbell
Office hours: Mondays 11-12pm in my office (SAC 4.122)
                      Firearms are not welcome in this class. If you own a gun, leave it at home.
                                                                                                       Photo: Mary Ellen Mark
                          Reality is always extraordinary.
                                              Mary Ellen Mark
THE PHOTOGRAPHIC IMAGE
Course Description
"The Photographic Image" applies concepts and practices from visual ethnography to the study of
culture and everyday life. The course aims at developing approaches to practices of looking and
                                                                                                                           1


                                                              The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325} Fall 2019
techniques of representation within an ethical and historical framework. Whereas photographs are
often taken to be archival and documentary technologies, we will invert this idea and explore how
images are also transient and ephemeral by focusing on sites of encounter and codes of
engagement. In our critical approach we consider both the production and reception of
photographs.
The class is planned around a series of photo-based projects that foregrounds experiential
learning. You will be required to read for these projects and undertake original photography
assignments. At all points in the course you will be drawn into the use of image-making as an
interpretive and critical engagement with course readings. Writing is an essential element in visual
ethnography; sometimes it is foregrounded, sometimes it is subordinated to the photographs.
Regardless, you will have an opportunity to fine-tune your writing in relation to your photographic
practice. We will begin with techniques of visual inquiry established by visual anthropologists and
documentarians as well as artists working within or on the margins of documentary traditions. You
are expected to engage fully in both individual and group activities.
            You will be expected to have at your disposal a camera (digital or analogue).
Required Readings
All assigned readings will be posted on Canvas. There are no books to purchase in this class.
Learning Goals
In general, there are a number of critical things that I think you should learn in this course. As the
title suggests the idea and practice of photography are central. This is not a photography course
that you would take in a Fine Arts or Journalism program; understanding the differences in these
disciplines is a key learning goal. You will be using your camera in a form of practice-based and
experiential learning. As we study photography you will be using your own photographs and
camera to extend your inquiry and hone your critical eye. You will also learn about how and why
ethics matter in anthropology, ethnography, and especially in visual anthropological work.
Ethics in research practice with a focus on the ethics of qualitative research and visual
representation is fundamental to and pervasive through this course. You will learn how ethics
matters not only in and to the discipline of Anthropology, but as a general humanist approach to
research. More specifically, you will learn the nuances of 'informed consent' though practice-based
exercises.
Finally, you will develop a flexible and extensible skill set that will allow you to create powerful
visual narratives. You will learn to look at and think about photographs as a historically grounded
form of visual culture, and think about the ways that photographs are apprehended by people in
the everyday.
Class expectations:
          Attendance in this course is of utmost importance. You are expected to attend all seminars
          and labs. It is your job to notifiy me if you must miss a class and to provide legitimate
          excuses.
          Readings provided are limited. You are expected to read them carefully, take notes, and
          come to class prepared to discuss them.
          Participation is essential. There are many ways to participate and I will work with you if
          you feel challenged to participate in a group environment. This is a small class setting so
                                                                                                                  2


                                                             The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325} Fall 2019
         you will need to come prepared to share your ideas, you will also need to come ready to
         listen and engage fully with one another. At times you will disagree with others and it is
         important to me that you feel safe to share your ideas and opinions and that you do so in
         a way that does not intimidate or silence others.
Note:
All information in this syllabus is subject to change. Students will be given reasonable and explicit
notice for all changes to the syllabus.
Grades & Assignments:
Participation = 20%
Presentations = 10%
Photo Assignments = 40%
Photographic essay assignment= 30%
Photographic exhibition assignment = 10%
Reading Notes
For all seminars with assigned readings you are required to upload reading notes at least two
hours before class and to bring a printed copy with you to class. These should be around a page
in length (max 2). This is part of your participation grade. Reading notes must include:
     •   Your name, ID#, Date
     •   Formatted reference to that week's readings (MLA style)
     •   Quotes from the text that you find interesting, challenging, or problemmatic.
     •   A few questions or ideas you'd like to discuss in class
     •   Other notes
Participation
Attendance and participation in labs and seminars is mandatory. If you need to miss a day
contact me in advance. Unapproved abscences, late arrivals, early departures can count against
you in your participation grade, they disrupt class, and ultimately undermine your capacity to
succeed in this class.
Presentations
Both formal and informal presentations are an important component of this course. You will be
evaluated on your preparation and your presentation. The presentations should be polished,
intelligent, and coherent.
                                                                                                                 3


                                                            The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325} Fall 2019
Photo Assignment requirements.
All photo assignments require you to take photographs. They also require you to read assigned
materials and undertake (usually) abbreviated research projects. There will be multiple
assignments throughout the course of the semester that will help to develop and set the
foundations for your final project.
     •   Purchase two portfolios for holding your work (must be large enough to hold tabloid
         (A3, 11x17) prints. Write your name on them and use them when you hand in
         assignments. Please don't get excessively large portfolios. We're basically just looking
         for a paper or plastic sleeve.
     •   Most of your assignments will require you to print on tabloid sized paper. You will need
         to find a printer who can do this for you (copy centers at UT can do this). As we proceed
         through the semester we will be placeing more and more importance on the quality of
         your presentation (not just the content).
     •   In most of our labs we will be doing critiques (crits) of your work. Even if the assignment
         is not due on that day, you are required to come prepared with work to share. Typically,
         half of your grade for any given assignment will be based on what you have brought and
         prepared for the crit. Assignments will be graded by percentage and then averaged at
         the end.
Final Project
The final project for this class is an independent ethnographic photo-essay. It is a major multi-
part project which will be introduced to you towards the end of September.
Statement of Support
 As the instructor I am committed to ensuring our classroom is an inclusive and safe place for
you to meet over the course of the semester. I strive for a compassionate form of education and
training that balances the rigorous and challenging conditions of university education with the
vagaries of life and differential experience we all share. Consider our class and my office a safe
space for LGBTQ identifying folk and people of color. Please talk to me or email me if you ever
have any concerns or questions.
For this class I've adopted the "shit happens rule" from my friend Yoke
Sum Wong: "You can invoke this once in this course. The Shit Happens
rule is when you cannot hand in your paper on time and you will get an
automatic 3-day extension – no matter what. You do not have to come
and talk to me or explain anything to me. Life can be messy and things
do not always turn out the way we expect them to turn out." Just let me
know when you wish to invoke your 'shit happens' coupon.
Please be sure to read the small type below as there are important resources documented there.
Take advantage of university resources.
                                                                                                                4


The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325} Fall 2019
                                                    5


                                                                  The Photographic Image - {Anthropology 325} Fall 2019
                                University Notices and Policies
Documented Disability Statement
     • Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
          Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice)
          or 232-2937 (video phone) or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd .
Notice regarding academic dishonesty
     • Honor Code or statement of ethics.
               o University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
                    learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
                    member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
                    trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
     • Explanation or example of what constitutes plagiarism
     • Web site for more information:
     http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
Religious Holy Days
     • By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
          date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
          assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
          complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
     • If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
          Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
          provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
          Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
          Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin
     • The University of Texas has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for
          your learning.
               o Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
               o Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
               o Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
               o Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
               o Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                                                                                      6
