                            HED 329: CHILD & ADOLESCENT HEALTH
                                             Unique # 74435
                                              Summer 2019
                            Tuesday/Wednesday/Thursday 12:30 – 3:00 PM
                                   SANCHEZ BUILDING (SZB) 426
Instructor:            Judith Jonas, PhD, RDN
                       Office: Bellmont Hall # 610A
                       judy.jonas@utexas.edu
Office Hours:          Tuesday 10:30- 11:03 am (in BEL 610A)
                       Wednesday 10:30- 11:03 am (in BEL 610A)
                       Thursday 10:30- 11:03 am (in BEL 610A)
                       Or by Appointment
Required Text: Teaching Today’s Health, 10th Edition. David Anspaugh & Gene Ezell (2013).
Benjamin Cummings
Course Description: The purpose of this course is to provide an introduction to the foundations of
child and adolescent health, and to highlight the biological, environmental, and behavioral determinants
of health. The course includes the application of evidence-based health promotion concepts and
prominent health risk behaviors established during youth that increase the risk of morbidity and
mortality.
An ecological perspective will inform our understanding and help shape discussions of the physical,
psychological, emotional, and social aspects of health. Of special interest will be a study of the
determinants of health and health outcomes in diverse populations, such as those characterized by
gender, race/ethnicity, and socioeconomic status. Underlying tenets of the class include considering
others’ perspectives while examining the complexities of health behaviors and health outcomes. Topics
covered in class consider the importance of adults as healthy role models. In support of this concept,
students will explore their own health behaviors through the completion of a self-assessment and
behavior change contract.
Cultural Diversity in the United States: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the
United States. Cultural Diversity courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and
richness of the American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a portion of your grade to
come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group
that has experienced persistent marginalization. Such assignments and class discussions will include an
examination of health disparities experienced by various population groups.
                                                                                                   Page 1 of 8
                                                                                                   SUM 2019
                                                                                                      5.29.19


Evaluation: Students will earn grades based on 3 tests, 2 short papers, and five in-class assignments.
There is no final exam in this class. A limited number of bonus point opportunities will be provided.
The value of assignments (not counting bonus opportunities) and the final grade scale is noted below.
Test 1                                          55 Points
Test 2                                          55 Points
Test 3                                          55 Points
Health Disparities Paper                        30 Points
Behavior Change Reflection Paper                30 Points
Participation/In-Class Assignments              25 Points
                                         Total 250 Points
Final Grades: The following scale will be used to determine your final grade:
A = 232.5-250                                   C = 182.5-194.9
A- = 225-232.4                                  C- = 175-182.4
B+ = 220-224.9                                  D+ = 170-174.9
B = 207.5-219.9                                 D = 157.5-169.9
B- = 200-207.4                                  D- = 150-157.4
C+ = 195-199.9                                  F = 149.9 or below
Calculating Your Grade: Throughout the semester, use a hand calculator to add up the points you have
earned to date. Compare to the list above to determine your letter grade at that point. Do not depend on
the overall calculations on Canvas, as these may not be the most up-to-date or accurate due to the timing
of posting graded assignments. Please contact Dr. Jonas immediately if you have a question about
cumulative points earned to date so that accuracy can be ensured.
Textbook, Faculty and Guest Lectures, and Outside Readings: It is very important that you keep up
with the textbook and outside readings assigned to you for this class. This is especially true in a summer
session because of the large amount of content that must be covered in a short amount of time. Students
are expected to come to class having already read the day’s required materials as noted on the daily class
schedule beginning on page 6 of the Syllabus. For example, health disparities will be discussed on June
11. Students are expected to read the articles related to this discussion PROIR to coming to class on the
11th. Required outside reading will be published on Canvas throughout the session in advance of class.
Lecture slides for the day will be posted no later than 24 hours following class lectures.
Tests: On test days, please bring your official photo identification, sit every other seat if possible,
put cell phones in non-vibrating mode, and place all belongings along the walls. Tests will consist
of multiple-choice and true/false questions, and will cover assigned readings from text, faculty and guest
lecture slides, and supplemental readings, audio, video, and other material posted on Canvas that are
labeled “required.” Material provided in lectures may overlap with information provided by the text;
Supplementary information will also be provided. Each student is responsible for obtaining this
supplementary information by attending all course lectures, and if class is missed, conferring with fellow
students to obtain information regarding what is missed. Your tests will be available for you to review
during the instructor’s office hours or by appointment for one week following the test. Study guides will
be provided prior to each test to assist you.
                                                                                                   Page 2 of 8
                                                                                                   SUM 2019
                                                                                                      5.29.19


Make-up Tests: Make-up tests WILL NOT be given in this course unless a valid excuse is presented
PRIOR to the test. Valid excuses include university-sanctioned events and major illnesses. Having one
or more tests on the same day is NOT a valid excuse. You must provide Dr. Jonas with a hard copy of
your excuse. Make-up tests will be scheduled at the discretion of the instructor. Any time there are
appropriately & sufficiently documented absences you must have email documentation from me
stating the details about how to go about making up the test. Even if you talk to me in person, you
must follow up with an email.
Short Papers: Each student is responsible for submitting two, 2.5 to 3-page double-spaced papers, not
counting the cover page or reference page. The paper will be a reflection on, and application of, the
information learned in the class and must be the original work of the student. The Short Paper #1
(Health Disparities) is due no later than 12:30 pm on June 26th. You must submit a HARD COPY of
the paper, in person, to the instructor as well as upload a copy (in Word) to your Canvas site. The
submission day and time are based on the day and time reflected in your Canvas upload. You
should notify Dr. Jonas if you will not be able to meet the deadline and wish to turn in a late paper. A
paper is late after 12:30 pm on the due date. Late papers will be accepted for up to 2 class days but will
receive an automatic 10% deduction in points earned for each day or portion of the day that your paper
is late. June 26, 12:40 pm – June 27, 12:30 pm = 1 day late. June 27, 12:40- June 28, 12:30 pm = 2
days late. Points will be deducted if a hard copy is not submitted, and no points are earned if not
uploaded to Canvas. Short paper #1 will not be accepted after 12:40 pm on June 28.
Short Paper #2 (Behavior Change Reflection) is due no later than 12:30 pm on July 9th. You must
submit a HARD COPY of the paper, in person, to the instructor as well as upload a copy (in Word) to
your Canvas site. Again, the time of uploading your assignment on Canvas will determine submission
day/time. Late penalties as described above apply. Short paper #2 will not be accepted after 12:40 pm
on July 11th.
Consult Canvas for writing guidelines, detailed instructions on completing the paper, and grading rubric.
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to
an archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be
used to determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn
submission, the faculty member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been
plagiarized. Detailed information about the paper is presented on Canvas.
Participation Points: Throughout the course of the semester, there will be in-class assignments that will
count towards the 25 participation points listed on page 1 of the Syllabus. In class-assignments are not
pop quizzes, but rather group discussions and activities specific to the topic being covered in class.
There will be five identified in-class assignments, each counting 5 points. For these “graded”
participation assignments, students will earn either full credit (5 points for in-class participation and
submission) or no credit (not present in class/did not participate). Other than the assigned readings noted
on the class schedule, no advance preparation for the in-class participation/assignment is required, and
no advance notice will be given. Arriving late or leaving early does not excuse students from in-class
participation assignments. To earn participation/assignment points for in-class assignments, students
must be present to complete and submit the assignment on the day it is assigned.
Bonus Points: In addition to the 25 participation points noted above, there will be a limited number of
opportunities (e.g., in-class group work, individual participation activities, take-home activities) for you
                                                                                                     Page 3 of 8
                                                                                                     SUM 2019
                                                                                                        5.29.19


to earn extra points (bonus points), ranging from 1-3 points per activity. Not all in-class activities will
count as participation point or bonus activities. These will be chosen randomly at Dr. Jonas’s discretion,
and will be treated as bonus points that contribute to your overall total class points. You must be present
in class and submit the activity the day it is conducted (or submit on due date). Your final course grade
cannot exceed 250 points, so not all bonus points may be added to your final grade.
A note about grades for in-class “graded” participation points and additional “bonus” points → With
rare exceptions, participation and bonus points earned will be posted on Canvas within 72 hours of the
class in which they were offered. If you were in class and did not receive credit for the participation
exercise, you must notify Dr. Jonas within 1 week of the original assignment. After this point, discuss
missed participation or bonus points will not be discussed. Please ensure your assignments are submitted
with your full name to prevent unintended misses.
Class Policies
Respect & Responsibility: As your instructor, I pledge to treat each of you with courtesy and respect,
and ask the same of all students. I value my time with you and have done my best to prepare ahead of
time, making the commitment to be present and engaged in a shared learning process. I ask the same of
you, and trust that you will make the same commitment.
If there are specific concepts discussed in class/the textbook that you do not understand, please ask for
further explanation. I welcome our discussions. It is your responsibility to read the text and other
assigned readings by the due date indicated in the syllabus, review the lecture slides when posted, and
seek out classmates to help you determine any material missed during an absence. It is also your
responsibility to keep track of your grades and feedback on any assignments as posted on Canvas. I also
encourage your coming to office hours to review your tests and to pick up your assignments. Please
allow time for me to post points earned in Canvas (e.g., about 3 days for tests and in-class and bonus
assignments and up to 1 week for your short papers). However, do not wait until the end of the semester
if you believe there is a discrepancy in your points listed on Canvas.
Respect for Ideas and for One Another: Some of the issues discussed in this class may be of a
sensitive nature. An important component of this course is to explore how cultural diversity influences
health behavior. This diversity includes gender, race, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, religion, family
structure, sexual orientation, and geographic region. Because students vary in their background,
experiences, and opinions, it is imperative that we are respectful of fellow students’ views, opinions, and
comments. Disrespectful comments and body language will not be tolerated.
Attendance: Participation in class discussions is as important to learning the assigned material as
reading the class text, taking tests, and writing the short papers. Participation will also factor into your
earned grade (see participation points information above). For this reason, you are expected to attend all
classes. I ask that you refrain from leaving early and/or arriving late, out of respect for your classmates
and me. If for any reason you are going to be late or need to leave early from class, please notify me via
email, and come speak with me in person. If your absence is due to an appropriately documented reason
(i.e., a university-sanctioned event or major illness), please contact me. Otherwise, contact fellow
classmates if you need information on what you missed.
Active Class Participation: Material presented in this class is more interesting and relevant when
students participate in class discussions. Moreover, advancement of our understanding of a topic occurs
when we listen to and discuss information from multiple perspectives. However, to be appropriately
                                                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                                                                                                      SUM 2019
                                                                                                         5.29.19


prepared for discussion, you must be informed, which means that reading the assigned materials (e.g.,
textbook chapter, short audio &/or video clips, other readings) before attending class.
Electronics Use: Please refrain from using phones and smartphones. TURN OFF ALL CELL
PHONES/TEXT MESSAGE CAPABILITIES (i.e., A NON-VIBRATING MODE) UPON
ENTERING THE CLASSROOM. Let me know prior to class if you have a situation that necessitates
having your phone out during class. Otherwise, all activity on your laptops, tablets, and smart phones is
limited to in-class activities only.
E-mail: You are encouraged to communicate with me as frequently as you wish, either in-person,
through e-mail, or telephone. I will respond to your e-mails within a 24-hour period of time during
weekdays. Responses on weekends may take longer. Please note that email response times apply to the
duration of the semester only, and end when final grades have been submitted. I recommend you email
me directly at judy.jonas@utexas.edu rather than messaging me through Canvas.
Canvas: Update your Canvas settings so that you receive all class announcements and notifications. To
update settings, go to Canvas → Account → Notifications to set push notifications. Check the Canvas
site for the syllabus, all class outlines, study guides, instructions for assignments and papers, etc. (I
review how often each student accesses canvas). Please access and check your grades weekly on
Canvas. If you believe there is a discrepancy with an assignment grade, contact me within one week of
the grade posting. Do not wait until the end of the semester. HELPFUL HINT: For full content details,
access Canvas from a Laptop or Desktop computer rather than your cell phone or tablet.
Academic Integrity: A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is
highly valued and seriously regarded at UT Austin, as emphasized in the standards of conduct. You and
other students are expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in
scholastic work" undertaken at the University. This is a very basic expectation that is further reinforced
by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, complete any assignments, tests, and other scholastic
endeavors with the utmost honesty. This requires you to a) acknowledge the contributions of other
sources to your scholastic efforts b) complete your assignments independently unless expressly
authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing them c) follow instructions for assignments and
tests, and observe the standards of your academic discipline d) avoid engaging in any form of academic
dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the
Student Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Academic Accommodations: "The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY."
                                                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                                                                                                    SUM 2019
                                                                                                        5.29.19


                                         TENTATIVE CLASS SCHEDULE
Listed below are the class dates, topics with assigned readings, and assignment due dates. Always check Canvas for
additional required class materials. Additionally, I’ve provided class preparation tips to assist in your preparing for
class. “Class Preparation” means that you read/listen to/view required topic materials (including the Textbook
chapters) BEFORE coming to class. We will strive to stick with this schedule; any changes will be announced in
class and/or via Canvas announcements.
    Date                               Topic                              Class Preparation*                    Due
                                                                                                          Dates/Tests
June 6         Introduction                                           - Review the syllabus
Thurs
               The Need for Health Education                          - Check Canvas for required
                                                                      readings
               Comprehensive School Health Models
                                                                      - Read How to Succeed in
               Health Behavior Change                                 HED 329 doc (see Class
                                                                      Resources module)
                                                                      - Begin thinking about a
                                                                      behavior you want to change
                                                                      over the summer. It should
                                                                      be one, very small, concrete
                                                                      behavior. Be prepared to
                                                                      submit written contract on
                                                                      June 11.
June 11        Health Disparities                                     - Check Canvas for required       BEHAVIOR
Tues                                                                  outside readings on Health        CHANGE
               Health Disparities Research Paper:                     Disparities                       CONTRACT
               Guest: Elle Covington, Librarian                                                         DUE
                                                                                                        - Complete and
                                                                                                        upload your
                                                                                                        Behavior
                                                                                                        Change
                                                                                                        Contract. Bring
                                                                                                        a hard copy to
                                                                                                        class.
                                                                                                           Page 6 of 8
                                                                                                           SUM 2019
                                                                                                               5.29.19


June 12 Mental Health & Stress Reduction                 - Check Canvas for required
Wed                                                      readings
        Suicide Prevention
        Guest: Michelle Emery, MA, “Be That One” -
        Suicide Prevention; UT Center for Mental Health
        Counseling
June 13 Mental Health & Stress Reduction, Continued      - Check Canvas for required  SHORT
Thurs                                                    readings                     PAPER #1
                                                                                      TOPIC DUE.
                                                                                      Just your
                                                                                      proposed topic,
                                                                                      not the full
                                                                                      paper
June 18 TEST 1                                            - Check Canvas for required TEST 1
Tues                                                     readings
        Violence & Injury Prevention                                                  Covering
                                                                                      materials June
                                                                                      6 - June 13
June 19 Substance Use and Misuse                         - Check Canvas for required
Wed                                                      readings
June 20 Substance Use and Misuse, continued              - Check Canvas for required
Thurs                                                    readings
        Guest: No´sse Ovienmhada, Tobacco-Free Campus
        Coordinator
        Guest: Joel Dunnington, MD, FACR
June 25 Nutrition                                        - Check Canvas for required
Tues                                                     readings
                                                         Read articles posted on
                                                         Canvas
June 26 Nutrition, Continued                             - Check Canvas for required  HEALTH
Wed                                                      readings                     DISPARITIES
        Body Image and Disordered eating                                              PAPER DUE
        Guests: Jennifer Barnoud RD. and Linett Negroni,                              NO LATER
        LCSW, University Student Health Services and                                  THAN 12:30
        Counseling and Mental Health Services                                         PM
                                                                                      UPLOAD in
                                                                                      Word to
                                                                                      Canvas and
                                                                                         Page 7 of 8
                                                                                         SUM 2019
                                                                                            5.29.19


                                                                                          submit a hard
                                                                                          copy in class
 June 27     TEST 2                                           - Check Canvas for required TEST 2
 Thurs                                                        readings                    Covering
             Aging, Dying, and Death                                                      materials June
                                                                                          18– June 26
 July 2      Healthy Relationships                            - Check Canvas for required
 Tues        Guest: Lara Latimer, PhD                         readings
             Senior Research Program Coordinator,
             Assistant Professor of Instruction
 July 3      Chronic and infectious Diseases                  - Check Canvas for required
 Wed                                                          readings
 July 4      Fourth of July Holiday – No Class – No Office Hours – Have fun – Be Safe!
 Thurs
 July 9      Infectious Disease and STIs, Continued           - Check Canvas for required PAPER #2:
 Tues                                                         readings                    BEHAVIOR
             Gender and Health Disparities                                                CHANGE
                                                                                          REFLECTION
                                                                                          DUE NO
                                                                                          LATER THAN
                                                                                          12:30 PM
                                                                                          UPLOAD in
                                                                                          Word to
                                                                                          Canvas and
                                                                                          submit a hard
                                                                                          Copy in class
 July 10     Sexuality Education                              - Check Canvas for required
 Wed                                                          readings
             Contraception
             Guest: Katherine Protil, BA, Health Promotion
             Coordinator, UT Student Health Services,
             Longhorn Wellness Center
 July 11     TEST 3                                                                       TEST 3
 Thurs                                                                                    Covering
 Last Day of Course Evaluation                                                            materials June
 Class!                                                                                   27 -July 10
NOTE: THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM IN THIS CLASS
                         Thank you for being a member of our class!
                                                                                            Page 8 of 8
                                                                                            SUM 2019
                                                                                               5.29.19


Page 9 of 8
SUM 2019
   5.29.19
