             AFS 111K SYLLABUS
                Unique Numbers:
                      31005/31010
Evolution of USAF Air & Space Power I
                      Fall 2018
                  AFROTC Detachment 825
              The University of Texas at Austin
           Captain Zac Crippen, Assistant Professor
                 Office Phone: (512) 232-2371
                      Office: CLA 5.722


                                                                                      Fall 2018
MEMORANDUM FOR AS 200 STUDENTS
FROM: Captain Zac Crippen
SUBJECT: Welcome to AS200—Team and Leadership Fundamentals
1. Congratulations on completing AS100 and beginning year two of the General Military
Course! Up to this point in the AFROTC program, you have come to understand the moral,
intellectual, and physical foundations of the Air Force officer corps. You’ve learned about the
sacrifices many of our heroes have undergone to secure the freedoms we still enjoy to this day.
Those exceptional men and women left behind legacies for us to study, learn from, and
internalize as we strive to be exceptional leaders in the greatest Air Force that the world has ever
known.
2. This year, in AS200, it’s time to build upon those lessons you’ve learned in AS100 and begin
to practice the art of leadership. During this semester, we will research various leadership and
management methodologies and explore these concepts through guided discussions, case studies,
and hands-on experience. In addition to examining these key leadership principles, we will
explore how to lead change, make critical decisions, and solve complex, often life-threatening
problems.
3. I expect all of you to come to class well prepared and ready to learn about leading America’s
Airmen as we work hard to stay ahead of our adversaries in the most complex, diverse, and
technologically advanced global battlefield ever known to mankind. You should expect me to do
the same. I look forward to a very rewarding and fun semester that will serve as a launch pad for
your career as an Air Force officer.
Integrity First—Service before Self—Excellence in All We Do!
                                                       ZAC A. CRIPPEN, Captain, USAF
                                                       Assistant Professor, Air Force Science
                                                                                                     2


Key Dates:
27 Aug – New Cadet Orientation Program
28 Aug – New Cadet In-processing and POC Orientation Program
29 Aug – Classes Begin
3 Sep – Labor Day Holiday
21 – 24 Nov – Thanksgiving Holiday
10 Dec – Last Class Day
21 Dec – Commissioning of ROTC Graduates
Course Location and Hours:
AFROTC Classroom, 0800-0900 (31005) 0900-1000 (31010)
Office Location, Hours and Contact Info:
CLA, 5.722 (Hours by Appointment—calendly.com/zac-crippen)
(512) 232-2371
zachary.crippen@austin.utexas.edu
Course Text: Students are not required to purchase a textbook. All course materials are posted
on Canvas.
                                         Course Requirements
Course Objective: This course is designed to provide a fundamental understanding of both
leadership and team building. It is imperative that cadets are taught from the beginning that there
are many layers to leadership, including aspects that don’t always jump to mind. Such things
include listening, understanding themselves, being a good follower and problem solving
efficiently. The students will apply these leadership perspectives when completing team building
activities and discussing things like conflict management. Students should demonstrate basic
verbal and written communication skills. Cadets will apply these lessons at Field Training,
which follows AS200.
                               Student Responsibilities and Guidelines
Classroom Conduct:
    1. When a ranking officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to
         attention until told to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the
         classroom, the students must again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer
         leaves the classroom. Class members will select a class monitor and alternate who will
         make these announcements for all class sessions.
    2. You are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class discussions,
         but you must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address the instructor
         as sir/ma’am or by rank/grade.
    3. No eating, smoking, or use of other tobacco products while in class.
    4. During class, cell phones will be turned off or placed in the silent mode.
    5. No personal use of laptops or tablets during class unless otherwise specified.
                                                                                                     3


Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all military
officers outside and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all ranking cadet
officers, of all military services, when in uniform and outdoors. Unless told to enter at ease, you
must use proper reporting procedures when entering the office of a commissioned officer.
Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming and
weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and appearance
standards are followed on- and off-duty.
Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008 cadets will wear their
uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and for
Practical Military Training (PMT). GMC cadets will wear appropriate civilian attire to their AS
class. POC will wear UOD to their AS class. Appropriate civilian clothes may be worn at other
times while in the CLA building.
Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with
military order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of, or inflict cruelty on
subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or privilege to which
they are legally entitled. Be honorable, be respectful.
Drugs & Alcohol: No drugs, period. No drinking alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be
responsible—do not abuse alcohol and never drive while or after drinking.
Cadet Standards: Cadets must be aware of membership requirements (refer to AFROTCI 36-
2011). Here is a recap of your requirements (these are not all-inclusive):
    1. Report all negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72
        hours. If the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets
        may wait to report the involvement NLT 72 hours after their return to classes following
        the break.
    2. Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours and term and cumulative GPA of
        2.50 or greater. You must also pass all AS courses with a C or better and no Fs or
        incomplete grades in any of your classes. Correspondence courses must have prior
        approval to be considered in your full-time status.
    3. Remain in good standing at your institution.
    4. Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with us in advance.
    5. Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
    6. Meet medical standards and advise us of any changes in your status.
    7. Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
                                           Administration
Textbook: All books are digital and will be posted on Canvas, please download as soon as
possible. Students will not purchase commercial texts.
Timeliness: Be on time; treat class as a military appointment.
                                                                                                    4


Instruction: Academic classes are conducted as a combination of lecture and guided discussion.
Be prepared for class by reading assignments in advance. Be able to share your knowledge and
personal views in class. Classes may be supplemented with films or videos.
Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011, each student will meet with
me for an academic plan review and counseling interview. We will have at least one per term,
with the first one occurring within the first few weeks of each semester. Utilize my Calendly link
(http://www.calendly.com/zac-crippen) to schedule a meeting. Plan on 30 minutes for your
appointment, be in uniform, and be on time.
Office Hours: My office hours are by appointment. Please utilize my Calendly link to schedule
an appointment. (http://www.calendly.com/zac-crippen)
Academic Freedom: Air University faculty, students, and staff are members of a learned
profession, and members of their respective educational organizations. The free exchange of
opinions and ideas is essential to the educational process and, to the greatest extent possible,
faculty, students, and staff are encouraged to speak and write freely. Even in this academic
setting, however, the importance of the University’s military mission requires limits on some
types of expression. Faculty, students, and staff should remember that the public might judge the
armed forces or Air University by their spoken or written statements. (AUI 36-2608)
Academic Integrity: You are expected to exercise uncompromising adherence to the highest
standards of academic integrity. You are prohibited from engaging in plagiarism, cheating,
misrepresentation, unprofessional relationships, or any other act constituting a lack of academic
integrity. Violations of academic integrity will result in, at minimum, a score of zero on the
affected assignment(s) and a conditional event. (AUI 36-2609)
                            Course Requirements and Grading Policy
Attendance: To pass this class you must attend 80% of scheduled classes. All absences will be
initially marked as unexcused, but at the discretion of the primary instructor, taking into account
extraordinary or extenuating circumstances and documentary materials (e.g. doctor’s notes),
unexcused absences may be later categorized as excused and will thus count towards the 80%
attendance requirement. This policy applies to ROTC cadets and non-cadet students alike.
Examinations: You will have two exams – a midterm and a final – each worth 25% of your
grade. The material for the exam will be taken from class lectures/discussions, readings, and
video/film presentations. The mid-term exam will cover lessons 1-14; the final exam will test
your knowledge of lessons 15-24.
EXAM #1 will be on 3 Oct and will cover material from the first half of the course.
EXAM #2 will be on 5 Dec and will cover material from the entire course.
Writing Assignment: There are three writing assignments. Follow the Tongue and Quill
format (see Canvas) for the Official Memorandum and the Official Email.
                                                                                                    5


   1. The Official Memorandum should be no longer than one page and will describe why you
chose to return to AFROTC for a second year (or, if this is your first year in the program, why
you decided to join).
    2. The Official Email will consist of a 150-250 word email to your instructor following the
official military email format. I will instruct you on the topic and execution at a later date.
    3. The Analysis Paper on Leadership will be a 2-3 page paper that identifies three ways in
which you plan to improve your leadership based on concepts you have learned in the course ot
the semester. Use MLA format for this assignment.
All assignments are due at the beginning of class. Late assignments will result in a letter grade
reduction for each class and day late. Turning your writing assignments in early is encouraged;
however, you will not receive feedback until after the original due date. Writing assignments
that do not meet the page requirement will automatically earn a failing grade.
Briefing Assignments: You must give an informative briefing this semester. The briefing
represents 10 points or 10% of your grade. The topic you will brief on will be a current or
historical Air Force Leader and his/her leadership as it relates to concepts discussed in
class. You must also meet a time constraint of 4-6 minutes. Powerpoint slides are required. You
MUST NOT use information from any previous presentation given by any student in any Air
Force Science class. Briefings will be delivered on 7 and 14 Nov.
Grading Computation: Your grade in this course considers attendance, subject matter
knowledge, and communications assignments, and is computed using the following scoring
system. Please note the total score possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter
grade/4-point GPA scale used by The University of Texas at Austin. Under no circumstances
will the course be graded on a curve.
                        FALL SEMESTER                                         Grading Criteria
     Graded Area                                      Points
     Examination #1                                      25                Score         Letter Grade
     Examination #2                                      25                              (GPA Points)
                                                                          93-100           A/4.0
     Writing                                             30
                                                              6            90-93           A-/3.67
        1: Official Memorandum (1 page min)
                                                              4            87-89           B+/3.33
        2: Official Email (150-250 words)
                                                             20            84-86           B/3.0
        3: Analysis Paper on Leadership (2-3 pages)
                                                                           80-83           B-/2.67
     Briefing                                            10                77-79           C+/2.33
     Class Participation & On-Time Attendance            10                74-76           C/2.0
     Total                                              100                70-73           C-/1.67
                                                                           67-69           D+/1.33
                                                                           64-66           D/1.0
                                                                           60-63           D-/0.67
                                                                            0-60           F/0.0
                                                                                                      6


Writing assignments will be scored according to the following rubric:
Course critique requirement: Your feedback on the course and course instructor is critically
important for two reasons. First, the feedback helps ensure the course is meeting its objective.
Students with Disabilities: Students with Disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities, (512) 471-6259, http://utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Accommodations for Religious Holidays: By UT Policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about your safety or the
safety of another student, please call the BCAL at (512) 232-5050.
                                                                                                   7


AFS 321 COURSE OUTLINE – FALL 2018
      Date     Lsn#                  Subject                         Assignments
   29 Aug       1       AS200 Welcome and Overview
     5 Sep      2               Self-Assessment
    12 Sep      3        Listening: The Neglected Skill      Writing Assignment #1 Due
    19 Sep      4                 Followership
    26 Sep      5            Full Range Leadership
     3 Oct                                      Exam #1
    10 Oct      6               Problem Solving
    17 Oct      7                  Motivation                Writing Assignment #2 Due
    24 Oct      8         Standards and Accountability
    31 Oct      9            Your Financial Future
    7 Nov      N/A            Student Briefings #1
   14 Nov      N/A            Student Briefings #2
   21 Nov                                 Thanksgiving Break
   28 Nov                     Exam Review (Writing Assignment #3 Due)
    5 Dec                                       Exam #2
                         This syllabus is subject to change.
                                                                                       8


Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
of class.
4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                                                                                              9
