Psy N418 (Unique 83099)             Statistics and Research Design                      Summer 2019
Class Times & Location:                      MTuWTh 8:30 to 9:45 AM                     SEA 2.108
Lab Times and Locations:                     TuTh 10:00 to 11:45 AM                     SEA 2.114
Instructor:        Patrick Carroll, Ph.D.
                            SEA 5.204        (512) 477-3906                     carroll@utexas.edu
                            Office Hours: Monday & Wednesday                    10:00 to 11:00 AM
                                                                                and by appointment
TA:                Avery Campos
                            Avery’s contact information and office hours will be posted on CANVAS.
Required Texts:
• Statistics Unplugged by Sally Caldwell (4th Edition, Copyright 2013) Wadsworth/Cengage
     Only the textbook is required. No other bundled material is needed.
Other Supplies:
• Please bring a calculator to all classes and to the tests. A simple $1 calculator is fine. You don’t need
     anything fancy.
• You will need access to a computer. If you have a laptop you can bring to class, you may find that
     preferable to using the department’s computers. Your computer should have MS Word and Excel
     (available for free from the university). You should download JASP to your computer.
Course Objectives
Students will acquire an appreciation for, as well as some knowledge of, the scientific
method as it is applied within the field of psychology. Students will learn to critically evaluate
published research, to form empirically testable hypotheses, and to design and conduct
experiments relevant to those hypotheses. Students also will learn to employ computers to
statistically describe and evaluate experimental data. Considerable emphasis will be placed on
the writing of research reports with clarity and objectivity. As this is a writing intensive course,
you will gain experience presenting your knowledge verbally through critical writing and speech.
This course carries several flags:
• Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline.
     In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
     projects, and receive feedback to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to
     improve your writing through revision, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work.
     You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work.
     Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
     Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating
     Board.
• Quantitative Reasoning Flag courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for
     understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and
     professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
     use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
• Independent Inquiry Flag courses are designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the
     course of a semester, providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question,
     problem, or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
     grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
Keeping Up
     The CANVAS website for this class will be used to help you keep track of assignments on a weekly
     basis. Please refer to CANVAS regularly to keep track of assignments and activities both for lecture
     and lab.


                                           COURSE STRUCTURE
Lecture Sessions
     The Monday through Thursday meetings of the class will include lectures and a variety of class
     activities. These will focus on conceptual understanding of statistics, research design, and research
     methods, as well as explanation of analytic procedures for the various statistical tests. Tests
     (Midterm and Final Exam) will focus on topics and skills developed in this part of the class.
Lab Sessions
     The Tuesday and Thursday lab meetings will focus on hands-on application of research methods,
     procedures, and statistical tests. Labs will involve group work and it will be NECESSARY to devote
     time outside of class or lab to group work. If you are not willing or able to commit time outside of
     class, you should not remain enrolled in this course.
                                                ASSESSMENT
Grading Percentages
     Grades are based on your performance on a variety of tasks and activities.
    Note that the grades above are divided into two nearly equal parts: 50% from lecture-related
    assessment (midterm and final, Aplia, quizzes), 45% from lab-related assessment (research project
    and lab activities), and a final 5% based on your involvement in and contributions to the class. You
    must receive a minimum of 70% of the possible points in each of the lab and lecture portions of the
    class to receive a “C” or higher in the class. In other words, if either part is lower than 70%, a “C-“ is
    the best grade you can receive. A high lab-related grade cannot save poor test performance, and
    high test grades cannot make up for poor lab performance.
    NOTE: With a “C-“, you cannot take upper division Psychology courses.
Final Course Grades
     Final course grades will be based on the percentage of the total possible points that you receive
     with the following ranges:
     Grades merely reflect your performance on the tests, papers, and other activities. I cannot evaluate


     how hard you work, how smart or motivated you are, how important the grade is to your future goals,
     how much you know of untested material, how well you would have done with a different testing
     format, how good a human being you are, or myriad other factors. I don’t trivialize the importance of
     these other factors, but they will not be calculated into your grade. I am simply not capable of fairly
     and meaningfully incorporating them into my assessment.
Exams (15% and 25% of grade)
     There will be two major tests, a midterm and a final test. Both are required. The midterm will be
     administered during the regularly scheduled class time. The final exam will take place during the
     exam period, as scheduled by the University Registrar.
                                   https://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/196/finals
     The exams will test your knowledge of statistics and research methodology. Questions will include
     statistical computations, multiple choice items, and conceptual essays and explanations. See the
     calendar on CANVAS for the time of the midterm and the registrar’s website (URL above) for the
     final exam.
     Missing an Exam: An excused absence from an exam will only be given for major documented
     emergencies. If a makeup exam is necessary, the time and place will be determined by
     arrangement. Makeup exams may be in a different format from the original exam.
Math Quizzes (10% of grade)
     The major tests are focused on using statistical information to understand research. Knowledge of
     how you calculate statistical tests and measures is important, because these procedures reveal what
     the statistics actually measure. After each section of the course, you will take a quiz testing your
     ability to use the formulas (sometimes memorized, sometimes provided) to find the correct values of
     the statistics. The times of the quizzes will be announced at least two days in advance and
     homework problems will be provided (on CANVAS) to allow you to prepare.
Lab Assignments (20% of grade)
    A variety of writing assignments will be given in the lab portion of the course as you learn about
    research methods, statistics, and APA writing style. There are no optional lab assignments.
    Passing grades for each assignment require that you complete the assignment in a timely way.
    However, even if you miss the due date, you cannot pass the course without completing all
    assignments. For missed assignments, the lab instructor will work with you to determine a time and
    date to submit the assignment to allow you to pass the class. Please Note: Late lab assignments
    will be penalized 10% of the total immediately after the deadline and 10% of the total for each
    additional day it is late. After four days (96 hours after the due date/time), the assignment will
    receive an automatic zero. After Week 7 (anything due after July 21), late assignments will not
    be accepted.)
Major Research Project (final paper 20%, drafts 5% of grade)
     During the much of the semester, you will work in groups on a major research project. This will
     involve designing and conducting a study, analyzing results, and reporting the findings. You will
     report your findings in the major APA paper due at the end of the semester. More information about
     this project will be provided as the semester progresses.
     The 5% of the grade will be based on your drafts of the various portions of the paper, submitted
     across several weeks. These drafts will be graded as DRAFTS. Grades on them should be
     understood as “work-in-progress” grades, NOT as indicators of the grade they will contribute to the
     final version of the paper.
Participation (5% of grade)
     This is an assessment by the instructors (with possible feedback as well from other students) about
     your general level of participation in the class, your active involvement in and contributions to
     activities, your level of attendance and communication.


Tentative Reading Plan
                                 NOTES ON OTHER IMPORTANT ISSUES
Lectures: A considerable amount of class time will be devoted to lectures and in-class activities.
    Lectures will often be used to clarify material in the readings, but they will also cover other material.
    The lectures are not intended as an alternative way to learn the information in the text. Note: Any
    formal lecture slides will be posted on CANVAS after the lecture.
Lecture Attendance Policy: Attendance is required for both lecture classes and labs. We will record
    attendance. On-time attendance of less that 70% to lecture will be considered unacceptable and will
    result in a grade penalty of at least one letter grade.
        Class starts at 8:30 and ends at 9:45 AM. I will attempt to respect both of those time limits. Please
    treat me with courtesy and I will reciprocate with equal courtesy. If the location of your prior class
    makes arriving in the room prior to 8:30 difficult, you should talk with me about that issue at the
    beginning of the semester. No one should have to leave prior to the end of class on a regular basis.
    If you do need to leave prior to the end of class, you should inform me before class.
Lab Attendance and Homework Policy: Lab starts at 10:00 AM and ends at 11:45 AM.
    On-time attendance of all labs is required. Should a genuine emergency prevent you from attending
    a lab on time or at all, three actions are required: (1) the lab instructor must be contacted ASAP--
    preferably before lab; (2) the other members of your research team must be contacted ASAP--
    preferably before lab; and (3) you arrange with the Lab Instructor to make up the lab activities
        Reference (3) above: Unless it is cleared by the lab instructor, homework from labs that are
    missed may NOT be made up. If you do not meet with the lab instructor after a missed lab (or, if the
    lab instructor prefers, have a phone conference), then the lab instructor may not accept homework
    for a missed lab.
Reading Assignments: Reading assignments will be posted on CANVAS in weekly folders. For
    assignments after the first week, the planned readings that are entered before the beginning of the
    course can be (and probably will be) modified as the semester progresses. Verify your readings at
    the beginning of each week to be sure you know the official readings. Any additional readings not in
    the textbooks will be posted on CANVAS and made available for download in pdf format.
Course Prerequisites:
    The Psychology Department will drop all students who do not meet the following prerequisites: PSY
    301 with a C or better; Math 302 or a higher-level mathematics course.
Students with Disabilities Policy—University of Texas at Austin. The University of Texas at Austin
    provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities.
    For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, TTY: 471-4641.


Academic Integrity:
You are expected to uphold and reflect the University Code of Conduct and the Student
Honor Code in this course: Student Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I
shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” University Code of
Conduct: “The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.”
Cheating and plagiarism are serious offenses. They not only undermine your ability to grow intellectually
and think for yourself but they can also lead to you being suspended or expelled from the University for
scholastic dishonesty. Cheating includes copying another student’s answers on a test or assignment and
using notes, books, cell phones, etc., to answer questions on a test or assignment when such materials
are not permitted.
Plagiarism includes (1) copying passages verbatim from another writer’s work and representing them as
one’s own work; (2) any use of another’s work that is submitted as one’s own work without giving the
original author sufficient credit; (3) submitting answers or papers written by another student; and (4)
reading someone else’s answers or paper, then copying the main ideas or parts of their answers/writing
into your own answers/writing. It is your responsibility to know what plagiarism is, and how to avoid it:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
Cases of cheating and plagiarism will be referred to the Honor Code Council.
You can find out more about academic integrity at:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
Media Issues:
In Class
•     Please turn off and put away all cell phones and other messaging devices during class. Don’t read or
      send messages during class.
•     If you bring a computer to class, multitask modestly and discreetly. Excessive use of a computer for
      purposes unrelated to the class is distracting to other students and rude to the instructor.
•     Turn off and securely put away any and all electronic devices during testing (quizzes and exams).
      Avoid even the appearance of impropriety.
Communication Outside of Class
•     When possible, please favor email messages over telephone calls when contacting Dr. Carroll. In
      general, email messages will lead to quicker and more reliable communication.
•     When sending emails, please assume a casually formal relationship. Identify yourself and indicating
      that you are in this class (Psy418). Please make phone messages similarly informative.
•     We (the instructor and TA) will try to respond to emails or telephone calls promptly, but we do not
      monitor these media obsessively. If you do not receive a response within 24 hours, please resend
      the message or speak with us in class.
•     We do not necessarily check for messages over the weekend. Messages (phone or email) sent late
      on Friday may remain unseen or unheard until Monday morning. Similarly, we do not generally
      check for class messages outside of normal work hours. A message sent in the evening or night on
      weekdays may not be seen or heard until some time the next day.
•     Occasionally messages can be inadvertently overlooked or incorrectly channeled by the mailer
      system to a “junk” mailbox. We apologize in advance if this should happen to you, and we hope you
      will simply send a follow-up message without feeling slighted. We will attempt to be attentive and
      responsive.


Classroom Etiquette
I am committed to upholding the University Code of Conduct in order to facilitate a productive learning
environment for all students. I expect that we all treat each other and the classroom with respect. To help
everyone get the most out of this experience, in-class distractions must be avoided. Examples of
distractions include (but are not limited to): cell phone use, private conversations, sleeping, online
shopping, smoking e-cigarettes, checking your email, etc. Coming to class engaged, treating your
classmates with respect and not distracting them is your best bet for success, and will help you avoid
losing participation points.
Disabilities
I am committed to providing a level playing field for all students in this course. If you need
accommodations (or think you might) to perform your best, please talk with me at the beginning of the
semester. The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Services for
Students with Disabilities: Call 512-471-6259, Videophone 512-410-6644, Email ssd@austin.utexas.edu,
Website http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
Emergency Procedures
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students
requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In
the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin
Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Religious Holidays
I believe it is important for everyone in the academic community to respect the beliefs and belief-based
practices of others. Because we are a diverse community, if you wish accommodations, it is important
that you provide me with the necessary information in a timely manner, so that I can make the necessary
adjustments to scheduled deadlines, tests, or activities. According to UT Austin policy, you must notify me
of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Academic Resources
Please contact the following organizations for invaluable support in meeting your
academic and professional goals:
University Libraries – call 512-475-4250 (main library phone number) or visit the website at
www.lib.utexas.edu. They can provide in-depth assistance finding research sources, avoiding
plagiarism, and using APA format.
Sanger Learning and Career Center – call 512-232-8400 or visit the career website at
www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/career or the learning center website at
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
University Writing Center – PCL 2.330, call 512-471-6222 or visit the website at
uwc.utexas.edu/ the writing center provides free, individualized writing assistance on a drop-in
basis. Feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project.


Additional Student Resources
If you are struggling in any way, I strongly encourage you to seek out any additional resources available
through the university that might help you to find security, cope, move in positive directions, and even
thrive:
University Emergency – visit the website for up to the minute updates on emergency status
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency/
Office of Campus Safety and Security – call 512-471-5767 or visit the website for tips and
information http://besafe.utexas.edu
Student Emergency Services – call 512-471-5017 or visit the website
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/ SES provides students at the University of Texas
at Austin with resources and support during times of personal or family crisis or emergency.
Counseling and Mental Health Center – call 512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255 for 24/7
counseling or visit the website cmhc.utexas.edu The university counseling center provides
individual, group, telephone or crisis counseling to all University of Texas students who are
currently enrolled in classes. The Telephone Counseling Line is available year-round, 24/7.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) – call 512-232-5050 (or 911 if emergency) or visit
https://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/. Get advice or share anonymous concerns about an
individual 24/7.
Student Disclosures of Sexual Violence
         The University of Texas fosters a campus free of sexual violence including sexual harassment,
domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and/or any form of sex or gender discrimination. If you
disclose a personal experience as a UT student, the course instructor is required to notify UT's Title IX
Office.
