ARH 348P/ANS 372/RS352 Art in the Himalayas                                   Spring 2020
                Lost in Tibet and Encountering Buddhist Art
Professor J. Leoshko; office: DFA 2.130; phone: 232-2581
 email: jleoshko@austin.utexas.edu office hours: M: 1-3 p.m. and by appt.
Overview In the last fifty years the field of Himalayan art has exploded with much ground-
breaking scholarship, significant new collections and many exhibitions. Despite this prodigious
amount of study and attention, much confusion remains, a situation exacerbated by the tense
Chinese control of Tibet since 1959. Central questions of this course engage with the very
definition of Tibetan art. What fueled the stunning developments that included diverse terrifying
forms and sexual imagery in addition to more commonly encountered Buddhist subjects? How
do these visual works reflect Buddhist practices in the Himalayas, the area designated by the
impressive mountain range dividing the plains of the Indian subcontinent from the Tibetan
plateau? And how do political factors –such as Chinese patronage impact developments?
Tibetan Buddhism has long been a difficult subject, but assessing the relationship between art
and religion in the Himalayas is a key to understanding how distinct practices evolved over time.
Learning about Tibetan artistic traditions as well as how they have been studied allows students
to explore broader questions about defining art and its roles in society. The course also considers
the legacy of earlier views that emphasized the region’s mysterious and other-worldly character.
While understanding Buddhist practices and art in Tibet is the major focus of this class, other
areas are considered such as Nepal and China as well as the multi-faceted influence of Indian
traditions upon developments in Tibet. There are 3 related themes: 1) Constructions-Art &
Religion; 2) Geographies-Place & Space; 3) Viewings-Now & Then.
Requirements & Grading Most broadly, students will develop skills in analyzing and writing
about art and its multi-layered influence in the development of culture. While a certain amount
of factual information must be mastered, the emphasis is upon how to engage critically with the
material encountered. The course mixes lectures with discussion and student presentations.
Occasionally students will write responses to the reading, either in class or as homework.
Attendance and participation by all students are crucial for the course’s success. Students should
come to class prepared to engage and having completed assigned reading. The schedule lists
topics and readings by week. The final grade will be determined by 1 quiz (15%), 2 exams (25%
each), participation in class discussions and presentations (15%) and writing assignments (15%
each). These requirements are listed on course schedule with due dates. No late work will be
accepted except for extraordinary circumstances made in consultation with instructor. All course
work must be completed to receive a passing grade for the class. After 3 unexcused absences, a
student’s course grade will be lowered.
Reading The Museum on the Roof of the World: Art, Politics and the Representation of Tibet by
Clare Harris (Chicago, 2012); the novel Kim by Rudyard Kipling (first published in 1901).
Copies on reserve in FAL. Two especially good books also on reserve are Amy Heller, Tibetan
Art, Tracing the Development of Spiritual Ideals, 600-2000 A.D. (1999) and Karl Ryavec, A
Historical Atlas of Tibet (Chicago, 2015)


In the broadest sense this class considers the implications of constrained views of the past upon
the present understanding of Himalayan culture. What, for instance, lies behind the following
poem by a twentieth-century Tibetan monk?
        In Tibet, everything that is old
        Is a work of Buddha
        And everything that is new
        Is a work of the Devil
        This is the sad tradition of our country.
                Written by Gendrun Chopel (1903-1951)
And how does this compare with the emphasis by Tsongkhapa (died 1419) who established the
monastery Ganden (and the Gelugpa sect, to which the Dalai Lama belongs). He wrote:
        Whatever depends on causes and conditions
        Is empty of intrinsic reality
        What excellent instruction could there be
        More marvelous than this discovery?
Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center,
FAC 211, 471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The Undergraduate Writing Center
offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. Any undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can
visit the UWC for assistance with any writing project. Their services are not just for
writing with "problems." Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of
a successful writing project. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve
their writing. The assistance they provide is intended to foster independence. Each
student determines how to use the consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to
help you work on your writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your work.
Accommodations for religious holidays: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/


Art in the Himalayas--Course schedule                              Spring 2020
1/21, 1/23 Introduction: On Studying Tibet and Tibetan art
Studying Art and Religion
1/28 read: Claire Harris, chapter 8, “The Buddha Goes Global”
1/30 read: Andrew Skilton, Concise History of Buddhism, 3-31
2/4, 2/6 read: Janice Leoshko, "The Changing Landscape at Bodh Gaya,” 43-60
Looking at Religion & Studying “Art”
2/11, read: Daniel Boucher, "Merit of Bathing the Buddha," 59-68
2/13, read: Luis O. Gomez, "Two Tantric Meditations," 318-327
Looking at Religion and Studying “Art”
2/18; read: Stephen Teiser, “The Wheel of Rebirth,” 139-153
2/20 Quiz
"Constructions" of Art and Ritual”
2/25, 2/27, read: Harris, chpt. 1, “The Tibet Museum in the West”
Practice & Art
3/3 Discussion (groups assigned 1 article): Amy Heller, “A Set of Thirteenth-Century Tsakali,”
48-52; Deborah Klimburg Salter, “Lama, Yidam, Protectors,” 48-53; Dan Martin, “ Padampa
Sangye: A History of Representation of a South Indian Siddha in Tibet,” 108-23
3/5 EXAM
Mandalas and cosmic space
3/10 Read: Rob Linrothe, "The Murals of Mangyu Esoteric Buddhist Iconography," 92-102
3/12 No class, reading day for Kim by Rudyard Kipling
3./17-19 SPRING BREAK


Place and Space: defining Tibetan art
3/24 discussion of Kim
3/26 discussion continue
Mapping “Tibetan Culture”
3/31 Shalu and the development of sects and mandalas (writing assignment 1 due)
4/2 read Harris, chapter 2, “the Younghusband Mission and Tibetan Art”
4/7, 4/9, view in class ‘Pad Yatra” acclaimed film about Tibetan lama and his promotion of
ecological awareness through a practice walking thru Himalayan terrain
Tibetan Art: Exhibition and Ethics
4/14, 4/16 Group Presentations
1 day each for sites: Gyantse and Shigatse Groups present conclusions about the available
information on these selected sites in the southern Tibetan province of Tsang, using scanned
chapters from Michael Henss, The Cultural Monuments of Tibet, the Central Regions, vol. II.
The Southern Tibetan Province of Tsang (New York, 2014). Book will also be on reserve in the
Fine Arts Library (DS786 H46 2014.)
4/21, 4/23 Group Presentations- discuss selected work from exhibition: Robert Thurman and
Marilyn Rhie, Wisdom and Compassion: the Sacred Art of Tibet (New York, 1991)
4/28, read: Annie Hall, “Ethical Considerations in the Treatment of a Tibetan Sculpture,” 10-13;
Chandra Reedy, “The Opening of Consecrated Tibetan Bronzes with Interior Contents:
Scholarly, Conservation, and Ethical Considerations,” 13-34 OR Chandra Reedy, “Religious and
Ethical Issues in the Study and Conservation of Tibetan Sculpture,” 41-50
 4/30 Exam
5/5, read Harris, chapter 5, “The Tibet Museum in Exile”
5/7 Towards the future & the image of Tibetan art (writing assignment 2 due)
Due Dates
2/20 Quiz
3/5 Exam I
3/31Writing Assignment 1
4/30 Exam II
5/7 Writing Assignment II
