                                 GENDER AND MEDIA CULTURE
                                  Radio-Television-Film 328c
                                  Cross-Listed with WGS 324
                                          Summer 2020
                                               Online
TEACHING TEAM
Professor: Dr. Jennifer McClearen, Dept. of Radio-Television-Film
Teaching Assistant: Katrina Margolis
Teaching Assistant: Brett Siegel
                              Note: This syllabus is subject to revision!
           Please check Canvas and your email frequently for any updates to the course.


COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course provides an introduction to the critical and theoretical analysis of gender (femininities
and masculinities) in media (film, television, new and emerging media). Students will engage
dominant and oppositional practices of media production, representation, and reception to
investigate the sociocultural mechanisms that shape individual and collective notions of gender in
our media-saturated environment. Paying particular attention to wider questions of power, politics,
and identity, students will read key texts in cultural, media, and communication studies, as well as
influential theories within gender, feminist, and transgender studies. Although primarily focused on
the mediated construction of gender, this course insists on an intersectional approach that
examines gender in conjunction with race, class, sexuality, nation, and generation.
REQUIRED TEXTS
All readings for this course are linked on the Canvas modules pages. There is no required textbook
for the course.
SCREENINGS
The screenings in this class are required course material, like assigned reading in a literature course.
Some of these screenings will be on Netflix, Hulu, or available for rent on Amazon (or elsewhere), so
you are responsible for ensuring you have access to those sites. Consider these the same as
purchasing a textbook for the class (although they will be considerably less expensive even if you
don’t already have access to these streaming services).
ASSIGNMENTS
I: Quizzes. (30% of final grade).
         There will be four quizzes* throughout the term. Each quiz will consist of 25 multiple choice
         questions based on the modules (which include mini lectures, readings, video clips, and
         screenings). The quizzes will be “open book” and “open note,” meaning that you can use
         ressources on Canvas and your own notes to take the quizzes. The quiz will be open for a
         24-hour period and you will have 1 hour to take the quiz (students with test timing
         accommodations may have additional time). *Note that the first quiz will be open longer
         and will only consist of 16 questions.
II. Engagement Activities. (20% of final grade).
         Engagement activities are opportunities for you to actively engage course content. These
         could be one-question InstaPol quizzes on the mini lectures or sharing your insights
         individually or with your classmates on the discussion board. Your two lowest engagement
         activities scores will be dropped.
III. Group Project Part 1: Photo Essay (20% of final grade)
         You will analyze found images of a gender and media culture topic that interests you using
         concepts, theories, and discussions from this course. This activity will be done in groups of


         two. The photo essay is essentially a first draft of your final video essay (see description
         below). You will select 8-10 images that help you argue a major thesis about some aspect of
         gender in the media. You’ll also provide written descriptions of the images that includes an
         introduction, body, and conclusion. More information on this assignment is on the Canvas
         assignment page.
IV: Final Group Project Part 2: Video Essay (30% of final grade)
         Your final project for this class will be a 5-minute video essay and will be completed with the
         same partner and on the same topic as your photo essay. A video essay is similar to a final
         paper in that you have to use analysis skills to make a claim about a particular media
         artifact. The assignment requires you to incorporate photos, video, and your own voices
         into the video essay. This assignment will be completed in pairs. You do not need to have
         experience in video essays to do this assignment well and there will be dedicated class time
         for learning video editing/how to do video essays. The assignment is divided into three
         parts.
              A.  A virtual meeting with your TA to discuss the video essay
              B.  A 5-minute video essay
              C.  Feedback on other students’ videos
              D.  Evaluation Your Peer Partner and Self
         More information on this assignment is on the Canvas assignment page.
POLICIES AND RESOURCES
Syllabus Revisions: Changes to the course schedule and assignments may occur due to unforeseen
circumstances; please make sure you check Canvas frequently for updates.
Grading system: This class will be graded using the following letter grade system: A (94%+), A-(90-
93%), B+ (87-89%), B (84-86%), B- (80-83%), C+ (77-79%), C (74-76%), D (60-69%), and F (less than
60%). Final grades that are .5 and above will be rounded up.
Access and Accommodation: Your experience in this class is important to me, and it is the policy
and practice of the University of Texas to create inclusive and accessible learning environments
consistent with federal and state law. Please inform me early in the first weeks of the semester if
you have a learning difference or other issue that could affect your performance in this class. The
University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Inclusion: Consideration for each other is very important in this classroom. This includes being
respectful of diversity of all kinds: race, ethnicity, sex and gender, sexual orientation,
ability/disability, among others. The diversities that each of us bring to the classroom allow us to be
exposed to other points of view. Please show consideration for each other, and be open to listening


to new perspectives and ideas. If you have any concerns about any of these issues within this class,
please let me know as soon as possible. Conversations will remain confidential unless you request
otherwise. Alternatively, students seeking support around these issues can find more information
and resources
Attendance: Each week we will have pair and group activities that will help you engage more
deeply with course content. Although attendance is not specifically required, active engagement is
a portion of your grade and a major factor in your learning. If you must be absent, please check
with a classmate to find out what you have missed.
Late assignments. For purposes of fairness for all students, you will be given a reasonable amount
of time to complete all assignments. Late assignments will be subject to a grade penalty.
Grace Policy: Time-bank options. Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In
an effort to accommodate any unexpected, unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks”
into our course. You do not have to utilize this policy, but if you find yourself struggling with
unexpected personal events, I encourage you to contact me as soon as possible to notify me that
you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy one of two ways (please choose, and let me
know):
              ● You may have a two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
              ● You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments
Mutual Respect: We will be talking about such loaded topics as gender and sexism in the media
industries and American society. We will also discuss how other identities such as race, sexuality,
class, ability, and other differences are portrayed in the media. In this endeavor, one of my main
responsibilities is to ensure that the virtual classroom is a space in which everyone can feel safe,
speak up, and feel respected. I don’t expect that we’ll always agree or that conversations will
always be comfortable for everyone. In fact, I encourage discussion and debate. What I do ask, is
that you engage with me and with each other with attentive listening and mutual respect. If
discomfort ever gives way to fearing for one’s emotional or physical safety, then please address
these concerns with me immediately.
Academic Honesty: Work turned in by a student should be solely her/his own work. Any time an
outside source is utilized in the writing of a student paper and not properly acknowledged, this is a
form of plagiarism. Plagiarism, cheating on an assignment or exam, or other academic misconduct
will not be tolerated and results in severe sanctions, which can include failing the course or
expulsion from the university. Please don’t put yourself in this position. For more information on
scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Writing Support: I encourage you to seek writing assistance from the Moody College Writing
Support Program or the University Writing Center. The Moody College Writing Support Program,
located at BMC 3.322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to students seeking to improve
their writing in all fields of communication, including film and television studies. Students may book
half-hour appointments at moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting or drop in during all stages of


the writing process. The University Writing Center, located in Learning Commons, PCL 2.330, also
offers individualized assistance to students who want to improve their writing skills. There is no
charge, and students may come in on a drop in or appointment basis. They are at 512-471-6222 and
uwc.utexas.edu.
Counseling Support: Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a
successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is
getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
     ● Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC)
         M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
     ● CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     ● CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
         M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
     ● Brief assessments and referral services
     ● Mental health & wellness articles -cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
     ● MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
     ● Classes, workshops, & groups -cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Title IX Reporting. Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and
stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning
and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs
in our community, the university can:
             1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
                harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that
are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or
staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official
report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting
options and resources, visit the Title IX Office website or contact them by email at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
COURSE SCHEDULE


Gender and Media Culture will meet as an asynchronous class, which means that there’s a degree
of flexibility over when you complete each module. For example, you could do all the modules for
the week on Monday and Tuesday or you could complete them on a Monday through Friday
schedule. The one thing you will have to keep up with is the engagement activity deadlines that
correspond with particular modules and making sure you complete the modules before the next
quiz. Here are the quiz dates and other major deadlines:
     ●   Friday June 5: Syllabus and Canvas Quiz Due
     ●   Friday June 12: Foundations Quiz Due
     ●   Monday June 22: Representation Quiz Due
     ●   Tuesday June 30: Media Production and Audiences Quiz Due
     ●   Wednesday July 1: Photo Essay Due
     ●   Thursday July 9: Video Essay Due
     ●   Friday July 10: Video Essay Feedback Due
Although you are free to complete the modules anytime before the engagement activities are due
or before each unit’s quiz, here’s a recommended schedule in moving through the material at a
steady pace on a Monday through Friday schedule.
Introductions:
         Thursday, June 4: Course Overview + All Pre-Class Technical Modules
Unit 1: Foundations
         Friday, June 5: Syllabus and Canvas Quiz Due + Gender, Sex, and Sexuality 101
         Monday, June 8: Gender Performativity
         Tuesday, June 9: Mythical Norms
         Wednesday, June 10: Intersectionality
         Thursday, June 11: Feminisms
         Friday, June 12 Gazes
         Sunday June 14 Foundations Quiz Due
Unit 2: Representation
         Monday, June 15: Representation
         Tuesday, June 16: Hegemonic Masculinities and Emphasized Femininities
         Wednesday, June 17: Representing Women of Color
         Thursday, June 18: Representing Men of Color
         Friday, June 19: LGBTQ Representation
         Monday, June 22: Representation Quiz Due
Unit 3: Media Production and Audiences
         Tuesday, June 23: Gender Inequality Behind the Camera
         Wednesday, June 24: What is a Photo Essay?
         Thursday, June 25: Selling Feminism
         Friday, June 26: The Glamor Industries and the “Pink Ghetto”
         Monday, June 29: DYI Feminist Media Production


        Tuesday, June 30: Gendered Audiences and Fans + Media Production and Audiences Quiz
        Due
Unit 4: Topics in Gender and Media Culture + Photo and Video Essays
        Wednesday, July 1: Photo Essay Due
        Thursday, July 2: Sports and Gender
        Friday, July 3: Topic # 2
        Monday, July 6 What is a Video Essay?
        Tuesday, July 7 Pair Group Meetings with TAs + Video Essay Tutorial (optional)
        Wednesday, July 8 Pair Work on Video Essays
        Thursday, July 9 Video Essay Due
        Friday, July 10 Video Essay feedback due
