                                                                                       1
Professor Indrani Chatterjee (ichatterjee@austin.utexas.edu)
Fall 2019
HIS 364G and ANS 361 (special numbers # 31685 and #38420)
Course Title: Slavery & South Asian History (GC)
Class Times: TTh 5 pm – 6.30 pm
Classroom: GAR 1.126
Office: GAR 3.412
Office Hours: Monday 1.30 -4 pm (or by appointment).
       Description: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures
courses are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the
United States. You should therefore expect to stretch your mental horizons to
comprehend the coherence of practices, beliefs, and histories of non-US groups. In
the case of the Indian subcontinent, these practices and beliefs have specially long
and complex histories. In learning about them we will develop skills of critical
reflection on our own cultural and social locations in the present.
       This is a three-part course. The first two parts use selected case-studies to
cover an entire social-political structure between the third century BCE and the late
eighteenth century. Students will learn about the ways in which a range of destitute
people, orphans, debtors and criminals were incorporated into complex and
variable social and political institutions. They will learn about key legal provisions
about the treatment of slaves recommended by ancient governments in the
subcontinent. They will also read about military and political structures that used
slaves in the medieval period. These structures, associated with the coming of
Islam in the subcontinent, enabled slaves to establish relationships with each other
as well as with their masters and mistresses. In the third part of the course, we will
study the impact of British colonial abolition from the late eighteenth to the
twentieth century. Students will understand the ways in which legal, political and
commercial processes, associated with global histories of European empires,
contributed to the large-scale shift in slave-using structures, the meanings of
slavery and the privileges and protections that slaves had earlier enjoyed.
       All readings will be available on Canvas.
Requirements:
1) Attendance and Class Participation (for 40 points of grade): Attendance
sign-in will occur within the first 10 minutes after the official beginning of the


                                                                                      2
class. Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination
schedules. It is the policy of UT-Austin that you must notify each of your
instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be
absent to observe a religious holy day. A student who has more than 2 absences
(includes religious holidays, personal illness, jury duty etc) in the semester will
lose a percentage point for every absence from the third one. A student who is late
more than twice in the semester or leaves class early more than twice also begins to
lose percentage points from the third such occurrence.
2) Written Work: (for a total of 60 grade points divided thus: 10 points for one 2-
5-page essay written at home, 20 points on a 5-page essay with summary and
analytic discussions of readings, 10 points for peer review exercises, final 20
points for an essay written in class on the last day.
Grading Policies: LETTER GRADES OF A, B, C, D, F will be given in this
course in the following fashion: total of 90-100= A; 80-89=B; 70-79=C; 60-69=D;
Under 50 a Fail or F.
All comments on reading and discussion submissions will be assessed on the basis
of three criteria: 1) How closely and carefully has the student read the material and
understood it? 2) How well can the student analyze, compare and synthesize
contradictory or comparative materials, reflect upon her/his own learning? 3) How
precisely, clearly and grammatically can the student express her/his thoughts in
language, and how does s/he base this in evidence, reading? The assessment of
oral discussion shifts in its emphasis from the beginning to the end of the semester.
IN the beginning, a student’s ability to speak coherently will be sufficient; by the
middle, a student’s ability to synthesize old and new readings, to remember the
beginning and be able to refer to it in discussion will be favorably assessed; in the
end, bringing all the older readings to bear upon the latest readings or viewing
materials and being able to discuss these in a clear and mature fashion will be
rewarded.
The components of an organized essay are 1) a strong thesis statement in the
introductory paragraph, 2) clear, connected and consistent paragraphs in an
organized body of text, with clear opening statements in each 3) a succinct
conclusion. Good spelling will count as well as grammatical writing, appropriate
vocabulary and active-voice construction.
All essays should be submitted on time. Delayed submissions, except under
certified medical or legal emergency, receive reduced grades (docked 1 point for
each 24 hours). Students can however earn extra credit (by 1 point each session for
a maximum of 5 points) by attending – and writing a one page report on - any of


                                                                                       3
the talks organized by the South Asia Institute on Thursdays, in the Meyerson
Conference Room, Hogg Building. The schedule of talks is available at
http://www.utexas.edu/cola/insts/southasia/ Your instructor will be presenting her
research work there on 3rd October between 3.30 and 5pm. If you can attend and
report on it and show how it develops your thinking in any way, you will get an
additional 2 marks on the course.
Please note also that all discussions of grades will only be done during office
hours, within seven days of the receipt of the grade. Such discussions will not
be conducted via email correspondence or on the telephone.
Policy on special accommodations. Students who need special accommodations
should notify the instructor within the first ten days of the semester, in person,
preferably during office hours in private. Such students should present the
instructor with a letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities
(SDD) Office. To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be
provided, students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
Read more at:           http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Academic integrity. University of Texas at Austin has an Honor Code. Students
who violate the Honor Code, and the University rules on scholastic dishonesty, are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
will be strictly enforced. This includes plagiarism, that is the use of other people’s
oral or written work without acknowledgement or citation, and extends to the
cutting and pasting of material from all web-sites.
       Read details at:    http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
Canvas and laptop/messaging device policy. The course web site on Canvas will
be used to post assignments and make announcements relating to the course –
check the site regularly for new information. It is your responsibility to maintain a
functioning email account linked to Canvas. Read university policy at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify/html
All students have the right to learn in a supportive environment: The use of a
laptop should not distract others and is acceptable during lectures or class
discussions only for note-taking or instructor-directed web-surfing. All mobile


                                                                                      4
messaging devices must be turned off and stored away during class. The instructor
retains the right to ask students to shut off devices that are hindering her teaching
or other students’ learning.
SCHEDULE OF READINGS
29 Aug, 2019: Introducing self, students- region and course. Definitions and
Distinctions- distinguish between slave as human wealth and slavery as a
fluctuating condition.
3 Sept, 2019: Histories of Caste, Family and Work in Ancient Records: Read
Arthashastra Book III, Chapter XIII, Rules Regarding Slaves and Laborers, PDF
on Canvas.
5 Sept, 2019: Medieval Methods of Acquisition and Use: Read 1) Daud Ali, ‘War,
Servitude and the Imperial Household’ PDF on Canvas + 2) Dominic Goodall,
‘Rudraganika: Courtesans in Siva’s Temple’, PDF on Canvas. In class we will
clarify histories of early medieval gender, households, religion, marriage, lay-
clerical divides in early India.
Prepare First Essay (minimum of 2 pages, maximum of 5 pages) comparing
your ideas of slavery with the ideas found in classical Indian legal texts such as
Arthashastra as well as in the histories put together by Ali and Goodall. Would
you characterize the systems of slave-holding found in the subcontinent between
the 3rd and 13th century as ‘open’ systems? Submit electronically on Sunday, 8th
Sept, by 11.59 pm
10 Sept---: 13th – 15th century developments: women and issue of caste: Read 1)
Pushpa Prasad, ‘Female Slavery in Thirteenth Century Documents’ + 2) Donald
Davis trans. Excerpt of Smritichandrika, a 13th century text.
12 Sept: Class Lecture on Coming of Islam, 8th- 14th century, and emergence of
Islamic laws.
17 Sept: Sultanates and the making of slave-to-noble careers. Read 1) Sunil
Kumar, ‘When Slaves Were Nobles’ on Canvas
19th Sept: Parallel Lives for Women in Courts: Read 1) Ramya Sreenivasan,
Drudges, Dancing Girls on Canvas
24th -26th Sept: Screening of Mughal-e-Azam in class. IF WE DO NOT FINISH
WATCHING THE FILM, YOU WILL BE EXPECTED TO FINISH IT ON 26th
September. BUT watch with the following questions in mind: 1) in what ways does
the plot of the film appear to confirm or/and contradict your earlier readings on
slave-women, or slave-biographies? 2) what aspects of your readings are not


                                                                                     5
touched upon in the film? 3) offer historically valid, plausible explanations for the
interpretations that the film’s modern director makes of the historical past. These 3
questions are to be addressed in the Second Essay you will write at home, a first
draft and outline of which is to be brought to class for review and discussion
on Oct 1 (The minimum for the outline is 1 page. The minimum for the final
second essay is 5 pages).
1st Oct.: Discussion and Peer Review of Film and Readings. This is the point
where students learn of the craft of reading multiple sources, matching one against
the other, and comparing ‘sources’. Take home the peer review comments and
begin writing 2nd essay for submission on 20th October electronically
3rd Oct: European Traders in 17thc-Subcontinent. Read 1) Markus Vink, ‘The
World’s Oldest Trade: Dutch Slavery and Slave Trade in the Indian Ocean in the
Seventeenth Century’, PDF on Canvas.
8th Oct---: What did the Europeans Do with Indian Ocean Slaves? Read 1) Titas
Chakraborty, ‘Household Workers’ PDF on Canvas
15th Oct: Did something change in this moment of European employment of
Indian-originating slaves in the 18th century? Read 1) Slave Documents (for the
trial of Lieutenant Arctander for murder of a slave-boy).
17th October: Instead of coming to class, each student will use the time to WRITE
the second essay. The essay will be submitted electronically to ichatterjee@
austin.utexas.edu by Sunday 20th October 11.59 pm.
22 Oct : Class Lecture on Colonial Judicial and Administrative Regimes of
Late 18th –Early 19th centuries.
24 Oct: Growth of Racialism: Read 1) Indrani Chatterjee, ‘Coloring Subalternity’,
PDF on Canvas.
29th Oct: Motors behind Colonial Abolition on Indian Ocean: Control of the Seas
in the 19th c 1) Read Ed Alpers, ‘On Becoming a British Lake’,
31st Oct: The Creation of Secondary Racialised Labor Forms: Asian Indenture
Read 1) Lomesh Roopnarine, Indo-Caribbean Indenture PDF
5th Nov: Indenture and Women : 2) Gaiutra Bahadur, Coolie Woman, 41-50 and
75-101, PDF on Canvas
7th Nov: Later 19th century Colonial Abolitionism as Method of Territorial
Domination: Read 1) Andrea Major, ‘Rajput and Maratha Princely States’ PDF.


                                                                                    6
12th Nov Abolitionism as ‘Rescue’ of Children: Read 1) Jessica Hinchy ‘The
Eunuch Archive’
14th Nov: Educated Indian Middle Classes Learn Abolitionist Politics: Read
Devesh Soneji, ‘Whatever Happened to the South Indian Nautch’, 70-111, on
Canvas.[ The Instructor might change the readings here depending on her
assessment of the class progress at this point ]
19th Nov: The end of Indenture of 1919. Read 1) Bahadur, Coolie Woman, pp 131-
160, PDF on Canvas and compare with 2) Charu Gupta on Indenture, PDF on
Canvas.
21st Nov: Internationalisation of Justice and the Policing of Immigration: The
Scare on ‘White Slave Trafficking’. Read 1) UN Laws on Prostitution of 1959,
PDF on Canvas.
26th Nov: Decolonisation and the Policing of Immigrant Laborers: the trouble with
‘Trafficking’. Read 1) Sarah Bernstein, Carcereal Feminism and Anti-Trafficking,
PDF on Canvas.
27th-30th Nov (incl) THANKSGIVING
3rd Dec: Watch Children Without Childhood in class and discuss.
5th Dec: Write an essay in class assessing the extent to which learning about older
systems of slavery in the Indian subcontinent enable you to think about the history
of transatlantic abolitionist movements in the late nineteenth and twentieth century.
