                             ADV345J Media Foundations
Section I [06340, 06345, 06350, 06355] & Section II [06360, 06365, 06370, 06375]
                                           Spring 2019
Lisa Dobias, Associate Professor of Practice
BMC 4.360                                               Dobias@austin.utexas.edu
Section I, WAG 101 TTh 9:30 – 11:00 a.m.                Office Hours: TTh 12:30 – 2:00
Section II, GEA 105 TTh 3:30 – 5:00 p.m.                    & by appointment
Teaching Assistants                                     TA office hours posted in your lab syllabus.
Duo Wang – buduo.wang@utexas.edu
Sujin Kim – sujin.kim@utexas.edu
Qin Gu – guqin@utexas.edu
                            Welcome to a Semester of Discovery
Each semester provides new challenges, new experiments, and new learning for all of us. As you
transition fully into your upper-division education in your major, it is critical that we challenge you
to really explore who you are and how you think. Beyond delivering new course content, and
developing new skill sets, this course is designed to assist you in discovering what your post-
graduation life might look like, and to start bringing that future to life.
            Requirements for Our Not-so-Typical Introductory Course
Canvas: https://courses.utexas.edu
All materials, including your syllabus, class schedule, lecture notes, practice assignments and grades
will be posted on this site under the link for this class. You will need a UT-EID to access your
materials. Please note that important, relevant news articles and supplementary video links will be
uploaded throughout the semester as they come up. Also, please note that for ease all of our
sections have been grouped together on Canvas under one lead unique. To be sure you have your
correct unique number for lab meeting times and other important items, please check your official
course schedule, not the unique number posted on Canvas.
Calculator: A basic function calculator is needed. Calculators with a memory key are
recommended. Each student is responsible for bringing their own calculator to exams.
Project Materials: You will be completing a major three-part team project in this class. You and
your group are together responsible for the costs associated with the producing, printing, binding
and presenting of this work.
Regular Lab Attendance and Participation: Once lab begins, you will be expected to attend
regularly participate and contribute. This will be a major grade component.
An Open Mind & A Good Attitude: Media is the hot spot of the communications industry today.
As a core required course, this course will be very applicable to your future career in
communications, regardless of your area of expertise.


                                             Course Flags
Writing Flag: This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give
students experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from
your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork,
and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
Quantitative Reasoning Flag: This course also carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag.
Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed to equip you with skills that are necessary for
understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your adult and
professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
                                            Course Overview
In addition to carrying two flags, this is a not-so-typical course because this is a not-so-typical
time in our industry and in your career as a student. The fields of advertising and PR, particularly
the media side of things, are some of the most dynamic and rapidly transforming industries in
existence. On every front, change defines the reality of how consumers consume, participate in,
contribute to, and control the media landscape today. It is essential that all of our students,
regardless of their future job title or description, have a working knowledge of and appreciation for
the world of media where our customers come into direct contact with our brands. It is also critical
for our students to understand that future professionals in advertising and PR, they will have a place
in shaping the course of the media industry unlike any generation before them. For this reason, they
must have a firm grasp on the foundations of media strategy plus a knack for experimentation in an
ambiguous and harsh environment. Finally, it is critical that our students fully understand all
potential areas for their future, including work within agencies, but also on the capacities of media
providers and clients alike. “Typical” simply just won’t cut it.
Our course is designed to provide you with a broad-based consumer-centric exposure to media.
We will help you create a solid foundation for thinking and doing that is transferable across both
existing and emerging contexts. Class lecture, practice work, outside activities, exams and projects
will cover both a theoretical exploration of media and practical application to be sure you are ready
for not only your first job out of college, but for the one you want 5…10…20 years from now.
All lecture notes, readings, videos, and other course materials will be uploaded to your class Canvas
for your review and use. Feel free to download and take notes directly on lecture slides. Note that a
summary of the daily notes is presented in most lectures in the “notes pages” section of the
PowerPoint for each conversation. The use of laptops is encouraged in class, but please refrain from
extra-curricular online activities during lecture as this is highly distracting to others around you.
Course Prerequisites: ADV 318J, STA 309 (or equivalent). Be sure you have received full credit for
this prerequisite, or else you may be dropped by the department on the 12th class day. If you have
any questions, please visit with your College of Communication Advisor as soon as possible.


                                          Course Objectives
This course is more than learning about media. It is about becoming a fierce critical thinker who
has curiosity at your core. Building discovery and analytical problem solving into your DNA
will make you a stronger media/PR/creative/account/everything else professional. To get that
process started, by the end of this semester, you will:
–   become even smarter about how paid, earned and owned media environments work
–   experience a completely different side of the advertising and PR business
–   build a new paradigm and vocabulary so that you can talk more proficiently both now with your
    classmates and intern supervisors, and later with your future clients and colleagues
–   understand the ongoing theories and processes involved in developing robust consumer
    communities and relationships
–   better interpret data and other research findings, some of which will contradict
–   be able to identify and strategically evaluate various options
–   become more comfortable using both qualitative and quantitative support for your decisions
    and ideas
–   learn the basic tools and critical thought process involved in developing a communication
    platform, media strategy, and detailed plan of implementation
–   practice these basic tools and strategies
–   feel more prepared for a future that will most definitely require you to determine, measure,
    and meet quantifiable goals
–   have some fun!
                                             Course Format
There are five distinct sections of this course as follows:
Part I: Navigating Today’s Media Environment
Part II: Finding Answers to Media Questions
Part III: Determining Your Media Vision & Accountability
Part IV: Making Your Vision a Reality
Part V: Selling In Your Ideas
These sections are detailed in an accompanying daily plan of attack also posted on Canvas for
your regular reference. In general, each of course sections will come to a close with a culminating
event – either an exam or project presentation.
Successful media strategy development is a function of both art and science.
The Science of Media
• Exams: Three exams will cover materials presented in lectures, assigned readings, homework
and any guest lectures. Exams are primarily hands-on application in the form of calculation
questions. Portions of the exams will also combine short answer, true/false and multiple choice, etc.
Course exams will be administered in three evenings outside of our regularly scheduled class
in a specially designated room. If you have another documented UT conflict, or qualify for
documented accommodations, you are responsible for notifying your instructor in person by
Friday, February 15 so that proper arrangements may be made.


There will be no make-up exams given throughout the semester with the exception of students
experiencing a serious personal injury or illness that is documented by a recognized professional.
Students who are affected in this way must notify me within 24 hours of the exam and must provide
the appropriate documentation upon their return. Many issues will also need to go through the
approval process via UT Student Services. Students with a serious, on-going illness that impacts
their ability to regularly participate in class or exams should consult with me immediately regarding
options to be considered.
All students should be aware of the following exam policies:
    • Make up exams are rare, only granted for those with valid excuses as just described.
    • Students must bring their UT student ID and their own calculators to the tests. Students
        cannot share calculators, and cell phones or other personal devices are not allowed as
        substitutes.
    • While taking exams, only exam papers, approved calculators, pencils and highlighters may
        be on a student’s desk.
    • Full scholastic honesty is expected. Any dishonest activities are strictly punished according to
        UT’s policy on scholastic dishonesty.
    • Exams will not be returned to students, but will be available for review during office hours.
    • Students will not be able to copy any materials off of exams while reviewing them.
    • Students entering the exam late may be denied the opportunity to take the exam.
    • Students will not be allowed to return to the exam after leaving the room.
• Final Exam: A comprehensive optional final will be delivered on the UT assigned final exam
date, time and place for this class as follows:
        Section I: Wednesday, May 15, 9:00 – 12:00 p.m.
        Section II: Monday, May 20, 9:00 – 12:00 p.m.
        Please note, the university assigned final exam dates and times are subject to change by the
university administration. If you miss an exam during the regular semester, your final will replace that
“0”. A higher grade on the optional final can also be used to replace the lowest of the other three
exams in the class.
• Practice Assignments: There will be optional practice assignments located on-line to help you
study throughout the semester. You will be able to check your work via on-line answer keys.
Although practice assignments in this course are optional, meaning there is no direct grade
implications for completing them, they are very highly recommended!
The Art of Media
• Strategic Communications Plan: This team project is designed to help you apply the concepts
learned in class and to provide you with the opportunity to create an inspired strategic plan. You will
be required to devise a complete plan for a real product or service. Details about the project will be
provided on-line and discussed in class when the time comes. Your plan will be broken into two
distinct sections this semester. Both a printed copy and .pdf file will be required by the due date
and time to be considered “submitted”. No late work is accepted! At the end of the project your
agency will deliver a pitch of your plan to the class in 10-minute presentation.


• Peer Evaluations: Your individual grade for each portion of the project is subject to
adjustments according to your average peer evaluation for that portion. Your individual portion and
resulting final project grade will be significantly lowered by poor peer evaluations. If your agency
does not think you have put forth the same amount of effort and the same quality of work as they
have throughout the length of the project, your peer evaluation will negatively influence your final
grade.
Example: Your average peer evaluation [95%] x the total group project score = Individual score.
Please see your on-line project materials for helpful pointers on dividing up the project work and on
working with teams in general. Your on-line project materials will also include the actual peer
evaluations that each of you will complete, so you will know from the get-go the criteria used by
your peers to evaluate you. This is serious. If you have any problems with your group or a
particular group member, you need to address and resolve it immediately. If you don’t, the
end result can be devastating.
Bringing it All Together
Beginning the third week of class we will meet during your regularly scheduled lab sections to
review and enhance course materials and provide you with a comprehensive look at the world of
media well beyond the 40 acres. In addition to media theories and fundamentals, you will complete
a series of online activities most weeks. In addition, you will have two individual assignments
designed to help you further advance in your individual writing, presenting, and young professional
thinking. These larger assignments will be detailed more in a lab schedule which will be distributed
the first week of lab.
Given the size of our class, it is required that you register for the lab section you regularly
attend. You must attend the section for which you are registered. Each student will receive
one lab absence which will apply as lab “sick days” or misses needed for other reasons, but
there are no additional make up labs. A detailed lab schedule will be distributed at the first
lab session of the semester.
                 Lab section meeting details are as follows:
                 Unique            Meeting Time                  Location
                 06340             Th 4:00 – 5:00 p.m.           BMC 4.206
                 06345             W 2:00 – 3:00 p.m.            BMC 4212
                 06350             M 5:00 – 6:00 p.m.            BMC 4.206
                 06355             T 3:30 – 4:30 p.m.            BMC 4.206
                 06360             W 2:00 – 3:00 p.m.            BMC 3.206
                 06365             M 4:00 – 5:00 p.m.            BMC 4.206
                 06370             M 5:00 – 6:00 p.m.            BMC 4.208
                 06375             Th 5:00 – 6:00 p.m.           BMC 4.206
Making up lab attendance or swapping lab sections unofficially is not permitted. Attendance
will be taken in lab each week. You are expected to be present when role is taken and throughout
the entire lab session. If you are not then you will be marked as absent for grade purposes.
Together, your attendance and participation in lab, along side of your scores on weekly activities
and individual lab assignments will determine your final lab grade.


  Finally, you are required to complete and submit the online Course Instructor Survey for your and
  your lab TA at the end of this semester. More details will be provided via our Canvas course site.
                                                 Grade Scale
                            Component                      Weighted Value
                            Exams                                  50%
                            Lab & Associated Activities            15%
                            Part I – Strategic Media Plan          15%
                            Part II – Strategic Media Plan         15%
                            Presentation                           5%
                                                                   100%
Grades in this course are not negotiable to give all students the same opportunities. There are no
“angel points” at the end of the semester to be fair to all students, and there are no guaranteed
curves or grade distributions. We are under the system of +/-. The following scale will be used to
determine the general breaks for final grades. Please note, in order for you to progress on to your
next major course our department requires you to make a C or better in all major courses,
including this one. If you are not an Ad or PR major and are taking the course CR/NC, you must
make at least the grade of 69.5% to earn credit or a letter grade of CR.
                               Weighted Score              Letter Grade
                                     92.5-100%                     A
                                     89.5-92.4                     A-
                                     86.5-89.4                     B+
                                     79.5-86.4                     B
                                     76.5-79.4                     C+
                                     72.5-76.4                     C
                             ________________________A grade of C or better is required to move on
                                     69.5-72.4                     C-
                                     59.5-69.4                     D
                                     Below 59.4                    F
Extra credit opportunities may be offered on occasion throughout the semester. Extra credit could
take the form of additional individual activities or assignments, completion of practice work by
example, attendance at specific events, or may include the voluntary participation in research
studies.
It is rare for a curve to be applied in this course. However, if there is one, it will not be determined
until after optional final exam grades are in and resulting total class scores are calculated.
                               University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.


                               Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
To make sure we are all on the same page, the following details UT’s policy on academic integrity:
“Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information please visit the Student
Judicial Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.”
What does this policy mean to you in this class? If you are caught cheating in any manner on lab
write ups, exams, or plagiarizing work in your project, you will be significantly reprimanded in a
manner that correlates with the severity of the problem. This can range from being required to
repeat the course, to expulsion from the University of Texas at Austin. Please take this as seriously
as we do! Your thinking and writing must be your own.
                         Counseling and Mental Health Services
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress,
test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are
options available for support.
For immediate support:
- Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-
3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
- CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
- M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
- Brief assessments and referral services
- Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
- MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
- Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
                             Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-
6259 [voice] or 471-6441 [TTY]. If this applies to you, please let me know by Friday, February 15 so
that we can work together to best meet your accommodations.
Please note if testing accommodations are part of your approved program as detailed in your UT
documentation, you will be responsible for personally scheduling all three of your exams with the
Student Services Office. Your exams will need to be scheduled for anytime that works for you on
the next day immediately following the regularly scheduled evening exam.


                                Students with Other Conflicts
If you are experiencing any course conflicts with another official University of Texas at Austin event
or organization, or with recognized religious events or holidays, you should notify me immediately
so that we can prepare a workable solution. The official UT policy is that you must notify me at
least 14 days prior to any missed activities due to this type of conflict. Lack of planning on your
part may result in our inability to work with you.
                                             Email Policy
Please check your email for important updates from me. However, e-mail should not be
used as a crutch or in place of meeting with us. Both of your TAs and I hold office hours
to answer specific questions about course materials or projects. Please utilize these hours
rather than writing an email novel. I will not use email as a means of communicating
about project work or practice assignments only because these topics are best discussed via
conversations before, during, or after class or during office hours due to their need for clarity and
detail.
                                       Office Hours Policy
In order to see as many of you as possible, during peak periods in the semester, I may
ask you to use the sign-up sheet on my office door to secure a specific meeting time,
even during regularly scheduled office hours so that everyone’s time can be used efficiently.
Walk ups are always very welcome, but you may have to wait in line or be bumped if others have
scheduled times.
Also during peak periods, office hour visits will be limited to 10 minutes if another student or
group is waiting. If my door is closed, it is your responsibility to knock and interrupt at your
appointment time to let me know you’re there. While waiting in the hall, please make yourself
comfortable, but you are not permitted to sit or place your personal items in the pathway out of
courtesy for others and for safety reasons. If we have a scheduled meeting, you should knock on
my door to let me know you are ready.
                                Instructor Closing Comments
Warning: This class will require that you think and take personal responsibility for your
success!
Of course with any new material, there is a component of memorization. However, in this course,
memorization will only get you so far. You must learn the material and be able to apply it in order
to succeed. In other words, you must think. After all, isn’t learning to think what college is about,
particularly now that you are officially upperclassmen in your majors?
All of your TAs and I are dedicated to making sure you know how to use the materials in this
course so that you can walk out with more than you walked in with. This goes for each lecture, lab,
and activity. Please let us know how we can help make this happen for you. Don’t wait until it is too
late. We will never waste your time, so please fully partake of the learning in all that we do in here.


It is our job to make sure that you have all the information and guidance you need to learn a great
deal in this course. It is your job to see that you take full advantage of all resources and put forth
the effort needed to succeed.
            Welcome to Media Foundations. Let’s learn a ton together!
                                            Here we go!!


                                           Media Foundations Daily Plan of Attack                                  rev. 1
                                                                                                                 1.22.19
                                                              Spring 2019
I. Navigating Today's Media Environment
       Day Date    Topic                                                 Relevant Events
                   Introduction to Class and Team:
   1   T    1/22   Why this is not your typical introductory course!
   2   Th   1/24   The Scope of Media
   3   T    1/29   Media's Impact in the Marketplace
   4   Th   1/31   Digitas Campus Visit                                  Ground Hog Day this weekend
                   Video: Agencies, Clients and Vendors: What in the
       Th   1/31   World is Out There?
                   Research Introduction + Understanding Consumer
   5   T    2/5    Behavior & Responses                                  Labs start this week. Lunar New Year
                                                                         Pick Your Teammates, Review Online
                   Tracking Competitive Media Activity                   Materials, Watch Video: The Planning
   6   Th   2/7    Form Agencies in Class                                Process, Expectations and Deliverables.
II: Finding Answers to Media Questions
       Day Date    Topic                                                 Relevant Events
   7   T    2/12   Analyzing Media Vehicle & Audience Measurement
   8   Th   2/14   Working with Media Cost Data                          Happy Valentine's Day
   9   T    2/19   Wrapping up Resources & Interpretation
  10 Th     2/21   No lecture. Media Plan Work Day - Part I Push
       Th   2/21   Exam 1 - No Make Ups 7:00 - 9:00 p.m.                 Accommodations to be on 2/22
                   Developing a Solid Communication Platform +
  11 T      2/26   Targeting Schemes & Challenges
       W    2/27   Spring COC CCS Career Fair 10:00 - 3:00 p.m.          Attendance is required instead of labs.
  12 Th     2/28   Creating Message Breadth & Depth
  13 T      3/5    Measuring Success (& Failure) Today
       T    3/5    Video: Managing Media Weight + Media Optimization
                                                                         Daylight Savings Time starts this
  14 Th     3/7    Changing Protocol in the Digital World                weekend
  15 T      3/12   The Richards Group Campus Visit
                   No lecture
                   Media Plan Part I Due to BMC 4.360 by noon
  16 Th     3/14   No Late Work Accepted (both hard copy and .pdf)
III: Determining Your Media Vision & Accountability
       Day Date    Topic                                                 Relevant Events
  17   T    3/19   Happy Spring Break!                                   Spring Break
  18 Th     3/21   Happy Spring Break!                                   Spring Break
  19   T    3/26   Sweeping Trends In and Across Media Channels
       W    3/27   Exam 2 - No Make Ups 7:00 - 8:30 p.m.                 Accommodations to be on 3/28
IV. Making Your Vision a Reality
       Day Date    Topic                                                 Relevant Events
  20 Th     3/28   Geography and Media
  21 T      4/2    Scheduling Media According to Objectives
                   Performance Comparisons: CPM, CPP, CPC, ROI &
  22 Th     4/4    Others
  23 T      4/9    Allocating Media Budgets
       W    4/10   Exam 3 - No Make Ups 7:00 - 8:30 p.m.                 Accommodations to be on 4/11


                                             Media Foundations Daily Plan of Attack                               rev. 1
                                                                                                                1.22.19
                                                               Spring 2019
V. Selling Your Media Ideas
      Day Date       Topic                                                     Relevant Events
 24 Th       4/11    Special Surprise Guest Speaker Panel
                     Media Plan Part II Due to BMC 4.360 by noon
      M      4/15    No Late Work Accepted (both hard copy and .pdf)           Tax Day
 25 T        4/16    Delivering Winning Presentations
 26 Th       4/18    Presentations                                             Passover + Easter this weekend
 27 T        4/23    Presentations
 28 Th       4/25    Presentations
 29 T        4/30    Presentations
 30 Th       5/2     Presentations                                             Cinco de Mayo this weekend
 31 T        5/7     Guest Speakers
                                                                               Last Day of Classes - Attendance
 32 Th       5/9     One final meeting -- The Big announcement!                Required
Optional Final Exams per UT Administration
                     Section I 9:30 Class -                         Optional
      W      5/15    Final Exam 9:00 - 12:00 p.m.
                     Section II 3:30 Class -                        Optional
      M      5/20    Final Exam 9:00 - 12:00 p.m.
Key         Orange: Broad course sections
            Green: No organized class meeting/Holiday. On workdays, meet your instructor in her office
            Red: Meeting time required outside of regularly scheduled class
            Blue: Direct contact with the outside world. Be professionals!
Note: This schedule is subject to change. Announcements of any schedule alterations will be made in
            class as well as distributed via Canvas and email. It is the responsibility of each student to be
            aware of any such changes.
