                                               IB 350S
                              International Trade & Management
                                            Summer 2019
INSTRUCTORS:
Dr. Deirdre Mendez (deirdre.mendez@mccombs.utexas.edu)
Dr. Linda Gerber (linda.gerber@mccombs.utexas.edu)
REQUIRED MATERIALS
Texts:
     Global Business Today, 10th Edition, Charles W.L. Hill and Tomas Hult, Irwin McGraw-
         Hill, New York, New York, 2013. You will receive a loose-leaf version and the text is also
         available online. Register for the on-line version by following the registration document
         on Canvas home page.
     The Culture Solution, Deirdre Mendez, Nicholas Brealey, Boston, London, 2017. It is
         available in paperback and e-book format.
Course Materials: The on-line version of the Hill/Hult text has an effective learning tool called
LearnSmart. You are encouraged to utilize this feature which is designed to support your
understanding of course concepts. Other materials for this class are available through Canvas
(http://courses.utexas.edu).
From the Canvas site, you will have access to online versions of all course materials other than
the text. Because important course updates and communication will be made via e-mail, be
sure to check daily for e-mails.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
In today’s global economy, business professionals must understand the relationships,
institutions, and environment that underlie international commerce as well as intercultural
factors that influence international partnerships, mergers, and acquisitions. The primary
objective of this course is to extend your knowledge of the global economy so that you can be a
more effective manager in business – whether or not you actually work in a global corporation.
We hope it will also help you to be an educated citizen, understanding the major issues
impacting government policy and globalization. The topics in the class have been selected to
address both theoretical and practical dimensions of the global economy.
The course has the following objectives:
1. To give you tools to analyze and understand the global economy overall, along with the
    business environments of individual countries.
    These tools include:
     Theories related to international trade and investment
     Major indicators of global business activity
     How and where to find information regarding a country, how to analyze that information
         and how to apply it in a professional context.
2. To make you aware of the role of cultural difference with respect to:
     Your own culturally based behavior, expectations, and reactions
     Ways of analyzing cultural tendencies in other people
     Adapting your approach to others’ tendencies to accomplish business goals


3. To give you knowledge of current events in the global economy, including:
     The continuing impact of globalization
     Differing cultural, legal, economic, and political systems
     Residual impacts of the 2008-2010 financial meltdown and recovery
     The changing role of emerging markets in the global economy
     Major organizations that influence international trade
     Changing impacts of the WTO and the IMF in the global economy
     The history and role of the dollar and the euro and their long-term prospects
4. To emphasize the role of government, politics, and public policy in international business,
    and help you assess government policy, both in general and for specific pieces of regulation
    or policies.
5. To develop your knowledge of the evolution of the global monetary system and the resulting
    mechanisms and factors that influence currency exchange rates (and thus, corporate profits,
    market potential, and operational costs).
6. To increase your familiarity with the locations and names of the nations of the world and
    increase your knowledge of the economic conditions of key nations and regions in the global
    economy.
7. To relate the political, economic, and financial systems discussed in class to the history and
    status of the Czech Republic, Central and Easter Europe, along with the evolving challenges
    facing the EU.
8. MOST IMPORTANT: To encourage your perception that the global economy is interesting,
    professionally relevant and your desire to build on the knowledge you’ve gained here by
    keeping abreast of the many changes that will occur in global business during your lifetime.
    We hope you will use the knowledge and skills you gain for your personal and professional
    development.
NATURE OF THE COURSE
IB 350S combines macro (big-picture) and micro (case-level) elements. The course looks at
international business in terms of aggregate impact, general forces, and overriding theories and
less at individual management decisions. The cultural component, offers managerial strategies
that individuals can use to further business objectives.
Because the course may cover concepts that are new to you, a significant portion of the
material will be introduced through lectures and the textbook. Most of the lectures will be in
class, although some will be “mini-lectures” of 1-5 minutes available on-line. We will also assign
a few readings on different course topics in order to update material in the text, apply concepts
we are covering, and to dive a bit deeper into some selected subjects.


   HOW TO SUCCEED
   Below are our expectations for your participation. If you do these things, you will be much more
   likely to make an A in the course. Our goal is to create the best learning environment possible.
   Content Responsibilities:
1. Read the chapters and any articles assigned for the class day – BEFORE the class
   period. Make sure you check Canvas regularly for assignments for each class period. If you
   are not already familiar with issues/concepts related to international business/economics, this is
   likely to be the most important thing you can do to perform well in the course.
2. We hope you will begin to keep up with current events in business and international trade by
   regularly reading the popular business press. There are many publications that help you do
   this: The Financial Times, Business Week, Fortune, Forbes, Fast Company, the Wall Street
   Journal, and, my personal favorite, The Economist. The particular publication best for you will
   depend on your interests and professional objectives, however, the best publications for
   international business interests are The Financial Times and The Economist. We are always
   happy for you to raise issues based on what you hear/learn from articles and news stories.
3. Because discussions can make a class more relevant, you can make this a more interesting
   class by engaging in the discussions. For there to be productive discussions it is important that
   everyone have an attitude of honesty, openness, respect, and fairness. At times we may
   venture into topics where you or others have strong opinions. While you should always you
   keep an open mind and respect others’ viewpoints, you should also feel free to express your
   own opinions – whether we or others agree with you or not.
CONDUCT EXPECTATIONS
1. Arrive on time; be seated and ready to begin when the class period starts.
2. Please do not leave during class unless absolutely necessary. We will schedule breaks
   during class time. If you do need to leave, please sit close to the door and make your exit as
   inconspicuous as possible.
3. Please try to remember to turn off your cell phones before class starts.
4. Other personal technology: You may use your laptops/tablets/etc. in class to take notes, for
   exercises or for quick-time research during discussions. Please do not abuse this policy.
   Distracting any other student from the class through your device use or doing personal work/e-
   mail during class will have the same penalty as texting: 1% deduction from your final grade
   average. Multiple incidences of misuse will cause you to lose your technology privilege for the
   remainder of the semester.
5. Please keep all discussion during class public, and do not engage in individual conversations
   except when part of a class exercise. We want you to be engaged, but separate discussions
   can be a distraction for everyone.


GRADING
  Exams (average of two)                        35%
  Country Analysis of the Czech Republic        45%
         Background analysis (7%)
         Cultural analysis (20%)
         Economic analysis (8%)
         EU/Euro Attitudes report (5%)
         Final Report (5%)
  Quizzes (Best 7 of 8)                         10%
  Class Participation                           10%
  Exams: Your exam grade in the course will be determined on the basis of two exams
  given during the course. Each exam will consist of 35 multiple choice questions and
  both exams together will be worth 35% of your grade.
  Country Analysis of the Czech Republic: The purpose is to allow you to apply
  different aspects of the course material to the Czech Republic and then to analyze how
  those elements are relevant to and could impact the strategy and operations of the
  company you’ve select for your analysis. There will be four different elements to this
  assignment (Background Analysis, Cultural Analysis, Economic Analysis, and EU/Euro
  Attitudes Report). These will be followed by a Final Report which will consolidate and
  summarized these various analyses.
  For details for this assignment you should refer to the “Instructions for the Country
  Analysis of the Czech Republic” document along with the separate instructions for the
  Cultural Analysis. The entire assignment will count for 45% of your grade. The
  weighting breakdown is noted above.
         Background Analysis: In this assignment you will assess the historical, social,
         political and legal environment of the Czech Republic and apply it to the
         company you’ve selected. (7%)
         Cultural Analysis of the Czech Republic: This assignment will consist of a
         cultural analysis of Prague based on class lecture, readings and observation.
         You will assess the implications of the culture profile you have developed for
         companies operating there. (20%)
         Economic Analysis of the Czech Republic This assignment will be an
         assessment of the country’s economic environment, including its trade,
         investment, and economic relationships and their impact on your company. (8%)
         EU/Euro Attitudes Report: For this assignment you will complete interviews of
         Czech citizens to gauge their attitudes toward the EU and the Czech Republic’s
         participation in the Eurozone. The interviews will be completed in your groups.
         See the separate instructions for this assignment. (5%)
         Final Report: The final report will be a PowerPoint document which summarizes
         the various Country Analysis assignments. (5%)


Quizzes: Each class session will begin with a short quiz over the textbook reading assignments for
the day. The quizzes will be five questions, either multiple choice or true/false. The questions are not
designed to be challenging, but rather to assess whether you have read the assigned material. There
will be eight quizzes total and your quiz grade will be the best seven out of eight (i.e., we will “drop”
your lowest score).
Class Participation: Throughout the course we will have impromptu in-class discussions
related to the course and assignments. We will keep track of participation each class day.
Each instructor will give you a class participation grade for their part of the course and your
overall class participation score will be an average of the scores from each instructor.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY
All students and faculty in courses offered by the McCombs School of Business are subject to the College’s
Code of Ethics (see below and at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics). If the application
of that Code of Ethics to this class and its assignments are unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask
me for clarification.
“The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail
in the Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty for the McCombs School of Business. By teaching
this course, I have agreed to observe all of the faculty responsibilities described in that document. By
enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described in that
document. If the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any
way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website or the General Information
Catalog to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as
further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.”
Any plagiarism on the Country Analysis Assignments will be referred to the Dean of Students.
NOTE: You may NOT use cell phones, PDA’s, calculators, or any other personal technology
during exams or having them sitting out during the exam. This is for exam security.
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY POLICY
All material presented in class lectures, PowerPoint presentations, and on the website is the intellectual
property of the instructor unless otherwise copyrighted. Any reproduction or publication of this material
without prior written consent is strictly forbidden.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity
with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade
to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group,
past or present.
