                       Sports & Entertainment Law in Business
                            ADV 378S, Unique Number 06210
                             PR 378S Unique Number 06650
                                          Fall 2019
                                 BMC 3.204 / ADV 4.378A
                               Wednesday 3:30 – 6:30 p.m.
Instructor:          J. Tullos Wells (Mr. Wells or Professor)
Office Hours:        By appointment 1 hour before Class
                     210-865-3520
                     Email: twells@kronkosky.org
I. Course Aims and Objectives:
Aims
This course should provide students with a broad but good understanding of the legal
issues that arise in all aspects of the sports and entertainment business from a
communications and business perspective, as well as learning about and how to deal
with practical legal problems in advertising, public relations media and business
generally in the sports and entertainment world. The students will learn to prepare
specific crisis management or other media plans in response to case studies.
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of the course, I expect students to be able to identify and understand legal
concerns that will arise in the sports and entertainment industry for media and
management-related professionals. Additionally, those who are considering a career in
sports or entertainment should have a much better idea of what real-world and day-to-
day life as a professional or manager involved in those industries would entail. To
achieve this, students will be required to participate actively in discussions and
presentations to the class in response to specific case studies or inquiries.
II. Format and Procedures:
The classes will consist of a seminar style roundtable on select issues set forth in the
syllabus, including discussions on fact scenarios. Students will be expected to
participate in class. It is one-third of your grade. In both the lectures and any group
presentations, the Socratic Method will be utilized extensively.
During this course, I will be asking students to give feedback on how they are
responding to the class and what could be done better or differently to maximize the
useful take-away from each session. Students will have the opportunity to respond by
way of surveys as well as responding to specific questions directed during the class.
My philosophy, in this regard, is that students oftentimes have a better understanding of
what they need to be able to learn than the professor does. Rather than guess at this, I
expect my students to be helpful to me in understanding those issues.
                                               1


III. My Assumptions
I have spent over 35 years as a lawyer in the sports and entertainment field, including
over two decades as a trial lawyer. From that, I have learned that the ability to
understand and communicate crisply and clearly is of monumental importance to the
success of managers. Additionally, I have learned that the ability to build and enhance
relationships with other professionals on teams responding to crises and other strategic
situations is essential. I expect students in this class to take advantage of those
opportunities to engage in both the communication and the relationship-building
aspects of this business.
IV. Course Requirements:
     1. Class attendance and participation policy:
         I expect every student to show to me and all their colleagues the same respect
         and consideration that I will show to them. On the off-chance that a few simple
         ground rules are required, here they are:
         (a) Be punctual. Things always arise, and everyone is occasionally late. If it
             becomes a habit, in my sole discretion, you will be invited to leave the class
             and not return.
         (b) Attend. If you do not attend and participate, you will not pass. There is not
             a heavy homework schedule in this class, but while you are in class, I
             expect you to be prepared and engaged.
             Which leads to:
         (c) No electronic devices, texting, Facebooking, Snapchatting, Instagramming,
             tweeting, blogging, emailing, netsurfing, ad nauseum during class time. I
             will most often give a break during class so that I can check my emails and
             you can check yours.
         (d) We will have guest lecturers who are giving up their valuable time to share
             unique insights with you. I certainly expect nothing but courtesy and
             cooperation to each of them.
         (e) If you are having a problem in the class that is preventing you from
             performing satisfactorily, and you are unable to resolve it on your own,
             please feel free to share it with me.
         (f) Attendance – An attendance sheet will be passed around for each of you
             to sign up at the beginning or during the course of every class. This works
             on the honor system. If you have another student sign for you, or you sign
             for another student, I will find out and you will automatically receive an F.
             Please honor the honor system. As you will learn, integrity in your dealings
             with colleagues and adversaries is one of the most important traits in a
             successful professional career.
         (g) If this is not interesting and enjoyable, it is probably not worth doing. I
             intend to enjoy our time together, and hope you will as well.
         Religious Holy Days
         By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
         fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you
         must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
                                               2


         observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
         missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
    Course Readings/Materials:
         (a) Required Course Book: “Sport Law, A Managerial Approach” (3rd
    Edition) by Linda A. Sharp, Anita M. Moorman, Cathryn L. Claussen.
         (b) Recommended subscription: Street & Smith's SportsBusiness Journal
    available at www.sbjcollege.com/subscribe
         (c) URL sites will be provided for specific reading from time to time, specifically
    http://sports-law.blogspot.com.
    2. Assignments, Assessment, and Evaluation
         (a) On the Wednesday following the initial class, you will be provided an
    assignment to be read and discussed in the following week's class. Please skim
    the textbook chapters to familiarize yourself with terms and the basics of
    issues.
         (b) Students who are unprepared or miss a class will have an opportunity to
    make up for the missed assignment.
         (c) Your grade will be based on your attendance and participation, and the
    caliber of presentations, both oral and written, that you provide during the course of
    the class.
    3. Use of Canvas in Class
         In this class I use Canvas —a Web-based course management system with
         password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course
         materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit
         assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys. You can find support
         in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday,
         8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
V. Grading Procedures: Grades will be based on:
         (a) Class attendance and participation (50%). Please realize that some of this
             will be somewhat subjective, so please endeavor to make a good
             impression. Grading will be based on quality far more than quantity.
             Familiarity with the material in the text will greatly aid this.
         (b) Semester Paper (50%)
VI. Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.'
                                               3


Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code
above. I have a personal very simple honor code – if you cheat, you fail . . . or worse.
VII. Other University Notices and Policies
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a
frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the
Dean of Students at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 512 471-6441 (TTY). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from
SSD.
    §   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is
        not accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not
        readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
    §   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related
        accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the
        arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
        accessibility, etc.).
    §   Reference      SSD’s      website    for   more      disability-related   information:
        http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                               4


Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
     “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may
     not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
     including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
     education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that
     number.”
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and
assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please
be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
        § Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you
           entered the building.
        § If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first
           week of class.
        § In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class
           instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire
Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
VIII.Tentative Course Schedule: **This syllabus represents my current plans and
objectives. As we go through the semester, those plans may need to change to
enhance the class learning opportunity. Such changes will be communicated clearly
and should be expected.
                                            5


Date                          Main Topic(s) / Speakers
 8/28 Introduction to Sports and Entertainment Law; meet Professor and GA;
      Constitutional law; Role of Lawyers. CHAPTER 1
  9/4 Understanding Legal Systems as applied to Sports and Entertainment
      Industries; (a) Sources of U.S. Law; (b) Types of U.S. Law; (c) U.S.
      Court system; First Amendment Rights CHAPTER 3
 9/11 Sports Governance – Professional; Amateur, and Olympic
      CHAPTERS 11, 12, and 13.
      Guest Speak: Carl Hirsch, Managing Partner, Stafford Sports
 9/18 Crisis Management
 9/25 Labor & Employment Part One – National Labor Relations Act; Collective
      Bargaining; Roles of Agents; and Unions - CHAPTER 9; 11 and 13
 10/2 Guest Speaker: Brandon James, Asst. General Counsel, SPURS
 10/9 Labor & Employment Part Two – Fair Employment Practices & Related
      Matters CHAPTERS 4, 6, 7, 8, 10 and 14
10/16 Fundamental Tenets of Contract Law; Personal Service Agreements;
      and Labor Agreements CHAPTERS 6 and 10;
10/23 Sports/Entertainment Law and Civil Rights; History; and Title IX
      CHAPTERS 5, 6 and 7
10/30 Criminal Justice System and Sports: criminalization of on and off-field
      conduct CHAPTERS 5 and 18
 11/6 eSports
11/13 Intellectual Property; Legal and Business Issues; Technology; and
      Impact on Traditional Business Models; Industry Economics; Business
      Model Issues CHAPTER 19 and 20
11/20 Venues: CHAPTERS 15 and 16
      SEMESTER PAPER DUE IN CLASS
11/27 Holiday
                                    6


Date                      Main Topic(s) / Speakers
12/4 Course Review; Presentation of Seminar Papers
                                 7


                       A Word about Conduct in a College Classroom
To make our time together as valuable as possible, we all have to work hard at it. The
following basic principles may give us come guidelines:
  Every student has the right to learn as well as the responsibility not to deprive
                                 others of their right to learn.
                   Every student is accountable for his or her actions.
In order for you to get the most out of this class, please consider the following:
a. Attend all scheduled classes and arrive on time.
    Late arrivals and early departures are very disruptive and violate the first basic
    principle listed above.
b. Please do not schedule other engagements during this class time.
    I will try to make class as interesting and informative as possible, but I can't learn
    the material for you.
c. If you have trouble hearing the lecture or media presentation because of distractions
    around you, quietly ask those responsible for the distraction to stop.
    If the distraction continues, please let me know. It is often impossible for me to hear
    such things from my position in the classroom.
d. Please let me know immediately if you have any problem that is preventing you from
    performing satisfactorily in this class.
I am looking forward to working with you this semester.
J. Tullos Wells
Fall 2019
                                              8
