                                       Africa and Rome:
                               History, Memory, and Identity
                                C C f348 (79874), AHC f330 (79794)
                               HIS f364G (82009), MES f343 (82718)
                                 MTuWThF 11:30-1:00, CBA 4.342
Instructor: Dr. James F. Patterson (Department of Classics)
Contact: james_patterson@utexas.edu, WAG 205
Office Hours: MTuWThF 11-11:30 and 12:15 and by appointment
Course Description
This course is a history of Roman provincial North Africa with emphasis on what is now Tunisia
and northern Algeria. It is also concerned with the response to Rome’s influence in the Maghrib
both in late antiquity and today. This course is a counterbalance to typically Eurocentric narratives
that cast the Maghrib as a violent land and appropriate as European the intellectual products of
Africa that they commend. In contrast, this course wishes to hear the sometimes vocal but often
silent voices from within Africa, where Rome was another foreign city “in the lands across the
sea.” The study of the ancient Maghrib is by nature multidisciplinary and welcomes students of all
backgrounds and disciplines including Classics, History, Middle Eastern Studies, African and
Africana Diaspora Studies, and Religious Studies.
The primary literature of this history falls fairly neatly into two groups. The first, selections from
which we read in Part 1 of the course, is mainly written by Romans in Italy as Rome transitioned
from Republic to Empire in the second half of the 1st c. BCE. These works are histories of the
Carthaginian Empire and the Kingdom of Numidia written to explain how Roman imperium spread
to the Maghrib. We read these histories in light of material and other literary evidence for this early
African history and examine how Romans constructed them to justify imperialist claims in Africa.
We follow nascent trends in scholarship that look past deprecatory exonyms, such as “Punic” and
“Donatist,” and unhelpfully broad categories, such as “Libyan” and “Catholic,” to see how
communities defined themselves. We then see how a tripartite ethnographic framework operated
in literary representations of Africa for colonialist purposes, both Roman and Latin African.
The second group, selections from which we read in Part 2 of the course, is written by Africans in
Africa in the late 2nd to early 5th c. CE. Much of this literature is concerned with establishing
African identities in light of and/or despite Rome as the African “periphery” increasingly became
a center within the disintegrating Roman Empire. The extant literature reveals ethnographic
divisions within Africa: Carthage versus Numidia, Caecilianism versus Donatism, city versus
country, and Latin versus Punic. The prevailing trend in modern histories has been to conflate
these binaries largely because the Latin African sources want us to. Thus, we are presented with
an urban Caecilianist Latin-speaking Carthage versus a rural predominantly non-Latin-speaking
Donatist Numidia. Part 2 of the course unravels this literary construct using epigraphical evidence,
ecclesiological architecture, bishop lists, and other sources.
                                                   1


This course’s emphasis on cultural memory inevitably means that it is interested in reception. Part
2 of the course concerns how Africans received Roman narratives about their past. But the course
goes further. We also compare how this history and its mytho-historical figures are variously
received in modern European and, in contrast, at least one work of Maghribi literature available in
translation, Mellah’s Elissa. By filling in gaps (though we do not know which) in the fragmented
history of a disconnected ancient past, Elissa raises questions of heritage and cultural memory. It
challenges western presumptions of its own cultural continuity and offers a window into how the
modern Maghrib receives its own past.
Required Texts
F. Mellah, Elissa (trans. H. Curtis), Forty Acres Press (UT Co-op)
All other texts will be available as PDFs on Canvas
All handouts, PowerPoints, and Canvas posts are required reading
The quantity of suggested and recommended readings is extraordinarily large. If there is something
you wish to read more about, by all means let me know.
Grading and Assessment
Exams: 20% x 2 = 40%. Exams will be a blend of multiple choice, fill-in-the-blanks, short
responses, and essays.
Quizzes: 30%. Most days begin with a short quiz. Quizzes test basic factual information (maps,
names, dates), ask comprehension questions about that day’s reading to encourage sufficient
preparation, and pose interpretative questions to open class discussion. Quizzes may not be made
up even in the case of a University-approved absence, but I will drop your two lowest quizzes.
Report: 20%. Each student will write a short report on a topic of modern reception or on a theme
relevant both to antiquity and to modernity, post the report to Canvas, and present it in class. See
the end of this document for details.
Participation: 10%. This grade is meant as a reward for those who prepare assignments thoroughly
and contribute thoughtfully to class discussion.
Attendance. Students are allowed two unexcused absences. Each subsequent absence will result in
a deduction of two points from one’s final grade.
Make-Ups and Late Work
Exams may be made-up and report deadlines delayed only in the case of University-approved
documented absences. Each part of a report will lose 1 point for each day it is otherwise late.
Quizzes and participation cannot be made up even in the case of approved absences. University-
approved documentation includes a letter from a physician explicitly telling me to excuse you from
the specific hour you were absent from class that day. A prescription slip, appointment reminder,
or photograph of your severed finger is not University-approved documentation.
                                                  2


Disabilities and Accommodations
UT provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For
more information, contact SSD at 512-417-6259 or find them online at
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/. Students who use the service must provide an official
accommodation letter authorizing specific accommodations as soon as possible and before the
graded assignment in question.
Religious Holidays
If you need to miss a class or other required class activity for the observance of a religious holiday,
you must notify me at least 14 days in advance so we can make alternative arrangements for your
absence.       The        University's       Religious         Days       Policy        is      online:
http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/.
Behavioral Concerns
If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line (BCAL) to discuss your concerns by phone. This service is provided through a partnership
among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD).
Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Scholastic Dishonesty
Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a 0 on that assignment and an F for
the course. Scholastic dishonesty includes any kind of cheating, unsanctioned collaboration on
graded assignments, or submitting work that is not your own or accurately attributed to its source.
For more information, contact Student Judicial Services at 471-2841, or go to
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ acint_student.php/. Note that I will report to the SJS if I am
aware of any cheating.
Technology in the Classroom
The use of cellphones, laptops, abacuses, etc. is strictly prohibited in the classroom with the
exception of laptops used to read texts that you cannot otherwise print. If I suspect unauthorized
use of a computer or sense the presence of a cellphone, I will mark you absent.
Tentative Course Schedule
Beginning on the next page is a tentative schedule of main topics discussed each day, readings
scheduled for that day (i.e. to be read before coming to class), and report presentation days.
Nothing much should change, but some readings will contract and others expand.
                                                   3
