                              American Catastrophes, Radical Histories
                                      AMS 311S (Spring 2019)
Instructor: Nicholas Bloom (nfbloom@gmail.com)
Office Hours: Monday 11:30 - 1, Tuesday 10 - 12, and by Appointment, BUR 408
Class Meeting: M-W-F 10 – 11 AM, BUR 436A
Course Overview: Catastrophes, “events producing…violent, wide-spread change in the
order of things,” appear frequently throughout US history and the history of the Americas,
especially those created by human beings: a centuries-long system of racial slavery, a civil
war, genocide of indigenous peoples, two world wars, the degradation of natural lands, and
the mass exploitation of workers are just a few.
 Because catastrophes affect the lives and consciousnesses of so many people across so much
space and time, they invite a plethora of interpretations, from a variety of different vantage
points. Historical narrators—and these can be professional historians, but also activists,
artists, novelists, poets, elementary school teachers, high school class clowns, parents at a
dinner table, etc.—try to make sense of catastrophes by placing them within certain
narratives, under certain kinds of critical lenses. In this course, we are going to study a
selection of important catastrophes from a variety of historical vantage points that are often
given short shrift by dominant and/or popular narrators of history in American culture. In
doing so, this course aims to challenge easy notions of progress or decline that tend to
dominate popular American political discourse, and instead consider the complex causes and
effects of catastrophes without quickly integrating them into narratives which we already
“understand” as true.
This course will require that we suspend our idea of the United States as a single, unified
entity. Instead, we will study these catastrophes as events in which varieties of overlapping
groups of people, regions, state and economic powers, and ideas were brought into
tumultuous, violent contact with one another, often against their will, rarely on an equal
playing field, and almost never with an easy resolution.
On the flip side of this focus, this course will also study the some of the social, intellectual,
and imaginative creations of those groups most affected by the catastrophes we consider,
creations that often offer alternative visions or even manifestations of social life. These
“radical histories” of American catastrophe we study here will be as much about the present
and the future as they are about the past.
Essential Questions: Two key sets of questions will run throughout this course:


Firstly, why are the events/phenomena we study “catastrophes?” What are the overlapping
sets of visions, desires, material forces, and coincidences that created the catastrophe, and
how did the catastrophe effect different people and places differently? We will pay particular
attention to the ways that catastrophes interact with, shape, and destroy social power
structures, such as racial and gender categories, state power, and distribution of wealth.
Secondly, how do various groups of people respond to catastrophes? What lessons do various
actors learn from catastrophes, and how do these lessons generate responses in both the
realm of ideas and material action? Why should we study or care about the catastrophe we
are studying? How do catastrophes provoke our imaginations, and how do they inspire as
well as paralyze us? Can catastrophe be ongoing, and are human-made catastrophes
inevitable parts of civilization? Have people attempted to generate social visions of
catastrophe-less civilization?
A Note on the Readings: While some of the readings for this course will be the work of
academic historians, this course will pay special attention to the creative and political work
of activists, intellectuals, and artists not necessarily working from universities, many of them
contemporary to the catastrophes we are studying. These thinkers are generally engaged in
attempts to explain the roots of the catastrophes they describe. They are also often trying to
imagine or create cultures and societies in which catastrophe is not programmed in to the
order of things. In this sense, they represent radical responses to the catastrophes they
describe, in the original sense of the word: to get at the “root” of something. Whether or not
these writers do get to the root of the catastrophes we study will be our task to consider.
Their writings will be models for us as we investigate various catastrophe in US history.
Course Format: Leading Discussion and Reading Responses: This course will be run
primarily as discussion-based seminar, with intermittent historical lectures by the instructor
when appropriate. Since it is a discussion-based seminar, student preparation and
participation are vital and mandatory.
Leading discussion: Throughout the course, you will be required to help lead discussion one
time. You should come prepared to give a brief, 5-10 minute presentation on the biography
of the author we are studying that day, as well as at least three discussion questions to
provoke class discussion for the specific text we are reading that day. You must submit your
discussion questions and a brief outline of your presentation at least 48 hours in advance of
your assigned class period.
Reading Responses: Students are required to write six one-paragraph-long reading responses
throughout the semester. These responses should demonstrate a thorough engagement with
the text you are writing about, and also engage with the question: what does this text have to
do with catastrophe, and how does it frame the narrative of this catastrophe? In order to
answer this question, use the “Essential Questions” section above to consider the many ways
the text might be wrestling with catastrophe. These responses are explorations, and do not


have to come to a clear conclusion. They can even function as a series of thorough questions,
or end with a question. The most important thing is that you demonstrate that you have
seriously read and thoroughly wrestled with the text, even if you feel you haven’t
understood it fully. Reading responses are due on 11:59 PM the night before we discuss the
text.
Course Expectations: Attendance, preparation, and active participation in class are
mandatory. Students are allowed three unexcused absences from class; with the exception of
emergencies, sickness, or religious holy days, students will lose a half-grade in their
participation grade for each subsequent absence (see Accommodations section below). In
addition to leading discussion and reading responses, reading quizzes will be issued at
instructor’s discretion, and will factor significantly into students’ participation grade.
All written assignments must be turned in on time, and will lose a half-letter grade for each
day late. If there are extenuating circumstances that you know will cause to you turn in a
paper late, you must let the instructor know at least a week in advance of the due date.
Assignments/Grade Breakdown:
15%: First Essay [Choice of Two Prompts Instructor Provides: Putting Two Texts in
Conversation]
20%: Second Essay [Developing Your Own Question; Putting two or more texts in
conversation; develop question in consultation with instructor]
25% Final Essay [Expanding one of first two papers, refining question and applying to
“catastrophe” of student’s choice; outside research necessary]
20% Weekly Response Posts
5% Leading Class Discussion
15% Class Participation [Attendance/Discussion Section Participation]
Accommodations: The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. To determine if you qualify, please
contact the Dean of Students at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY. If the office certifies your needs,
I will work with you to make appropriate arrangements.
A student who misses an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the
observance of a religious holy day will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed
within a reasonable time after the absence, provided that he or she has properly notified the
instructor. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that the student must notify
the instructor at least 14 days prior to the classes scheduled on dates he or she will be absent
to observe a religious holy day. For religious holy days that fall within the first two weeks of


the semester, the notice should be given on the first day of the semester. The student will not
be penalized for these excused absences, but the instructor may appropriately respond if the
student fails to complete satisfactorily the missed assignment or examination within a
reasonable time after the excused absence.
Required Texts for Purchase:
Baldwin, James. The Fire Next Time. (1962 (1993) Vintage International).
Cesaire, Aime. Discourse on Colonialism (1955).
Morrison, Toni, Beloved. (1987, Alfred A. Knopf).
Ward, Jesmyn, Sing, Unburied, Sing (2017, Simon & Schuster).
Zinn, Howard, The Bomb. (2010, City Lights Books).
All texts listed above are available for purchase at the UT COOP.
 All other assigned texts will be uploaded by instructor to the “Files” section of Canvas, OR
the instructor will direct you to online location of the text.
CLASS SCHEDULE
 INTRODUCTION: History, Catastrophe, and Narrative
     “We are never as steeped in history as when we pretend not to be…” – Michel-Rolph
                                             Trouillot
Week 1:
1/23: Course Introduction
1/25: Michel-Ralph Trouillot, Silencing the Past, Ch. 1: Pages 1-4; Winthrop, “City Upon a
Hill” Excerpt
Week 2: Catastrophe and History
1/28: Michel-Ralph Trouillot, Silencing the Past, Ch. 1: Pages 4 -31
1/30: Langston Hughes, "Let America Be America Again"; “The Declaration of
Independence" (https://www.archives.gov/founding-docs/declaration-transcript);
2/1: James Baldwin, “My Dungeon Shook.” The Fire Next Time, Pages 1 – 10
UNIT 1: FOUNDATIONAL AMERICAN CATASTROPHE: SLAVERY IN THE ATLANTIC
WORLD
Week 3: Atlantic Slavery: A Calculated Catastrophe


2/4: Stephanie Smallwood, “The Living Dead aboard the Slave Ship.” Saltwater Slavery, pp.
122 – 152; Peruse www.slavevoyages.org (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site.; Receive Essay 1 Prompt
2/6: Walter Johnson, River of Dark Dreams: 3 – 17
2/8: Vincent Brown, The Reaper’s Garden, 13-23
Week 4: Radical Histories of Slavery and Resistance I: Military Revolts
2/11: “Slave Revolt in Jamaica” Assignment (http://revolt.axismaps.com/)
2/13: Dubois, Black Reconstruction, “The General Strike,” 55 – 67
2/15: Dubois, Black Reconstruction, 711 – 717, 725 – 728.
Week 5: Radical Histories of Slavery and Resistance II: Toni Morrison
2/18: Toni Morrison, Beloved, Foreword & 1 - 75
2/20: Beloved, 76 - 125
2/22: Beloved, 125 - 173
 Week 6:
2/25: Beloved, 174 - 235
2/27: Beloved, 236 - 270
3/1: Beloved, 271 - 324
UNIT 2: THE CENTER WILL NOT HOLD: MANY HISTORIES OF A WORLD AT WAR
Week 7: A Sick Civilization?
3/4: Essay 1 Due; Gandhi, Hind Swaraj, “Civilization” 15 – 17
3/6: Aime Cesaire, Discourse on Colonialism (31 - 53)
3/8: Cesaire, Discourse on Colonialism (54 - 78) Receive 2nd Essay Prompt
Week 8: Violence and Morality in a Catastrophic Atmosphere
3/11: Howard Zinn, “Hiroshima.” The Bomb;
3/13: Frantz Fanon, “On Violence,” The Wretched of the Earth (1 - 21; 52 - 62)
3/15: Virginia Woolf, Three Guineas, 103 – 114.
Spring Break: NO CLASS 3/18 – 3/22


Week 9: US Black Freedom Movement: Catastrophe’s Possibilities
3/25:”; Claudia Jones, “An End to the Neglect of the Problems of the Negro Woman.”
(1949) https://libcom.org/files/claudiajones.pdf
3/27: Malcolm X, “The Ballot or the Bullet” Selections; Martin Luther King, Jr., “Letter from
a Birmingham Jail”
(1963) https://web.cn.edu/kwheeler/documents/Letter_Birmingham_Jail.pdf
3/29: King, “Why I Am Opposed to the War in Vietnam”; NPR Code Switch Redlining
Documentary: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O5FBJyqfoLM
Week 10: Decolonization from the Inside: A Sick Civilization?
4/1: James Baldwin, The Fire Next Time, “Down at the Cross.” (15 - 47)
4/3: The Fire Next Time (47 - 82)
4/5: The Fire Next Time (82 - 106)
UNIT 3: HAUNTED LANDS: CASE STUDIES OF CONTEMPORARY CATASTROPHE:
MISSISSIPPI AND PUERTO RICO
Week 11: Mississippi
4/8: Clyde Woods, Development Arrested, pages TBA
4/10: Woods Cont., pages TBA
4/12: Jesmyn Ward, Sing, Unburied, Sing; Second Essay Due
Week 12: Mississippi
4/15: Jesmyn Ward, Sing, Unburied, Sing; Receive Final Essay Assignment
4/17: Jesmyn Ward, Sing, Unburied, Sing
4/19: Jesmyn Ward, Sing, Unburied, Sing
Week 13: Puerto Rican Crisis, Before and After Maria (And finishing Ward)
4/22: Ward, Sing, Unburied, Sing
4/24: Ward, Sing, Unburied, Sing
4/26: Colonialsim, Debt, and Austerity in Puerto Rico: Articles from The Puerto Rico
Syllabus: https://puertoricosyllabus.com/
Week 14: Puerto Rican Crisis (Cont.)


4/29: Colonialsim, Debt, and Austerity in Puerto Rico: Articles from The Puerto Rico
Syllabus: https://puertoricosyllabus.com/
5/1: Final Paper Presentations
5/2-3: Final Paper Conferences (10 – 2, in Office; Can meet by appointment at other times
this week as well if this time doesn’t work)
Week 15:
5/6: Final Paper Presentations
5/8: Final Paper Presentations
5/10: Final Essays Due: Presentations and Instructor Survey
