Sarah L. Lopez
Associate Professor
Architectural Historian
Undergraduate Upper Division History Elective
Unique: ARC 342 (unique: 00839), AMS 321 (unique: 31124)
Spring 2020
e. sll@utexas.edu
t. 512-471-0147
A History of American Buildings and Cities: U.S. Cultural Landscapes from the 1100s to
the Present
Have you ever wondered why the city looks and feels the way it does? Every building has
a story to tell. The history of the U.S. built environment is a class that explores the
mystery of cities by diving into the choices that people have made. We examine the
history of buildings—shopping malls, libraries, courthouses, post offices, workers
cottages, the Victorian house—and landscape elements—plazas, streets, freeways,
parks—to better understand and interpret the built environment which constitutes the
fabrics of our lives. We start with the land and move our way through Native American
cities, colonial towns, industrial cities, suburban regions and mega-cities. We examine
the American landscape as a composite of discrete building types and landscape elements
built and inhabited by migrants, workers, women, people of color, as well as institutional
actors and government officials. Emerging architects and designers will learn about the
historic importance of "site" and "context" as well as how and why basic historic research
is a critical component of the design process.
Course Goals:
* reading buildings in their spatial context
* overview of 19th and 20th century built environment history
* using archival sources (maps, newspapers)
* critical engagement with city through observation, mapping, interviews
* developing analytic writing using primary sources
Course Requirements:
1. Class Attendance and Readings: Students are expected to attend classes regularly and
to read. Only excused absences are acceptable. Please email me if you miss a class. More
than two unexcused absences will automatically lower your grade by one whole letter.
* See Canvas website for syllabus, handouts and readings.
2. Discussion and Short Writing Assignments
There are several strategies we will use for discussion.


                                                                         Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 2
     a. Each student will be asked to come to every class with a question. The question
         can relate to one or all of the readings, or the topic for the day, or the discussion
         we had in the proceeding class. Be creative and thoughtful with your daily
         question. What (that day) are you thinking about in terms of architecture, the built
         environment, cities and society? Keep a record of your questions to turn in later.
     b. Group discussions of weekly readings: students will break into smaller groups to
         discuss readings on occasion. When doing so: 1) repeat the title, when it was
         published, time frame of the piece, and overall subject, 2) find any places where
         the author uses the terms “I argue” or expresses a strong point or observation and
         discuss those, 3) share with your classmate places that you underlined or
         highlighted and explain why, 4) identify a sentence or paragraph that you found
         confusing or odd, or disagreed with/ and one that you especially liked. Why?
     c. Throughout the semester there are two very short writing assignments that will be
         shared amongst the group and read by peers and/or by myself. See weekly
         assignments for a fuller description of each assignment. There is one dérive.
     d. Finally, discussion will also be centered around group-Google Earth and Google
         Street View travel to the sites under consideration in our readings and lectures.
         Navigating these places together on the screen, we will use the "history" function
         on Google Street View to see what was there before the current building, and
         discuss change over time in that particular place. No advanced preparation is
         necessary for these in-class exercises.
3.One Short Paper Broken into Installments (due May 15th):
In addition to the above assignments, each student will write a final essay broken into 4
installments. These include 1) a 3 page virtual exploration and meditation on the virtual
realm of your site; 2) on site observation and spatial analysis; 3) a bibliography of at least
5 sources including primary sources/historic sources; and finally 4) the final paper. The
paper should be about the history and meaning of one building or landscape element in
Austin using secondary and primary sources. Choose a space that you know well or want
to get to know better. This could be a building, a road, a park, even an intersection. Based
on your own observation, and complemented with online and historical research, examine
how the meaning of the site is conveyed digitally versus materially. Address how this
place functions as a space—how the aesthetic and physical features interact with the
place’s social, cultural or political life.
In the final paper (6-10 double spaced pages), you will incorporate the materials from the
first two installments, expand the analytic dimension, and add an argument about your
building/site. If you bring the history of the site into our current moment, what can you
say about it? What does the site teach us? What can we learn from comparing its digital
life to its material life? Use the secondary sources and course readings as evidence to
support your argument. Be sure to argue a strong thesis and back it up with specific
examples from your research and your own analysis. You will be graded on the clarity of
your prose, the strength of your arguments, the originality of your insights, the care of
your observation, and your ability to develop and elaborate consistent themes dealing


                                                                      Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 3
with both the form and content of the aspect of the built environment you’re writing
about. Your argument must start with and relate back to physical spaces and how they
work.
         *Class time will be devoted to grammatical skills and library skills such as proper
         citation, use of quotations, annotated bibliographies, and paragraph structure.
4. Final essay exam (potentially the last class, TBD)
Final essay exam. We will collectively come up with the questions for this exam and they
will be determined and shared ahead of time.
*required text:
Dolores Hayden, Redesigning the American Dream (New York: W. W. Norton &
Company, 2002). Available for $10 on Amazon, also available on Canvas.
Robert Venturi, Steven Izenour, Denise Scott Brown, Learning from Las Vegas
(Cambride: MIT Press, 1972). Available for $11 on Amazon.
File Naming Convention
You will submit your work via Canvas to me using Microsoft WORD format and you
will bring in a hard copy (if you don’t have access to a printer, you are excused from
bringing it in). Please save your word documents according to the following convention:
         Filenames will begin with your last name followed by an underline and the
         date that the paper is due. Assume that a student named Mary Jane Doe is
         submitting a paper due on September 15. She should name the file
                         doe_sept15.doc
         All assignments are due to be submitted electronically by NOON on the
         day they are due. Submit papers to sll@utexas.edu.
         The revised version of each paper should be labeled
                         doe_sept15REV.doc
Grading Structure
Attendance and participation (questions, discussion): 20%
Short writing responses and derive: 10%
Final paper: 45% (how each installment of this will be graded will be discussed in more
detail in class).
Final Essay Exam: 25%


                                                                    Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 4
Late papers will be penalized by one minus each day they are late. Papers more than
three days late without a valid reason will not be accepted and you will receive a zero for
that item.
Office Hours: By appt., Sutton 2.118, and Thursday 12.30-1.30pm
**I reserve the right to change the syllabus according to group discussion/needs. Please
look out for e-mails I send or Canvas updates regarding any changes to the syllabus.


                                                                     Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 5
WEEK 1
January 21 (Tuesday)
Built Environment History/ Cultural Landscapes / Vernacular Architecture: What is it?
         Reading (due today):
         NONE
         In class:
         Go over syllabus, discuss discipline.
January 23 (Thursday)
Native American Placemaking: Cahokia and St. Louis
         Reading:
             • Syllabus (come in with one question about syllabus)
             • Paul Groth, “Frameworks for Cultural Landscape Study,” in
                 Understanding Ordinary Landscapes (Yale University Press, 1997): 1-23.
             • Vogler, Significant and Insignificant Mounds,”
                 http://theamericanbottom.org/itineraryTwo.html
             • http://markingandmeasuring.org/mounds.html
         In class:
         Lecture and discussion (L&D)
         Go over syllabus (again).
WEEK 2
January 28 (Tuesday)
Initial Settlement, City and Nation Gridding
         Reading:
             • J. B. Jackson, “Sense of Place, Sense of Time,” in Sense of Place, Sense of
                 Time (Yale University Press, 1994): 151-163.
             • J. B. Jackson, “Almost Perfect Town,” 1-7.
             • Grisemer, “Better Our Circumstances,” Settler Colonialism in Ohio
                 During the 1780s,” Ohio History, vol. 124, no. 1 (2017): 22-40.
         In class:
         L&D
         How to read essays and articles for class.


                                                                   Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 6
January 30 (Thursday)
Preindustrial Farmsteads (to Corporate America)
       Reading:
           • Thomas Hubka, Big House, Little House, Back House, Barn: The
               Connected Farm Buildings of New England (University Press of England,
               2004). I: 3-31, and 2: 32-69.
       In Class:
       L&D
       Google Earth group exploration
WEEK 3
Feb. 4 (Tuesday)
Waterpower Workplaces to Company Towns
       Reading:
           • Jesse Vogler, “Company Towns,” theamericanbottom.org (15)
           • Herod, Andrew, “Social Engineering Through Spatial Engineering” in
               Company Towns in the Americas: Landscape, Power, and Working-Class
               Communities (ch. 1, 21-44)
       In class:
       L&D
       What is good writing? Why is writing hard?
Feb. 6 (Thursday)
National Transportation: Canals, Turnpikes, Rail
       Reading:
           • Richard White, “What is a Spatial History?” Spatial History Lab, Feb. 1,
               2010.
               https://web.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/media/images/publication/w
               hat%20is%20spatial%20history%20pub%20020110.pdf
           • Richard White, Railroaded: The Transcontinental and the Making of
               Modern America, Introduction, xxi-xxxix
       Of Note:
           • Richard White, “Information, Markets, and Corruption: Transcontinental
               Railroads in the Gilded Age,” Journal of American History vol. 90, issue
               1, June 2003, 19-43.


                                                                    Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 7
        In class:
        L&D
        How to peer-edit
        Peer editing each other’s one paragraph response. See handout in class.
        Assignment due today:
        Short Writing Response: “What is space?” 200-300 words.
WEEK 4
Feb. 11 (Tuesday)
The Post Office and Post Roads: defining civic infrastructure, rural-urban connections,
national ideologies
        Reading:
            • David Henkin, Postal Age (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2006).
                Ch. 3, Playing Post Office: Mail in Urban Space, 63-90.
            • Podcast: 244 “The Revolutionary Post”
            • New York Times, “A Fight for Post Offices and Town’s Souls” (pg. 4)
        In class:
        L&D.
Feb. 13 (Thursday)
Libraries as Public Infrastructure: Archiving and Reading
        Reading:
            • Van Slyck, “The Librarian and the Library: Why Place Matters,” Libraries
                and Culture 36.4 (2001): 518-523.
            • New York Times, “Saving Schools and Libraries by Giving Up the Land
                they Sit On,” March 17, 2013. (pgs. 3)
            • Podcast: 99% Invisible Episode 346 “Palaces for the People”
        Of note:
        Jurgen Habermas, The Structural Transformation of the Public Sphere (intro)
        In class:
        L&D
WEEK 5
Feb. 18 (Tuesday)
Schools and Colleges: Socializing and Learning


                                                                   Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 8
        Reading:
            • Rina Swentzell, “Conflicting Landscape Values: The Santa Clara Pueblo
                and Day School,” in Understanding Ordinary Landscapes (Yale
                University Press, 1997): 56-66.
            • Claire Robinson, “Architecture in Support of Citizenry: Vernon DeMars
                and the Berkeley Student Union,” Journal of Architectural Education 70.2
                (2016): 236-247.
            • Carla Yanni, PLATFORM article (1 page).
        In class:
        What are peer-reviewed journal articles? Searching for them…
Feb. 20 (Thursday)
Guadalupe Tour. Meet at the entrance to Sutton Hall at 9.30am SHARP.
        Reading:
             • Stewart Brand, How Buildings Learn: What happens after they are built
             (Penguin Books, 1994). Ch. 1 & Ch. 2, pgs. 1-23.
        In class:
        Tour
WEEK 6
Feb. 25 (Tuesday)
Streetcar Suburbs: The Spatialization of Housing by Class
        Reading:
            • Sam Bass Warner, Streetcar Suburbs: The Process of Growth in Boston,
                1870-1900 (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1978). Ch. 1, pgs. 1-14,
                Ch. 2, pgs. 15-34, Ch. 3, pgs. 35-45.
        In class:
        L&D
        Sanborn Maps (Introduced)
Feb. 27 (Thursday)
Freedman’s Towns (guest lecture: Dr. Tara Dudley)
        Reading:
            • Mears, Michelle. And Grace Will Lead Me Home: African American
                Freedmen Communities of Austin, Texas, 1865-1928. Lubbock: Texas
                Tech University Press, 2009. (Chapter One: “The Birth of Austin’s


                                                                    Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 9
               Freedmen Communities” and Chapter Two: Rural Freedmen Settlements
               Near Austin")
       In class:
       L&D
WEEK 7
March 3 (Tuesday)
Segregated City: the Spatialization of Housing by Race (The Workers Cottage and
Bungalow)
       Reading:
           • Sarah McTarnaghan, “Development and Displacement: Single Family
               Home Demolitions in Central East Austin,” Planning Forum, 47-65.
           • Dolores Hayden, Redesigning the American Dream (New York: W. W.
               Norton & Company, 2002). Part 1, Ch. 1 & 2, pgs. 17-55.
       In class:
       On how and why we cite (citations) and quote.
       Sanborn Session (East Austin)
       Google street view exploration, if time.
       Assignment:
       Please come to class prepared to share thoughts, insights, and questions that arose
       out of the lecture and reading for last Thursday. Please include any burning
       questions you want addressed on these topics next week.
March 5 (Thursday)
20th Century Housing Challenges: Women and the Suburbs
       Reading:
           • Dolores Hayden, Redesigning the American Dream (New York: W. W.
               Norton & Company, 2002). Ch. 3, 56-78. Ch. 4, 81-119.
           • Margaret Ruth Little, “Getting the Dream for Themselves: Postwar
               Modern Subdivisions for African Americans in Raleigh, North Carolina,”
               Buildings & Landscapes 19, no. 12 (2012), 73-86.
       Assignment:
       Find your childhood house on Google Street View. Navigate. Write a 200-300 wd
       response about your house, your street, and your neighborhood informed by the
       readings and discussions this week. Be prepared to share.


                                                                    Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 10
WEEK 8
March 10 (Tuesday)
Levittown and Public Housing (guest lecture: Willa Granger, Ph.D. Candidate)
       Reading:
           • TBA
       In Class:
       Go over how to navigate Sanborn (if you have a site for your final paper in mind,
       find it in class)
March 12 (Thursday)
Apartments, Flats, and Hotels
       Reading:
           • Andrew Sandoval Strauss, Hotel: An American History (New Haven: Yale
                University Press, 2007) 1-9.
           • Paul Groth, Living Downtown (Berkeley: UC Press), “Conflicting Ideas
                about Hotel Life,” 1-25.
           • 99% Invisible: Episode 211 “The Grand Dame of Broad Street”
       In class:
       L&D
       Go over how to navigate historic newspapers
WEEK 9 – March 17 – March 19 Spring Break
       Assignment:
       Choose site for final project (use the week off to explore it virtually and in person
       casually. Be courageous and exploratory). Nothing due.
WEEK 10
March 24
Urban Dérive and Digest
       Reading:
           • Guy Debord, Theory of the Dérive, 1958. (short)
       In class:
       Discuss urban drift.
       Is Debord good writing?


                                                                 Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 11
       Assignment:
       Go on dérive. Before class email me one pdf that has a pencil, messy drawing of
       your route and 1 to 3 photographs of things you noticed on your walk. Be
       prepared to share.
March 26
Theorizing Space and Place
       Reading:
           • Henri Lefebvre, “Social Space,” in The Production of Space (1991), 68-
               79.
           • Dolores Hayden, The Power of Place: Urban Landscape as Public
               History, Chapter 1, “Claiming Urban Landscape as Public History,” 1-13.
       In class:
       On passive voice in writing. On theoretical writing.
WEEK 11
March 31
The Road
       Reading:
           •   John Brinckerhoff Jackson, “The Stranger’s Path” in Landscape in Sight:
               Looking at America (2000), 19-29.
           •   Michel de Certeau, “Walking in the City,” in The Practice of Everyday
               Life (1984), 91-110.
       In class:
       L&D
       Discuss sites you chose.
April 2
The Freeway and Roadside Architecture
       Reading:
           • Venturi, Scott Brown, Learning from Las Vegas (MIT Press, 1972), Part I,
               1-73 (skim, lots of pictures).
           • Podcast: 99% Invisible: 68 Built for Speed
       In class:
       L&D


                                                                     Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 12
       Remaining research tools.
       Assignment (bring in hard copy):
       First installment of paper, virtual site. Find your site on social media, it’s own
       website, blogs that address that building type or architectural style, and/or
       movies/shows/youtube videos that address the building type if not your site.
       Think about this: what is the space of your building? What are different spatial
       ideas, points of view, or debates about your site? How is your site represented on
       social media? What kinds of stories, images, are projected?
WEEK 12
April 7
Reading Ethnicity in the Built Environment: Indian and Pakistani Neighborhoods
       Readings:
           • Arijit Sen, Transcultural Placemaking: Intertwined Spaces of Sacred and
                Secular on Devon Avenue, Chicago (31-62)
       In class:
       Mini lecture on migration and the built environment
       Discuss observation as a method.
April 9
Latinx Landscapes: Mexican Cultural Landscapes
       Reading:
           • James Rojas, “Enacted Environment: Examining the Streets and Yards of
                East Los Angeles,” in Everyday America (University of California Press,
                2003): 275-292. (not in your reader)
       In class:
       L&D
       Discuss observation / Maybe short movie about taco trucks
       Assignment (turn in nothing, but be ready to talk):
       Second installment, on site observation and spatial analysis. Go to your site.
       Observe your site for 1 hour. Notice its location on the block, the buildings that
       flank it, the façade, the setback, the materials used, the construction type. Enter if
       able. Notice the plan. What do the rooms allow? Where does public access stop?
       Then, observe social evidence. Who is using your site and how? Are there people
       present? Were there people present? Write up notes, you will need them for your
       final paper. For now, do not turn it in.


                                                                Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 13
WEEK 13
April 14 (Tuesday)
Historic Chinatowns
        Reading:
            • Christopher Yip, “Association, Residence, and Shop: An Appropriation of
                Commercial Blocks in Chinatowns,” Perspectives in Vernacular
                Architecture vol. 5 (1995) 109-117.
            • Podcast: 99% Invisible Episode 319 “It’s Chinatown”
            • Podcast: 99% Invisible Episode 192 “Pagodas and Dragon Gates”
        Going Further:
        Dolores Hayden, “Remembering Little Tokyo on First Street,” in The Power of
        Place, 210-225.
        In class:
        L&D
        Discuss sentence structure, and hypothesis.
April 16 (Thursday)
East Asian Suburbs
        Reading:
            • Becky Nicholaides and James Zasadiaz, “Design Assimilation in
                Suburbia: Asian Americans, Built Landscapes, and Suburban Advantage,”
                Journal of Urban History 43.2 (2015): 332-371.
        In class:
        L&D
        Discuss paragraph structure.
WEEK 14
April 21 (Tuesday)
Shopping Malls
        Reading:
            • Elizabeth Cohen, “From Town Center to Shopping Center: The
                Reconfiguration of Community Marketplaces in Postwar America” The
                American Historical Review, 101.4 (1996): 1050-1081.
            • New York Times, “Ode to Shopping Malls”
                (https://www.nytimes.com/2017/07/26/fashion/an-ode-to-shopping-
                malls.html?mcubz=0&_r=0)


                                                                  Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 14
       In class:
       L&D
       Assignment (bring in hard copy):
       Third installment, compile history of site using primary research and look for
       secondary journal articles or books. Turn in a bibliography of historic
       newspapers, journal articles/books, and Sanborns. You should have a minimum of
       5 sources. Provide a one sentence description of each source.
April 23 (Thursday)
Walmart and Amazon
       Reading
           • Jesse LeCavilier, “Patrons and Prototypes: Walmart’s Catalytic Urbanism”
               (27-35)
           • The New York Times, “Prime Mover, How Amazon Wove Itself into the
               Life of an American City,” Nov. 13, 2019
           • The New York Times, “How Walmart Used Payoffs to Get Its Way in
               Mexico,” Dec. 17, 2012
       Of Note:
       Jesse LeCavilier, The Rule of Logistics: Walmart and the Architecture of
       Fulfillment
WEEK 15
April 28 (Tuesday)
       West Campus On Foot Exploration: Walking Group Derive
April 23 (Thursday) In class essay. TBD.
WEEK 16 – NO CLASSES DUE TO FINAL REVIEWS in SOA
Final Papers due Friday May 15th.


                                                                          Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 15
UT Resources:
I strongly encourage you to use the services offered by the University Writing Center.
The UWC offers 45-minute, one-on-one consultations with UT students on any piece of
writing. You may visit up to three times per assignment. The consultants are well trained,
and the cost of the service is covered in your tuition. If you wish to make an appointment,
you may do so through the UWC website: uwc.utexas.edu.”
Students with Disabilities
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations
should contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized
accommodations.
Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you
miss an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a
religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin
that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes
scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
Plagiarism and Academic Integrity
Using someone else’s work in your own writing without giving proper credit is
considered plagiarism, a serious form of academic dishonesty that can result in severe
penalties. Copying someone else’s work, buying a paper and submitting it as your own,
copying and pasting text (even with changes), or borrowing images from an online
source, are some examples of plagiarism. Even if you plagiarize accidentally, you can be
held responsible and penalized.
Learning to cite sources appropriately is an important part of becoming a professional.
When you are unsure about citation, you are encouraged to ask your instructor (who is
already an expert in the discipline) what is appropriate in the context of your assignment.
Consultants at The “University Writing Center”: http://uwc.utexas.edu/ can also help you
determine whether you are citing sources correctly—and they have helpful guides online
for using direct quotations and paraphrasing. Reviewing those skills will help you feel
confident that you are handling sources professionally in your writing.
CARE PROGRAM
The CARE Program places licensed mental health professionals within the colleges or schools
they serve in order to provide better access to support for students who are struggling emotionally
and/or academically. The CARE Counselor in the School of Architecture is
[cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html]Abby Simpson, LCSW.
        - Office Hour: Fridays 1230p – 130p | BTL 114B


                                                                       Lopez / Spring 2020 / pg. 16
        - Available by phone: M-F 8-5p | 512.471.3115 (Please *leave a message* if she is
        unavailable)
        - [cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html]cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
For immediate support:
-     Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor |
512-471-3515 |[cmhc.utexas.edu]cmhc.utexas.edu
-     CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255
| [cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html]cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
Services at CMHC:
-     Brief assessments and referral services
- [cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html]cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
-     Mental health & wellness articles
- [cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html]cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-     MindBody Lab - [cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html]cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-     Classes, workshops, & groups
- [cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html]cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
-     Tips on self-care - [cmhc.utexas.edu/selfcare.html]cmhc.utexas.edu/selfcare.html
Other Helpful Offices at UT
-         Student Emergency Services (SES)
- [deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency]deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency
-         Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
– [diversity.utexas.edu/disability]diversity.utexas.edu/disability
-         Office of the Student Ombuds - [ombuds.utexas.edu/student]ombuds.utexas.edu/student
