                       Sociocultural Influences on Learning (ALD 327)
                                         Summer, 2020
                                    Unique Numbers: 73360
                                 University of Texas at Austin
                              Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
Instructor: Dr. Noah De Lissovoy
Pronouns: he/him/his
Office Hours: by appointment
Email: delissovoy@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant: Alex Armonda
Pronouns: he/him/his
Office Hours: by appointment
Email: armonda@utexas.edu
REQUIRED TEXTS
    •    Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African
         American Students, 2nd Edition (e-book through PCL)
    •    Angela Valenzuela, Subtractive Schooling: U.S. Mexican Youth and the Politics
         of Caring (e-book through PCL)
    •    Additional articles on Canvas (see Schedule below)
COURSE DESCRIPTION AND OBJECTIVES
This course is devoted to exploring the relationships between education, culture, and
society. It will focus on: structures of social and educational inequality, in particular as they
relate to race, class and gender; processes of power and control in education, as they are
expressed in curriculum, policy, and pedagogy; education as a process of social and
cultural reproduction; and teaching as a form of intervention in these processes. The course
will give special attention to the experiences and educational conditions of those who have
been marginalized within U.S. schools. It is expected that in this course students will
become familiar with the sociological, cultural, and political contexts and dimensions of
education in U.S. society, will come to understand relationships of power within society
and as they are expressed in schooling, and will develop the foundational knowledge
necessary for working with children and youth from diverse backgrounds.
TEACHING PHILOSOPHY
I believe that it is important for educators to engage intellectually with central questions in
their discipline in order to be effective in their work. I also believe that intellectual and
practical issues in education cannot be separated from political and ethical issues: to think
honestly about education means confronting injustices. I encourage everyone to express


                                                                 ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 2
their ideas on issues we take up, and also to think critically about the limits of our own
perspectives in order to enlarge and transform them. It is important for all students to feel
comfortable sharing their ideas and engaging with the contributions of others. I am
committed to the learning of all, and expect students also to be committed to the course.
Please do not hesitate to approach me with any questions you may have during the course.
POLICIES
Academic Integrity: All work must be your own. If referring to ideas or information from
others, make sure that you cite the source. No credit will be given for work that violates
this principle.
Late Work: Reading Responses and Canvas Discussion posts will not be accepted if
turned in after the deadline. All other written assignments will lose two points if turned in
past the deadline.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc): I will gladly honor your request to
address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADING BASIS
Note: Extended guidelines for the following assignments are provided at the end of this
syllabus.
Zoom Meeting Attendance and Participation
Attendance and participation in Zoom meetings are important to facilitate your own
learning and that of others. Our discussion depends on all voices being shared and heard. In
order to engage in an informed way in class discussions, it is important that you carefully
read all assigned readings prior to the meeting.
Canvas Discussions
Each week beginning on Monday, you will be assigned to a discussion group on Canvas.
The weekly discussion prompt will provide you the opportunity to critically engage with
cultural artifacts (films, news clips, curriculum documents, etc.) related to central themes in
the course. Your weekly contributions will consist of your own original post as well as two
replies to the posts of fellow group members. The individual post is due each Wednesday at
11:59pm. Replies to two classmates are due by Friday at 11:59 pm.
Reading Responses
For each meeting for which reading is assigned (except for July 6) you will turn in a
response starting from a prompt that I provide. This assignment asks you to engage
rigorously with key ideas in the readings. The response should make specific reference to
the text while developing your own analysis. It must address the prompt explicitly. (Enter
your response in the submissions field under Assignments on Canvas.) The reading


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 3
responses are due the day before class (Zoom meeting) by 11:59pm. No late assignments
will be accepted.
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay you will reflect on your life experience as it relates to the topics and ideas
covered in class. You will describe how your own identity and development have been
influenced by the social and cultural processes in education we are studying, and you will
analyze your experiences to explain their importance and meanings. The Autobiographical
Essay (as a Word document) is due on June 26.
Crisis Learning Journal
Recent social crises (including the coronavirus pandemic, racist police violence, and
economic dislocation) have caused wrenching changes and upheaval, revealing aspects of
power and oppression; forcing us to explore new ways to live; and at times creating
opportunities for new learning. In this assignment, you will describe what you are learning
outside of school in this context. You can reflect on emotional struggles/strategies, social
and political consciousness, communication and relationships, autonomous intellectual
pursuits, or other areas. The journal is due in two installments on June 20 and July 5.
Group Presentation
In small groups, you will undertake a presentation at one Friday Zoom meeting related to one
topic or idea from the content for that week. Your presentation should bring a new perspective
or direction to the topic. This is an open-ended and creative assignment, which asks you to take
initiative in your analysis. Following the formal presentation, your group will facilitate a brief
discussion.
Final Reflective Essay
In this essay you will reflect on what you have learned during the course, and how it has
affected your thinking about teaching, learning, and/or schooling. While you will engage
with specific course concepts and readings that have made a difference to you, the
assignment is subjective in nature, and asks you to describe, from your own perspective, your
intellectual growth in relation to this material. The Final Reflective Essay (as a Word
document) is due on July 11.
Assignment                                             Points
Zoom Meeting Participation                             10
Reading Responses                                      18
Canvas Discussion                                      20
Autobiographical Essay                                 12
Crisis Learning Journal                                10
Group Presentation                                     10
Final Reflective Essay                                 20
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 4
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F
UNIVERSITY NOTICES AND POLICIES
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of
the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT.
Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in
previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are
responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code
which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
University Resources for Students
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because
we all learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning
or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible. Together we’ll develop strategies
to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are also a range of
resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if
you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only
do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
(video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/


                                                                  ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 5
Counseling and Mental Health Center
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are
many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is
often helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life
events, or feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops,
private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more
than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your
call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust
your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning
and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
    or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title
IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title
IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before
talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be
sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone
for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.


                                                        ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 6
 ZOOM MEETING SCHEDULE
 (M and TH meetings 1:00pm-2:20pm; F meetings 1:00pm-1:50pm)
Date     Zoom Meeting (and Module)      Reading (to be read prior to Zoom meeting)
Thurs.,  Introduction to Course
June 4
Mon.,    Race, Racism, and Deficit        • Tara Yosso: “Whose Culture Has
June 8   Thinking                            Capital?”
                                          • Lois Weiner: “Challenging Deficit
                                             Thinking”
                                          • Tamika Mallory: “America has Looted
                                             Black People” (video)
Thurs.,  Race, Poverty, and Social        • Pedro Noguera: selection from City
June 11  Reproduction                        Schools and the American Dream
Fri.,    Group Presentation
June 12
Mon.,    Power and Ideology               • Peter McLaren: Selection from Life in
June 15                                      Schools
Thurs.,  Class, Corporatization, and      • David Hursh: “Assessing No Child Left
June 18  Education                          Behind and the Rise of Neoliberal
                                            Education Policies”
                                          • Naomi Klein: “Coronavirus Capitalism”
                                            (video)
Fri.,    Group Presentation
June 19
Mon.,    Gender Bias and                  • American Association of University
June 22  Crisis Learning Journal             Women (AAUW): “How Schools
         Discussion                          Shortchange Girls”
Thurs.,  Gender, Sexuality, and           • Claudia Cervantes-Soon: “Mujeres
June 25  Discrimination                      Truchas: Urban Girls Redefining
                                             Smartness in a Dystopic Global South”
                                          • Cris Mayo: “The Tolerance that Dare Not
                                             Speak Its Name”


                                                       ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 7
Fri.,      Group Presentation
June 26
Mon.,      Culture, Language, and       • Valenzuela, Chapter 2: pp. 33-60;
June 29    Education                       Chapter 3 (partial): pp. 61-75
Thurs.,    Cultural Difference and      • Valenzuela, Chapter 3 (partial): pp. 75-
July 2     Marginalization                 113; Chapter 5 (partial) pp. 161-181
Fri., July Group Presentation
3
Mon.,      Teaching, Curriculum and     • Ladson-Billings, Chapters 2-4: pp. 17-84
July 6     Social Context
Thurs.,    Culturally Relevant Teaching • Ladson-Billings, Chapters 5-7: pp. 85-
July 9                                     156


                                                               ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 8
Reading Responses
For each meeting for which reading is assigned (except for July 6) you will turn in a
response starting from a prompt that I provide. This assignment asks you to engage
rigorously with key ideas in the readings. The response should make specific reference to
the text while developing your own analysis. It must address the prompt explicitly. (Enter
your response in the submissions field on Canvas.) The reading responses are due the
day before class (Zoom meeting) by 11:59pm. No late assignments will be accepted.
Additional Notes:
    •   Responses should be 300-400 words.
    •   If you are having technical difficulties with Canvas, email your response directly.
        Responses must be posted or received by 11:59pm on Monday to receive credit.
    •   The response should directly address the prompt; it asks you to develop your own
        analysis, with close reference to the reading.
    •   Your response should focus on key ideas in the text, rather than on general
        speculations. Be specific in your writing.
    •   9 reading responses will be due during the course; each is worth 2 points.


                                                                ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 9
Canvas Discussions
Each week beginning on Monday, you will be assigned to a discussion group on Canvas. The
weekly discussion prompt will provide you the opportunity to critically engage with cultural
artifacts (films, news clips, curriculum documents, etc.) related to central themes in the course.
Your weekly contributions will consist of your own original post as well as two replies to the
posts of fellow group members. The individual post is due each Wednesday at 11:59pm.
Replies to two classmates are due by Friday at 11:59 pm.
The content for Canvas Discussions will vary by week. Links to artifacts will be posted
directly to the Discussions page.
4 points each week over 5 weeks = 20 points total for Canvas Discussions.
Evaluation
Individual posts (worth 2 points) will be evaluated according to the following criteria:
     • Has length of 150-200 words
     • Demonstrates a substantial engagement with the selected artifacts for that week
     • Offers at least one thematic connection to the concepts explored in course literature
Replies to two classmates (worth 2 points total) will be evaluated according to the following
criteria:
     • Each reply has a length of 50-100 words
     • Demonstrates a thoughtful consideration of classmates’ ideas
     • Offers a follow up question, extension, or connection


                                                                 ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 10
Group Presentation
In small groups, you will undertake an oral presentation at a Friday Zoom meeting related to
one topic or idea from the modules for that week. Your presentation should bring a new
perspective or direction to the topic. This is an open-ended and creative assignment, which
asks you to take initiative in analyzing the topic.
The presentation must relate to one of the themes for the week; it may or may not start
from a specific point in the text. This is not a report, but rather an analysis and discussion.
Plan your presentation carefully for 15-20 minutes; do not go over 20 minutes so that
there is time for discussion.
Following the formal presentation, your group will facilitate a discussion for 20-25
minutes. This should be planned and structured. It can involve consideration of questions
in small or large groups, an interactive activity, or some other format.
Some ways to approach the presentation (there are other possibilities):
    • Description of a particular current context, event, organization, or institution for
        which one of the topics of the week is relevant or dramatized
    • Consideration of a possible application of one of the ideas from the reading in a
        school or other social context
    • Contextualization of one of the topics of the week in a historical tradition, social
        movement, school of thought, etc.
Notes:
    • You will need to prepare slides for the presentation; you will share your screen to
        present them during the Zoom meeting. (Please also upload your slides to Canvas
        through the Group Presentation assignment.)
    • All group members must be involved in planning and delivering the presentation.
    • Avoid video clips in your presentation, unless absolutely necessary.
Evaluation
Presentations will be evaluated on: 1) depth of analysis and creativity of presentation; 2)
quality of planning and collaboration among presenters; 3) insights offered on one of the
week’s topics; 4) preparation of discussion to follow presentation.


                                                              ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 11
Autobiographical Essay
In this essay (4 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on your own previous life
experience as it relates to the topics and ideas we have been considering in class. The
question for you to respond to in this assignment is:
    •    Who are you, and how has your identity been influenced by, and constructed
         in relationship to your educational experiences?
“Educational experiences” includes school, but can also include other educational
experiences in your family, with peers, or in other contexts. This essay is concerned with
how your development has been connected to the educational, social, and cultural context
you have come from. Along the way you should consider how some of the racial, class,
cultural, and gender understandings, differences, and processes that we have
discussed have affected you (and also, if you want, how you have responded). You
should provide specific descriptions of experiences to make your essay more vivid, and
should analyze these experiences to explain their importance and meanings. (You do
not need to tell your whole life story.)
For this assignment, it is important to connect your description to the topics and ideas we
have been concerned with in class; however, you do not have to cite specific pages in the
texts or lectures.
The Autobiographical Essay (as a Word document) is due on June 26.
Evaluation
This essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1) specific discussion of
personal experience and identity, 2) depth of analysis and insights, 3) connections drawn
to ideas and topics considered in the course.


                                                               ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 12
Crisis Learning Journal
Recent social crises (including the coronavirus pandemic, racist police violence, and
economic dislocation, and others) have caused wrenching changes and upheaval, revealing
aspects of power and oppression; forcing us to explore new ways to live; and at times
creating opportunities for new learning. In this assignment, you will describe what you are
learning outside of school in this context. You can reflect on emotional struggles/strategies,
social and political consciousness, communication and relationships, autonomous
intellectual pursuits, or other areas. Consideration of learning during this time is not
intended to minimize the suffering these crises have caused, but on the contrary to provide
an opportunity to reflect on our experiences and to think about how we can confront
challenges more powerfully as individuals and as collectives.
In this assignment, you will describe what you have learned or are learning (understood
broadly) during the time period of the class and in the context of the current historical
moment. This journal does not need to focus on the formal content of the course (although
connections are fine), but rather on your out-of-school experiences and reflections.
It is up to you how you want to structure the journal (e.g. as occasional entries or as one
larger reflection); you are not expected to organize your journal in essay format. It is due in
two installments (approx. 700 words each): the first due on June 20 and the second due on
July 5. Enter responses directly into the submission field on Canvas.
The emphasis in this assignment is on giving you a space to reflect. All journals responding
to the guidelines will receive full credit.


                                                                ALD 327, De Lissovoy, p. 13
Final Reflective Essay
In this essay (5-7 typed double-spaced pages), you will reflect on what you have learned
during the course and its various assignments, and how it has affected your thinking
about teaching, learning, and/or schooling. In the course of your discussion, you should
engage explicitly with specific course concepts and readings that have made a
difference to you. The assignment is subjective in nature; in this essay, you should
coherently describe, from your own perspective, your intellectual growth in relation to
this material. (Some questions that might spur your thinking for this assignment: How
did the course, and connected experiences, challenge or change your thinking? How did
it confirm or extend your own insights or experiences? How did it feel to you to work
through the arguments presented? What remains as an important problem or gap for
you?)
In referring to course texts, make sure you use specific citations to authors, including
quotations (provide page numbers for quotes). Do not summarize the texts; instead, they
will serve as tools to help you work through your ideas. You can also refer to your own
life experience to help you develop your narrative if you wish; however, this is not an
autobiographical essay but rather a narrative of your own response to the course content.
The Final Reflective Essay (as a Word document) is due on July 11.
Evaluation
The final reflective essay will be evaluated according to the following criteria: 1) depth
and interest of reflections, analysis, and ideas, 2) specific engagement with course
readings and concepts, and 3) organization and coherence of overall argument/narrative.
