                              The University of Texas at Austin
                        College of Fine Arts: Art Education Division
               AED 381K - Contemporary Issues in Art Education
AED 381K                                     Instructor:
Contemporary Issues in Art Education                 Dr. Donalyn Heise
Course Day/time: Wednesday 6 – 9 pm                  Office Hours—Wednesdays 3:00-5:00 pm or by appt
Classroom: ART bldg. 3.408                           Office—ART 3.414
Term: Fall 2019                                      Office Phone—
                                                     Email: dheise2@utexas.edu
                                        Course Syllabus
Description
This graduate course is designed to provide students with the opportunity to engage with and
discuss a variety of contemporary issues within the field of art education. In so doing, students
are challenged to recognize the dynamic function art education performs in both education
and society today. A range of topics is discussed in class, including the role current social
issues and ecological engagements play in our world. Moreover, issues surrounding art
education, visual and material culture, technology, multiculturalism, gender studies,
interdisciplinary connections, and contemporary art are explored. Some issues for
investigation by the class are identified by the instructor during the initial weeks of the course;
later in the semester contemporary issues for discussion are generated by the students.
Objectives
This course is designed for each student to:
• Recognize that art education can play a significant role in the exploration of contemporary
    issues in the areas of art, education, and society.
• Secure foundational grounding in knowing some of the primary contemporary issues in
    art education.
• Explore in depth, a specific self-selected contemporary topic/issue within the field of art
    education.
• Gain experience in preparing and leading a class discussion directed toward a
    contemporary issue within the field of art education.
Format
This graduate seminar centers on reading about and discussing contemporary issues within
the field of art education. Conversation about issues in art education is at the heart of the
class, and students are expected to engage in leading and participating in class discussion
throughout the semester.
Texts
One textbook and readings (available on Canvas) are required for the course.
Text: Anderson, T., Gussak, D., Hallmark, K. K., & Paul, A. (Eds.). (2010). Art Education
         for Social Justice. Reston, VA: National Art Education Association.
Other required readings are available on Canvas (see Modules).
Please bring to class each week all readings assigned to be completed for that particular
    class session.


Requirements/Assignments
Weekly QQQQ Papers—4 of 8 weeks
        (9/4, 9/11, 9/18, 9/25, 10/2, 10/9,10/16, 10/23)       50 pts each           200 pts
Attendance and Active Participation                    15 classes x 20 pts each      300 pts
Student Issues-Based Presentation/Discussion Session                                 200 pts
Annotated Bibliography (Issue or Topic Based)                                        100 pts
Final Assignment: Creative artwork, scholarly essay and presentation                 200 pts
University Grading System (+/-)
A (4.00)        A- (3.67)       B+ (3.33)      B (3.00)        B- (2.67)      C+ (2.33)
C (2.00)        C- (1.67)       D+ (1.33)      D (1.00)        D- (0.67)      F (0.00)
Attendance
Class attendance is required. Please notify the instructor in advance if you know you will be
absent from class. Full participation in this course can only be achieved by attending all
sessions. Missing more than one class could adversely affect your grade. Please check
with the professor, should you need to miss more than one class session.
Course Information
All assignments are due on the day specified in the course schedule and in Canvas.
Assigned papers must be completed by using a word processor and submitted on Canvas
unless otherwise discussed. QQQQ papers must be submitted 24 hours prior to class (see
calendar).
Changes to Course Schedule:
The course schedule and assignments are subject to change. All changes will be
announced in class, through email, and/or on Canvas. Be sure to check your email and
Canvas daily for any announced changes. When you miss a class session, it is your
responsibility to find out about any new or changed assignments.
Work turned in late will be lowered by one full letter grade. No late work will be accepted
after one week unless otherwise negotiated with the professor. Appeals to have a grade
raised must be made within two weeks of the return of the graded assignment.
Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
Cell Phone Usage
Refrain from texting and phone calls during class time. If you have an emergency, step
outside so that you do not distract others from learning.


University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Academic Integrity—Plagiarism. From the Office of the Dean of Students.
Plagiarism can occur with all types of media—scholarly or non-academic, published or
unpublished—written publications, Internet sources, oral presentations, illustrations,
computer code, scientific data or analyses, music, art, and other forms of expression.
Borrowed material from written works can include entire papers, one or more paragraphs,
single phrases, or any other excerpts from a variety of sources such as books, journal
articles, magazines, downloaded Internet documents, purchased papers from commercial
writing services, papers obtained from other students (including homework assignments),
etc. As a general rule, the use of any borrowed material results in plagiarism if the original
source is not properly acknowledged. So you can be held accountable for plagiarizing
material in either a final submission of an assignment or a draft that is being submitted to
an instructor for review, comments, and/or approval.
For a thorough discussion of “Scholastic Dishonesty” at The University of Texas at Austin,
including consequences for scholastic dishonesty, see the following website:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, or other similar tool that
compares submitted material to an archived database of published work to check for
potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to determine if a paper is the
student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty
member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been
plagiarized.
Safety
For information regarding safety procedures at UT, see: https://besafe.utexas.edu/
Including SUREwalk https://www.utsg.org/request-a-sure-walk/
Safety Tips: https://besafe.utexas.edu/safety-tips-apps
Counseling and Mental Health https://cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/index.html
Behavior Concerns Advice Line https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line
Night Rides https://parking.utexas.edu/night
SURE Walk is a student-run volunteer group that provides pedestrian escorts to the
university community on school nights. Thanks to the Student Government, this service is
available to university students, staff and faculty, so improving your safety is as simple as
contacting SURE Walk and asking for a walk home (campus vicinity) or to another part of
campus. Any student or employee of The University of Texas at Austin can contact the
SURE WALK help desk and ask for a walk. Two volunteers—one male and one female—
will walk you home or to another location on campus or to the greater campus area
(including west and north campus, etc.).


I have received a copy of the syllabus for AED 381K Contemporary Issues in Art
Education. I am aware and agree to abide to the academic, ethical and safety
requirements as described in the syllabus.
SIGNATURE:
PRINT Name:
DATE:
STUDENT ID:
EMAIL:
PHONE:
