                                 Anthropology of the Himalayas
               ANS 361.27/ANT 324L/AAS330 – Unique 31350/31665/32190
                           University of Texas at Austin – Fall 2019
                                             RPL 0.122
                                 Tuesday/Thursday 2 - 3:30 PM
                                         Heather Hindman
      Office: WCH (Will C. Hogg) 4.104 C (this is difficult to find)– Phone: 471-1667
                    E-mail: h.hindman@mail.utexas.edu (preferred contact)
  Office Hours: Tuesday 3:30-4:30, Thursday 12:30 - 1:30 -- Other times by appointment
Course Description
This course looks at the history and culture of the Himalayan region, including Northeast
India, sections of Pakistan and Afghanistan, and Tibet, but especially Nepal. Some
understanding of Asian history, politics and religion will be helpful (but not necessary) as
our attempt will not be a comprehensive survey of the region. The Himalayas have been
the site of a great deal of anthropological attention and as such we will be simultaneously
be exploring several key theoretical, historical and methodological issues within the
discipline of anthropology as we learn about places and people in the region. Particular
attention will be paid to the area as a site for negotiating identity (caste and indigeneity),
development politics, anthropocene, music and diasporas as well as the current political
tensions in the region. At the conclusion of the class, students should have a stronger idea
of the important role this area has played in the political, religious and social imagination
of the world and an appreciation of concepts such as ritual theory, social movements,
modernity and gender studies.
Texts and Readings
Three books have been ordered as required reading for this class:
Craig, Sienna. 2012. Healing Elements: Efficacy and the Social Ecologies of Tibetan Medicine.
         Berkeley: University of California Press.
Liechty, Mark. 2003. Suitably Modern: Making Middle-Class Culture in a New Consumer
         Society. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Beskey, Sarah, 2013. The Darjeeling Distinction: Labor and Justices on Fair-Trade Tea
         Plantations in India. Berkeley: University of California Press.
These books are available at the UT Co-op bookstore, but also via on-line booksellers. (There
should be no edition problems.) Note all these books are also available at the library for quick
reference.
Our other readings are from assorted journals, books and edited collections. I have provided full
bibliographic information on them in the syllabus (just to get us in the habit of providing
citations). These will be found in “FILES” on our class Canvas page. Please check Canvas
regularly – syllabus updates and additional information will often be posted there. You should
bring the relevant text to class each day as we will be discussing the texts in class and that will be
facilitated by you having something to remember the ideas. We will also be watching several
films in class – I consider these texts as well. I recommend you take notes on them and you
should feel free to discuss them in your papers – visual material is intellectual material!
                                                                                                     1


Readings listed for a given class day should be completed BEFORE coming to class to enable
your active participation in discussion. If you are not able to do the readings, come to class
anyway – but I anticipate this will only happen once or twice during the semester. (If student
preparation becomes a problem, I reserve the right to introduce in-class quizzes as an
enforcement mechanism.)
Assignments
There are six components to how your performance in this class will be evaluated. NOTE: On
the syllabus all assignments are listed in Bold Italics. The listed assignments must be turned in at
the beginning of the noted class, on paper.
(#1 & 2) Class participation in this course is highly valued. (Perhaps needless to say, but
attendance is an element of this – participating in class is difficult if you are not in class.
Attendance is thus also a significant part of your participation grade.) Participation is more than
‘talking a lot’ – instead it is being an enthusiastic, prepared and considerate member of a learning
community. To this end, coming to class prepared with notes and questions is often useful.
Given that not everyone feels comfortable speaking in class, there are other ways you can
participate. If you wish to contribute, but feel more comfortable writing, please feel free to send
me an email with your thoughts on recent reading or to post a note on Canvas in our Discussion
Board. I also encourage you to discuss in class events happening in the Himalayan region or
issues raised by the course material that relates to other classes, but also remember…this is a
situation where more is not better – quality over quantity.
In this class we will be talking about divisive, controversial and important issues – sex, religion,
race, etc. – I expect students to show respect to themselves and other members of the learning
community in these discussions. Please be considerate of one another. All opinions are welcome
in this course if presented with civility and scholarly rigor.
As a part of our discussions, we may have quizzes or in-class writing exercises if this becomes
useful or necessary.
(#3) There are classes throughout the term that will be lead by student presentation teams. These
take place during the reading of the major texts of the class and in those days one or more
students will be responsible for introducing the reading for the day and beginning class
discussion. The “formal” oral presentation should not take more than 15-20 minutes. You
should not summarize the material, but perhaps provide a few signposts to refresh participants’
memories. Your main contribution should be to provide some context for the reading (although
faculty lectures will be doing this as well, and thus coordination of the presentation between
faculty and student is useful), relate the material to other ideas in the class, highlight key concepts
and raise critical questions of the text that can lead to discussion. The student leader(s) should
also be prepared to guide discussion throughout the class. It sounds like a lot – but this sort of
preparation should be what most students are doing for most class periods. The main expectation
is that the student be the most prepared one for that day.
(#4) There are four short papers throughout the class - you can choose three to complete. The
length for these should be between 750-1500 words (3-6 pages) and hopefully the later papers
will be longer than the earlier ones. These papers may require some outside research, using both
popular and scholarly sources, although the main material will be drawn from the class. (Any
material, including wikipedia, newspapers or commercial websites that you consult MUST be
cited!) Your short papers should discuss one narrow area, topic, theory, period, etc. from the
reading for the section and explore it in more detail. These should be formally written papers
with an argument but can include your opinion and reflections as well as any additional scholarly
                                                                                                      2


research you have done. I can provide topics - or if you have a particular area of interest you may
select your own topic WITH PRIOR APPROVAL.
(#5) There will be an exam – but it will be short and minor. This is a class about concepts and
ideas – nonetheless, you should leave the class with a better idea about the history, geography and
politics of the Himalayan region, as well as a new mastery of anthropological concepts such as
liminality, practice/praxis, power, social movements, etc. I anticipate (and dearly hope) that the
average grade for this final exam will be over 95% and that it is an easy way to gain points. This
is merely an attempt to be sure the class conveys some grasp of the region as a whole and that
students can find Kashmir on a map at the end of the class.
(#6) The Final Paper is, well, a final paper, but need not be a final statement or a proclamation of
total knowledge. The final paper should be a revision and expansion of one of the short papers
written during the class. Keep this requirement in mind as you write your short papers and do
the readings. I encourage you to write about areas of interest, but they must also be relevant to
the class and of some scholarly rigor. The best final papers are ones that in some way begin
within the first two weeks of the class and are something students continue to reflect on after the
class is over.
                                                       An insight into the mind of your professor –
                                                       I dislike the grading aspect of teaching and
The numbers…                                           am far more enthusiastic about talking about
         Participation/Attendance 15%                  how you are doing in the course than
         Student Presentations 10%                     arguing over letters and numbers. Having a
         3 Short papers           40%                  conversation before an assignment is due
         Exam                     10%                  about the learning process and how each
         Final Paper              25%                  individual can improve has proven more
                                                       useful for students seeking to do well in the
                                                       course than looking at “A”, “B” or “C” at
                                                       the top of your paper.
                                                                                                     3


My Policies
          ABSENCES
          I expect students to come to class regularly, on time and prepared. If you do not do this,
not only will your grade be negatively affected, but it disrupts the learning process of your fellow
students as well as showing a lack of respect for the course. This is admittedly one of my pet
peeves. If you must miss a class, make arrangements with your fellow students to make up the
material. There are no ‘free absences’ in the class outside of legitimate and documented needs.
Attending class means showing up on time, prepared and ready to learn. If you are not prepared –
which I don’t anticipate will ever happen – come to class anyway. I do not require
documentation of medical absences, but please keep me informed, preferably in advance. Many
problems can be solved if you keep in contact with your professors.
          ACADEMIC HONESTY
          I expect students to conduct their research and writing honestly and to reference any
sources consulted. Plagiarism is theft and a particular heinous crime to those whose life is
writing and research. Any dishonest academic practice will be referred to the administration for
investigation. I encourage collaboration among students, which is different from copying or
paper trading. One can never be accused of academic dishonesty if you acknowledge where your
ideas came from. Learning how to master a combination of direct citation, paraphrase and idea
acknowledgement takes time and practice. In the meantime, CITE EVERYTHING. If in doubt
about the ethics of a situation, contact me – do not guess.
          COMMUNICATION
          I enjoy meeting with students in office hours and exchanging email with students. YET,
I do not check email every 10 minutes. I am very eager to answer student questions by email,
discuss points of the reading or relevant outside materials, but please think before you write.
Show respect in your communication with me and with one another. I rarely use my office
phone, you are more likely to get a response from me by email.
          MISCELLANEOUS
- Turn off your cell phone when you get to class.
- I DO NOT ALLOW LAPTOPS IN CLASS. It has just become too much of a problem. If
you have a documented need to use a laptop, please provide it. Recent studies suggest that
students remember things better if written down the old-fashioned way, with paper and pen.
- You may eat and drink in class, if it is subtle and not distracting to you or other students. A cup
of coffee – great – a roast chicken dinner – wait until after class.
University Notices and Policies
Global Cultures Flag
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion
of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-
U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester,
complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your
writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to
read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.
                                                                                                            4


University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e- mail regularly and frequently to stay current
with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your disability
from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester so we can discuss
the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam, you should remind me of any testing
accommodations you will need. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259
(voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss
by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
               Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest
                exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
               If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
               In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
SYLLABUS POLICY SUMMARY – If in doubt - ask! I am much happier
discussing potential problems and concerns than dealing with events in the past or
problems that have been allowed to grow over time.
                                                     SCHEDULE
(This reading list is subject to change. I promise to give advanced notice, but you must
check Canvas and your UT email regularly.)
August 29             Introduction to the class and policies
           Ridiculously superficial introduction to geography and religion in the region.
           Video
                                                                                                                         5


September 3 Anthropology’s relationship with the Himalayas
             “People and Cultures of the Himalayas” by Gerald Berreman, Asian
             Survey 3(6) (June 1963), pp. 289-304.
      NOTE: This article is more than 50 years old. It provides important information,
      but should also be read in its historical context.
             Reference- A History of Nepal by John Whelpton. Cambridge: Cambridge
             University Press, 2005.
      NOTE: I don’t expect you to read all of this book. But it is useful for the exam or
      when you don’t remember a mentioned historical figure - or wikipedia....
September 5 Pictures are Worth Many Words
             Selections from film and text Himalaya by Michael Palin. London:
             Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 2004.
Himalayas through Music
      10     Stirr, Anna. "Introduction," in Singing across divides : music and intimate
             politics in Nepal. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017, PP. 1-28.
      12     Greene, Paul. “Electronic and Affective Overdrive.” in Metal Rules the
             World. Durham: Duke University Press, 2012, PP. 109-134.
             Van Ommen, Premila “Himalayan melodies and heavy metal.”
             https://himalmag.com/himalayan-melodies-heavy-metal/
             Student Presentation
      17     Diehl, Keila. “When Tibetan Refugees Rock, Paradigms Roll.” in
             Constructing Tibetan Culture: Contemporary Perspectives. Frank Korom
             ed. Quebec: World Heritage Press, 1997. PP 122-159.
             Student Presentation
      19     Adams, Vincanne. “Karaoke as Modern Lhasa, Tibet: Western Encounters
             with Cultural Politics.” Cultural Anthropology 11(4), pp. 510-546.
             Student Presentation
Tea and Labor
      24     The Darjeeling Distinction - Introduction (and start Ch. 1)
DUE Paper on Section 1
      26     The Darjeeling Distinction - Ch. 1&2 (“Darjeeling” and “Plantation)
             Student Presentation
                                                                                        6


October 1     The Darjeeling Distinction - Ch. 3&4 (“Property” and “Fairness”)
             Student Presentation
       3     The Darjeeling Distinction - Ch. 5 (“Sovereignty”) and Conclusion
             Student Presentation
       8     “Across the Interface of State Ethnography: Rethinking Ethnology and its
             Subjects in Multicultural India.” C. Townsend Middleton. American
             Ethnologist 38(2): 249-266.
DUE Paper on Section 2
Lions and Tigers and Bears, oh my
       10    Mocko, Anne and Shaunna Barnhart, “All the King’s Horses, All the
             King’s Elephants,” HIMALAYA 38(1).
             Craig, Sienna, “Windhorses and Dharma Warriors” in Horses and
             Humans. Oxford: British Archaeological Reports, 2000, pp. 339-354
             Student Presentation
       15    Locke, Piers, “Elephants as persons, affective apprenticeship, and
             fieldwork with nonhuman informants in Nepal.” HAU: Journal of
             Ethnographic Theory 7(1): 353-376.
       17    LIBRARY SESSION
       22    Mathur, Nayanika. “A Remote Town” from Paper Tiger Cambridge:
             Cambridge University Press, 2015, PP. 36-59.
             Student Presentation
Becoming Middle Class in Kathmandu
       24    Suitably Modern Chapters 1-3
             Student Presentation
       29    Suitably Modern Chapters 4-6
             Student Presentation
       31    Suitably Modern Chapters 7-9
November 5 Suitably Modern Chapter 10
DUE Paper on Section 3
November 7 - Contemporary materials on Kashmir
Nov. 12      Healing Elements - Intro. and Chapter 1
                                                                                      7


       14   Healing Elements - Chapter 2 and 3
            Student Presentation
       19   Healing Elements Chapter 4 and 5
            Student Presentation
       21   “Sari Soldiers”
       26   Healing Elements Chapter 6 and Conclusion (skipping 7)
DUE Paper on Section 4
Nov. 28     THANKSGIVING
December 3  Aftershocked: Reflections on the 2015 Earthquakes in Nepal
            https://culanth.org/fieldsights/series/aftershocked-reflections-on-the-2015-
            earthquakes-in-nepal
December 5  Wrap up, news, exam prep
FINAL PAPER DUE December 13th at 4PM
(EXAM time TBA)
                                                                                       8
