       ANATOMY AND BIOLOGY OF THE HUMAN SKELETON
                                                SYLLABUS
ANTHROPOLOGY 366 (31225)                                                                       FALL 2019
PROFESSOR
  • Dr. John Kappelman (jkappelman@mail.utexas.edu
  • Office: SAC 5.160, telephone: 512-471-0055
  • Office hours: M and W: 12-1 pm in SAC 5.160, or by appointment
CLASS MEETINGS
  • M and W: 1–3.30 pm in SAC 5.172
PREREQUISITES
  • Anthropology 301 and upper-division standing, or permission of the instructor
  • Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
      Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259
DESCRIPTION (see the UT Canvas class website)
      This class introduces the student to an in-depth study of the human skeleton. Class sessions combine
  lecture and laboratory sessions and cover primarily skeletal identification with some attention to
  developmental biology and functional morphology, and a special focus on identification skills as they relate to
  forensics and archaeological studies. This class is not, however, solely concerned with simple identifications
  of complete skeletal elements; although it is important to master this skill, exams focuses on identifications of
  fragmentary elements and even broken portions of elements, the anatomical features of elements, siding,
  pathology, taphonomy, and determinations of age and sex. Students will be introduced to new 3D imaging
  techniques for studying the skeleton and have the opportunity to apply these techniques to their own forensic
  case study term project if desired.
      This class requires both intensive in-class and out-of-class study. Participants must be prepared to handle
  actual human osteological specimens and have a professional approach to the subject and the human remains.
  Expertise in human skeletal identification is especially applicable to the fields of archeology, biological
  anthropology, health sciences, law, and law enforcement.
GRADING
  • Weekly exams and problem sets (there is no final exam):                             60%
  • Case study:                                                                         25%
  • Class and lab participation (attendance is taken!):                                 15%
  • Grades (rounded to whole number with + and -):                       A        90-100%
                                                                         B          80-89%
                                                                         C          70-79%
                                                                         D          60-69%
                                                                         F            <60%
TEXTBOOKS AND ELECTRONIC MEDIA
  • Steele and Bramblett, 1988. The Anatomy and Biology of the Human Skeleton. Texas A&M University
      Press, College Station, TX. (Note: we use the vocabulary in this text.)
  • Bass, 1995. Human Osteology. Special Publication No. 2, Missouri Archaeological Society, Columbia,
      MO.
  • Buikstra and Uberlaker, 1994. Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal Remains.
  • See www.eSkeletons.org for a web-based version of the human and primate skeleton.
                                                        1


CLASS SCHEDULE
  Aug. 28  Introduction to the class. Introduction to bone biology; introduction to Skull; and
           description of Case study project.
  Sept. 2  No class
  Sept. 4  Skull (continued)
  Sept. 9  First one hour for skull study.
           QUIZ: Skull; Introduction to Vertebrae
  Sept. 11 Vertebrae (continued)
  Sept. 16 QUIZ: Vertebrae; Introduction to Chest
  Sept. 18 Chest (continued)
  Sept. 23 QUIZ: Chest; Introduction to Arm
  Sept. 25 Arm (continued)
  Sept. 30 QUIZ: Arm; Introduction to Hand
  Oct. 2   Hand (continued)
  Oct. 7   QUIZ: Hand; Introduction to Pelvis
  Oct. 9   Pelvis (continued)
  Oct. 14  QUIZ: Pelvis; Introduction to The Leg
  Oct. 16  Leg (continued)
  Oct. 21  QUIZ: Leg; Introduction to The Foot
  Oct. 23  Foot (continued)
  Oct. 28  QUIZ: Foot; Introduction to Dentition
  Oct. 30  Dentition (continued)
  Nov. 4   QUIZ: Dentition; Introduction to Applications: 3D imaging
  Nov. 6   Your case study
  Nov. 11  Your case study
           Problem set 1: estimation of stature and body mass
  Nov. 13  Your case study
  Nov. 18  Your case study
           Problem set 2: estimation of sex and age
           Problem set 1 DUE
  Nov. 20  Your case study
  Nov. 25  Your case study
           Problem set 2 DUE
  Nov. 27  Thanksgiving Holiday (no class meeting)
  Dec. 2   Your case study (continued)
  Dec. 4   Your case study (continued)
  Dec. 9   Last class day (this is a Monday)
           Case study project due
                                                     2


ACADEMIC HONESTY
  Students who cheat not only cheat themselves but also cheat other students in the class as well as the
      University. This class has a zero tolerance policy for cheating.
  Any student found cheating will receive an F in the class and will be directed to the appropriate
      University authorities for additional sanctions including possible dismissal from the University.
      Please see Honor Code to review the UT policy.
  Students ARE NOT permitted to copy answers from or share information with another student during
      an exam. Students are not permitted to look at each other’s exam sheets during an exam. If you
      finish a question before time is up, keep your eyes directed to your exam!
  Students ARE NOT permitted to share problem sets and answers with other students unless they are
      specifically directed to collaborate and work in teams.
  Students ARE NOT permitted to submit problem sets for one another.
  Any questions about problem sets and exams should be directed to the professor and NOT to your
      fellow students. If you have any questions, please ask the professor!
IMPORTANT DATES AND DEADLINES TO REMEMBER:
  2 Sept.     Labor Day Holiday (no class)
  3 Sept.     Last day of official add/drop period
  13 Sept.    Twelfth Class Day
  31 Oct.     Last day a student may, with their dean’s approval, withdraw or drop a class, or change to
              pass/fail basis.
  27-30 Nov. Thanksgiving Holiday
  9 Dec.      Last day of the semester
                                                      3


SAC 5.172 Schedule Fall 2019
  It is likely that you will want to (and need to !) study the osteological specimens and work on your case
  study project outside of the scheduled class and lab times (just as you would work on a term paper outside
  of class time). You can use the room schedule below to determine when SAC 5.172 is free. If you have a
  smart UT ID card (and if you don’t, you’ll need to get one!), you will be granted UT ID card-activated
  access to the room. You will need to be sure that the osteological specimens are put away and the
  cabinets and room locked when you leave. If you use the room outside of our formally scheduled calls
  and lab times, you are responsible for ensuring the security of the skeletal collections. You are not
  permitted to allow unauthorized people into the room, and are not permitted to have food in the room. If
  you work in the room before another class starts, you must have everything cleaned up and put away and
  be out of the room 10 minutes before the start of that class. (For example, if you work in the lab early
  Tuesday morning, you will need to be out of the room no later than 8.50 am.)
  Here below is the Fall 2019 schedule for the room. It is relatively full, but there are some available
  windows. And there is always Saturday and Sunday!
                                                          4
