                  ME 353 Engineering Finance - Summer 2020
Place and time: Zoom Class Meetings (Live and recorded): M W Th 1:00 - 3:30 pm
Professor:      Erhan Kutanoglu (a.k.a. Dr. K)
Office:         ETC 5.114
Office Hours:   M Th 12:15 - 12:45 pm via Zoom (If you need to see me outside of the office hours, please
                send me an e-mail to make an appointment.)
e-mail:         erhank@mail.utexas.edu
Teaching         Name                      Office Hours                    E-mail                   Office
Assistant:      Ashutosh Shukla         M Th 3:30-4:00pm        ashutosh.shukla@utexas.edu        ETC 5.138
Class Web page Canvas: http://canvas.utexas.edu
Course          ME 353. Engineering Finance.
Description     Evaluating the financial impact of engineering decisions. Comparing alternatives with cash
                flow analysis considering rate of return, inflation, and taxes, with emphasis on analyzing
                risk. Managing complex projects with activity scheduling and resource allocation
                considering cash flows. Methods include probabilistic analysis and simulation. Three
                lecture hours and two discussion hours a week for one semester.
                Prerequisites:
                Mathematics 408C, Mechanical Engineering 205 or 318M, and 335 with a grade of at least
                C in each, and admission to an appropriate major sequence in engineering.
Objective       The purpose of this course is to relate engineering decisions to the larger goals of business
                and government. Decisions made by design and manufacturing engineers require the
                expenditure of capital and affect the profitability of the organization. In addition to
                technical competence, engineering decisions must have economic justification. With this
                course the student will learn about the economic effects of decisions and methods for
                comparing engineering alternatives using economic criteria. The professor and TAs are
                dedicated to continually improving the teaching/learning activities of this course. We
                expect that the students will join us in this dedication.
Text            Fundamentals of Engineering Economics (Fourth Edition)
                Chan S. Park
                Pearson/Prentice Hall
                ISBN: 0-13-487007-7
                https://www.vitalsource.com/referral?term=9780134872728
                With MyLab Access – ISBN: 0134872754
                The textbook has an accompanying website: http://www.pearsonhighered.com/park/
Computational   Microsoft Excel
Tools


Lessons       I plan to hold live (and hopefully interactive) Zoom sessions at our scheduled class times.
              Please try to attend the live session if at all possible. I plan to record the live session and
              upload the recording after each class. You will also have access to PowerPoint slides and
              other material on Canvas. This will be useful for students who miss the live class session or
              for anyone for reviewing later on. We will rely on Canvas and Zoom, so if you experience
              any problems with either, please let me know as soon as possible so that we can get help to
              fix them.
TA Discussion You will have weekly discussion sessions with your TA. There will be specific assignments
Sessions      (case studies or events) to be done during your session and to be submitted via Canvas. You
              will earn learning activities points from your discussion session events, ranging from 0 to 4.
Homework      Homework assignments are done as individuals. They are due 11:59pm on the scheduled
              due date via Canvas. Homework credit is awarded to the learning activities portion of the
              grade. On each homework assignment, you receive 0, 1, 2, or 3 points. You receive 3 points
              if you did all of the problems correctly. You receive 2 points if you made a decent effort to
              do the homework and did most of the problems correctly. You receive 1 point if you only
              put in relatively little effort in doing the homework. 0 points are awarded if you do not hand
              in an assignment, or for all intents and purposes, your answers are equivalent to zero effort.
Exams         There is one midterm exam, scheduled as follows:
                            o Exam 1: June 24
              There will be a comprehensive final exam scheduled for July 10, 9:00 am - 12:00 pm.
              All students must take the exams and quizzes when scheduled. There will be no make-up
              exams, except for a documented medical emergency.
              Exams will cover material from the textbook and lecture. Exams will be open book and
              open notes. You may use a calculator (including financial calculators) or Excel during the
              exams. However, you must clearly show your work including cash flow diagrams and
              all formulas used in your solution. Your work needs to be such that someone could
              reproduce your answer without the use of a financial calculator or spreadsheet. No credit
              will be given for a problem where this is not the case.
Grading       There are two grade components for this course:
                   • Learning Activities: 0-30%, and
                   • Exams: 70-100%.
              The points for the learning activities (homework assignments and discussion session
              events) are added up to find a learning activities score and truncated to a maximum of 30.
              The total weight of the three exams is 100% (each exam equally weighted) minus the
              number of points earned for the learning activities.
              For example, if a student accumulates 30 LA points during the semester, and earns 75% and
              85% on the exams, then the final grade will be 30 + (100 - 30) * (75 + 85)/200 = 86. If, on
              the other hand, a student accumulates only 5 points during the semester, and earns 75% and
              85% on the exams, then the final grade will be 5+(100-5)*(75+85)/200 = 81. If a student
              with the same exams did not earn any LA points, the final grade will be 100*(75+85)/200 =
              80.
              If your overall weighted average falls within one of the following ranges, you are
              guaranteed one of the letter grades for the corresponding range.
                                                                                                          2


                                                    Average Overall Score            Letter Grade
                                                           90 - 100%                    A or A-
                                                            80 - 90%                 B+, B, or B-
                                                            70 - 80%                 C+, C, or C-
                                                            60 - 70%                 D+, D, or D-
                                                          Below 60%                        F
               Important Remarks:
               • Note that doing homework or events, even only a few assignments, can never lower
                    your course average.
               • I will be comparing your overall class average against everyone else's average,
                    including homework and events performance. Therefore, it is quite likely that someone
                    who has a lower test average yet did more homework and events will obtain a better
                    letter grade than you.
Regrading      If you feel that you weren't graded fairly on an exam question, first look at the solution key,
               then write a note to your TA explaining how your answer compares to the posted solution
               and why you think you deserve more credit. Hand in your note and exam to your TA or me
               no later than 1 week after the exam is returned. If you have a question about homework
               grading, you can discuss it with your TA, again with a note that explains your reason for
               deserving more credit.
Scholastic     The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
Dishonesty     leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
               expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
               toward peers and community. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
               dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
               course and dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, fellow
               students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
               strictly enforced. Cheating will not be tolerated, and incidents of dishonesty will be
               reported. For more information, and for what constitutes "cheating," see:
               http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php and http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-
               information/student-services/discipline/.
Students with  The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
Disabilities   adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. Students with disabilities may request
               appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
               Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
               http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. Please provide proper documentation from the SSD
               Office at the beginning of the semester.
Course         Please feel free to share any feedback you have during the semester and I will consider and
Evaluation     try to incorporate your suggestions into our teaching throughout the semester. Near the end
               of the semester, you will have an opportunity to anonymously evaluate the course and
               instructor using the standard Cockrell School of Engineering evaluation form. Your
               comments during and at the end of the semester will be greatly appreciated!
Religious Holy By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
Days           prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an exam, a
               work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
               opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Dropping       An engineering student must have the Dean's approval to add or drop a course after the 2nd
               class day of the semester. A student seeking to drop a class after the 2nd class day should
               visit the Cockrell School of Engineering Student Services, EER 2.848, 471-4321.
                                                                                                        3


Canvas       This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password
             protected site is created for each course. (Student enrollments in each course are updated
             each evening.) Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and
             collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and
             surveys. You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class
             work and announcements.
E-mail       In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be
Notification responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if
Policy       you are an employee of the University, your e-mail address in Canvas is your employee
             address. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address
             are available at https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-
             notification-policy.
Web Site and Web-based, password-protected class sites are associated with all academic courses taught
Privacy      at The University. The syllabus, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of
             information that may be available within this site. Site activities could include exchanging
             e-mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, a class e-
             mail roster will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
             in this electronic class roster must restrict their directory information in the Office of the
             Registrar, Main Building, Room 1.
Tentative    Please note: We may not cover all these topics and the order may be slightly different. We
Outline      may make adjustments during the semester.
             Foundations
             Chapter 1 – Engineering Economic Decisions
             Chapter 2 – Time Value of Money
             Chapter 3 – Understanding Money Management
             Decision Making
             Chapter 5 – Single Project Present-Worth Analysis
             Chapter 6 – Single Project Annual-Equivalence Analysis
             Chapter 7 – Single Project Rate-of-Return Analysis
             Chapter 5 – Multi-Project Present-Worth Analysis
             Chapter 6 – Multi-Project Annual-Equivalence Analysis
             Chapter 7 – Multi-Project Rate-of-Return Analysis
             Extension and Applications
             Chapter 8 – Single and Multiple Public Projects and Benefit-Cost Analysis
             Chapter 9 – Depreciation and Income Taxes
             Chapter 12 – Replacement Decisions
             Chapter 4 – Equivalence Calculations under Inflation
             Incorporating Uncertainty
             Chapter 11 – Handling Project Uncertainty
             Notes – Decision Trees
                                                                                                       4
