                                      Life Writing
                                     AMS 390/E 395M/WGS 393
                                              BUR 436B
                                      Professor Julia Mickenberg
                                   mickenberg@austin.utexas.edu
                               512-232-2650 (don’t leave a voicemail)
                  Office hours: Tuesdays, 12:30-3:30 (email if you plan to come in)
Course description:
Focusing on biography but also considering other genres such as autobiography, memoir, letters,
and diaries, this class considers the possibilities of life writing as a window into history, culture,
society, and politics as they relate to subjectivity, intimate relations, sexuality, and affect.
Covering a range of formal possibilities and disciplinary approaches as well as theoretical
perspectives, and emphasizing writings by women and feminist theory, the class will culminate
in either a critically-informed comparison of several (auto)biographical texts or the creation of a
work that uses a biographical or autobiographical frame for exploration of issues that extend
beyond the individual or individuals in question.
Required Texts (available from UT Co-op and/or UT Libraries on reserve or electronically):
Hermione Lee, Biography: A Very Short Introduction
Harriet Jacobs, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl
Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife’s Tale
Gertrude Stein, The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas
Erik Erikson, Young Man Luther
Joyce Johnson, Minor Characters
Saidiya Hartman, Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments
Lauren Redniss, Radioactive: A Tale of Love and Fallout
Ruth Behar, Translated Woman
Miroslava Chávez-Garcia, Migrant Longing: Letter Writing Across the U.S.-Mexico Border
Course procedures:
This course will self-consciously function as a team learning exercise in which all of us will gain
only as much as each member of the class is committed to the collective educational experience.


I have selected a number of primary, secondary, and theoretical texts that do something
interesting related to life writing, but I do not pretend to be an expert in the field, nor would I
claim that this is a definitive reading list. As such, I see myself as a guide and co-learner in this
enterprise of exploring the possibilities inherent in life writing, and I have tried both in my
choice of texts and in the structure of class procedures and assignments to foster an atmosphere
of engaged exploration and dialogue.
On most weeks, one member of the seminar will serve as a designated presenter/provocateur,
focusing on the assigned text or texts and offering an overview of the book’s reception upon its
publication and raising questions for discussion (you may also want to introduce one or more
theoretical texts in addition to assigned material). Another member of the class will give a short
presentation on a related life writing text, with the understanding that I don’t necessarily expect
you to read this related/supplemental text in its entirety (especially in the case of biographies that
can come in at close to 700 pages). Prior to class (by noon on the day of our class meeting, if not
earlier), members of the class should post on Canvas an initial response or set of questions for
discussion. This need not be longer than a few sentences, and it does not need to be fully
formulated or even especially coherent—the idea is simply to get the conversation going.
There will also be two formal written assignments:
    1. A book review of one of our assigned texts or of that text in relation to a supplemental
        text or texts. This can be written for a scholarly journal or for a more popular outlet,
        whichever you feel better serves your own needs and interests. Your review should focus
        as much upon sources, methods, and form as much as upon content. Due 1 week after our
        discussion of whatever text you choose; review should be approximately 3-5 pages,
        double spaced. My expectation is that you’ll write this either on the week that you’re
        presenting on the primary text or on the supplemental text, but it’s up to you; in either
        case do not put this off until the end of the semester. If it will save you from putting this
        assignment off we can have a sign-up sheet for students to make a tentative commitment.
    2. A more extended, analytical seminar paper that can either focus on 2-3 life writing texts,
        framing your discussion in a theoretical as well as social and historical context as a
        reflection of issues in life writing (suitable for publication in a scholarly journal such as
        Biography) OR a biographical or autobiographical study (or template for a longer study),
        that uses an individual or set of individuals to discuss larger issues. This can take a
        traditional scholarly form or being more creatively oriented. I’m also open to other
        forms/options for final paper—please see me if you have something else in mind. 15-20
        pages, due 1 week after last class meeting; rough drafts due Tuesday, May 5 for peer
        review and short presentation on May 7.
Schedule (subject to change):
Week 1: Thursday, January 23 Introduction
Optional reading: A.S. Byatt, The Biographer’s Tale—chapter 1
Film: Nobody’s Business
Week 2: Thursday, January 30


Hermione Lee, Biography: A Very Short introduction
Read approximately 30 pages of a text that Lee mentions/cites—I’ll highlight some of the key
ones on Jan 23.
Week 3: Thursday, Feb. 6th
•Harriet Jacobs, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl
•Sidonie Smith and Julia Watson, “Toolkit: Twenty-four Strategies for Reading Life Narratives”
•Sarah Emsley, “Harriet Jacobs and the Language of Autobiography.” Canadian Review of
        American Studies 28:2 (1998), 145-162.
Recommended: Smith and Watson, “Life Narrative in Historical Perspective”
Supplemental texts:
Choose in consultation with me (there are too many good autobiographies and memoirs out there
for me to list just one or two); I might suggest a more modern-day work that has been compared
to Jacobs’ eg. autobiographies of Elaine Brown, Angela Davis, or Assata Shakur
Week 4: Thursday, Feb. 13
Laurel Thatcher Ulrich, A Midwife’s Tale
Jill Lepore, “Historians Who Love Too Much: Reflections on Microhistory and Biography”
Journal of American History 88:1 (June 2001), 129-144.
Recommended:
Bunkers, Suzanne L. and Cynthia Anne Huff, Inscribing the Daily: Critical Essays on Women’s
Diaries (1996) (e-book)
Lejeune, Phillipe, On Diary
Supplemental/comparative text(s):
Carlo Ginzburg, The Cheese and the Worms
Natalie Zemon Davis, The Return of Martin Guerre
Week 5: Thursday, February 20 Literary Biography/Feminist Biography
(Note: our last hour of class this week will be held in the Harry Ransom Center)
Chapters from Hermione Lee, Virginia Woolf (sign up in advance)
Choose one (or two, or read them all):
•Diane Wood Middlebrook, “Telling Secrets” from The Seductions of Biography (Canvas)
•Hermione Lee, “Virginia Woolf’s Nose,” (Canvas)
•Richard Holmes, “Biography: Inventing the Truth,” from The Art of Literary Biography
(Canvas)
Supplemental:
Nancy Milford, Zelda


Diane Middlebrook, Anne Sexton: A Biography
Week 6: Thursday Feb. 27
Sadiya Hartman, Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments
Hartman, “Venus in Two Acts” in Small Axe 12:2 (June 2008), 1-14
Supplemental/comparative text(s):
Lisa Cohen, All We Know
Recommended: Alison Booth, How to Make It as a Woman: Collective Biographical History
from Victoria to the Present, esp. chapter five: “The World’s Fair Women: or, Racial Progress in
the Nineteenth Century” (Canvas)
Week 7: Thursday, March 5th Queering the auto/biographical
Gertrude Stein, The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas—
Nora Doyle, Gertrude Stein and the Domestication of Genius in The Autobiography of Alice B.
Toklas, Feminist Studies, Vol. 44, No. 1 (2018), pp. 43-69
Supplemental:
 Jenn Shapland, My Autobiography of Carson McCullers
A.J.A. Symons, The Quest for Corvo
Ian Hamilton, In Search of J.D. Salinger
Week 8: Psychobiography
Note: Class meets earlier this week (I’m traveling March 12th)
Erik Erikson, Young Man Luther
Recommended:
•Carolina du Plessis, “The Method of Psychobiography: Presenting a Step-wise Approach,”
Qualitative Research in Psychology 14:2 (Apr-June 2017), 216-237
•Donald Capps, “Erik H. Erikson’s Young Man Luther: A Classic Revisited.” Pastoral Psychology
(2015) 64:327–343
Supplemental:
Sigmund Freud, The Moses of Michelangelo: Art and Psychoanalysis
Elizabeth Young-Bruehl, Anna Freud: A Biography
SPRING BREAK
Week 9: Thursday, March 26 Scientific biography/graphic (auto)biography
Lauren Redniss, Radioactive: Marie & Pierre Curie: A Tale of Love and Fallout
Candida Rifkind, The Seeing Eye of Scientific Graphic Biography,” Biography 38:1 (winter
2015), pp. 1-22


Eva Hemmungs Wirtén , “The Pasteurization of Marie Curie: A (meta)biographical experiment.
 Social Studies of Science 45: 4 (August 2015), pp. 597-610
Supplemental text(s):
Alison Bechdel, Fun Home: A Family Tragicomic (2006)
Art Spiegelman Maus (I or II)
Week 10 Thursday, April 2—Power, politics and masculinity in biography
Robert Caro, “EOB 274” and one additional chapter from The Passage of Power: The Years of
        Lyndon Johnson
___, “The Secrets of Lyndon Johnson’s Archives,” New Yorker, Jan. 21, 2019
Norman Mailer, “A Novel Biography,” from Marilyn (Canvas)
William H. Epstein, “(Post) Modern Lives: Abducting the Biographical Subject” in Contesting
the Subject: Essays in the Postmodern Theory and Practice of Biography and Biographical
Criticism, ed. William H. Epstein (1991). (Canvas)
Supplemental Text:
Blanche Wiesen Cooke, Eleanor Roosevelt (any volume)
Week 11 Thursday, April 9 Memoir and Biography/Minor Characters and Milieus
Joyce Johnson, Minor Characters
Judy Long, “Feminist Biography,” in Telling Women’s Lives (Canvas)
Supplemental reading:
Carolyn Steedman, Landscape for a Good Woman
Week 12, Thursday, April 16 Biography as Anthropology
Ruth Behar, Translated Woman
Susana S. Martinez, “Coyotes, Comrades, y Colegas Theorizing the Personal in Ruth Behar’s
Tranlated Woman: Crossing the Border with Esperanza’s Story,” Meridians 5:2 (2005), 149-175
Supplemental reading: Mama Lola: A Vodou Priestess in Brooklyn
Week 13, Thursday, April 23 Letters and Crossings
Miroslava Chávez-García, Migrant Longing: Letter Writing Across the U.S.-Mexico Borderlands
Liz Stanley, “The Epistolarium: On Theorizing Letters and Correspondences,” Auto/Biography
12 (2004): 201-235.
Week 14, Thursday April 30th
Conferences
Week 15 Thursday May 7th
Peer review/presentations
