	                                   AHC 319D/CC319D/HIS 319D         	  
	                                    Ancient Mediterranean World     	  
                                                Fall 2019	  
                            Ancient Mediterranean World
                                          MW 9 am-10 am
                                              WAG 201
Instructor: Dr. Andrea Pittard
Email: apittard@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 217
Office Hours: MW 11 am-12 pm
TA: Kevin Lee
Email: kevin.s.lee@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 111
Office Hours: T 10:30-11:30 am, Th 1:30-2:30 pm
Discussion Sessions
Section Number                      Session Day/Time                  Session Place/Instructor
32765/32955/38110                   Thursdays 9 am-10 am              GAR 2.128/Kevin Lee
32775/32965/38120                   Thursdays 11 am-12pm              MEZ 2.118/Kevin Lee
32770/32960/38115                   Fridays 9 am-10am                 WAG 208/Kevin Lee
32780/32970/38125                   Fridays 11 am – 12 pm             MEZ 1.204/Andrea Pittard
You MUST attend the discussion session you registered for. If you are not able to attend the
session that your register for, please see your instructor immediately.
Course Description
Civilization, as we tend to think of it today, had its beginnings in the Near East and the areas
around the Mediterranean Sea. Ancient cultures such as the Sumerians, Egyptians, Greeks, and
Romans developed and expanded large urban civilizations that changed the trajectory of human
existence. This course provides an introduction to the history, culture, institutions, and
ideologies of these Ancient Mediterranean societies. We will begin in the Near East around 3000
BCE and move through time and geographical areas, ending with the Romans and the fall of the
Roman Empire, ca. 400 CE. We will look at a variety of evidence in our attempts to trace
Mediterranean history and understand Mediterranean cultures, including literary texts,
inscriptions, art, architecture, burials, material remains and goods. Our weekly lectures
(Mondays and Wednesdays) will cover the historical narrative and introduce themes (systems of
government, religious beliefs and practices, social hierarchies, artistic and literary conventions,
etc). Weekly discussion sessions (Thursdays or Fridays) will provide the opportunity to discuss
these themes and analyze primary evidence.
This course carries a Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. Your grad will be based on
                                                                            AHC 319D-Pittard/Lee 1


	                                   AHC 319D/CC319D/HIS 319D            	  
	                                    Ancient Mediterranean World        	  
                                                 Fall 2019	  
assignments dealing with the practice, beliefs, and histories of the ancient civilizations of the
Mediterranean basin, informed by literature and archaeology.
Course Goals
This course will provide a working knowledge of ancient Mediterranean history and culture, as
well as familiarity and appreciation of the literature, art, architecture, and institutions of each
cultural group we encounter. You will develop an understanding of the legacy of these cultures
and their influence over modern Western society. You will also have the opportunity for personal
reflection through our readings that deal with broad topics and questions such as identity,
beauty, conflict and morality. Through our readings, discussions, and writing assignments, you
will develop interpretive, reflective, and critical thinking skills, as well as the ability to articulate
your analyses in a thoughtful and coherent manner.
Required Texts
D. Brendan Nagle. The Ancient Mediterranean World: A Social and Cultural History. 8th
        Edition. Pearson. 2014. (Available on Amazon, AbeBooks, et al. and in PDF on Canvas)
John Haywood. The Penguin Historical Atlas of Ancient Civilizations. Penguin Books. 2005.
You are also required to have a subscription to Top Hat. All of my presentations will run through
Top Hat and we will have regular quizzes and discussions in class using this platform. To
subscribe, please go to tophat.com. I have sent each of you an invitation to the course page (to
the email you have provided to the UT directory). Please see me if you did not receive an
invitation.
We will have primary readings each week, as well. These will be available on Canvas. I will also
announce and give a brief intro for each week’s reading in lecture.
Grading
Your grade will be based on the following:
Top Hat quizzes and participation: 15%
Discussion session attendance and participation: 30%
Exam 1: 15%
Exam 2: 20%
Exam 3: 20%
Top Hat Quizzes and Participation: During each class, I will introduce multiple-choice, map
and discussion questions through Top Hat. These may be quick multiple choice or fill-in-the-
blank, or they may be longer individual and group discussion/reflection questions. Participation
in these will increase your engagement with the material, with me, and with your classmates. As
these are conducted in-class, they cannot be made up.
                                                                               AHC 319D-Pittard/Lee 2


	                                    AHC 319D/CC319D/HIS 319D         	  
	                                     Ancient Mediterranean World     	  
                                                 Fall 2019	  
Discussion Session Attendance and Participation: Our weekly discussion sessions provide an
opportunity for you to encounter primary sources from each cultural group we will focus on.
They are designed to teach you how to read, analyze, and critique ancient sources. You are
required to attend your discussion session each week. You will be allowed two unexcused
absences. You will lose 1% of your possible 30% for each additional absence. You will also be
required to come to each session prepared to participate. This means you will have read the
assigned readings, made notes on the readings and any discussion questions included with the
readings, and prepared additional comments or questions on the readings. Just attending the
sessions WILL NOT fulfill the 30% allotted to these sessions. Please bring all reading
assignments with you to the session.
Exams: You will have 3 exams in this course. These will be in-class, non-cumulative exams. Each
exam will consist of 1 short essay on historical events and social or cultural phenomena, based
loosely on the discussion questions we will address in discussion sessions. You will also have 4
slide IDs that will test your knowledge of the art, architecture and material goods we discuss. I
will provide a study guide for the exams at least 10 days prior to the exam date. You will need to
bring a bluebook to class for each of these exams.
Make-up exams will only be given in cases of documented emergencies, such as hospital visits,
traffic accidents, or other unforeseen and unavoidable circumstances for which you can provide
documentation (doctor’s note, accident report, etc). You must notify me as soon as you are able
to, but at least 1 hour prior to the exam, to take a make-up. If you have scheduling conflicts with
any of our exam dates (school athletics if you are an athlete, military obligation, religious
observance, etc.), speak with me immediately.
If you would like to discuss a grade on a quiz or test, you must meet with me within one week of
the receiving the graded quiz/exam. I will not review grades after this window.
Classroom Policies
The best way to contact me is via email at the address above. I will check my emails and respond
within 24 hours during the week. You are responsible for checking your school/canvas email, this
is where I will send correspondence. I expect professional and proper format on all emails.
Emails without salutations/greeting (Dear…) or without appropriate formatting (punctuation,
etc.) will not be answered. Please make sure to sign your name on all emails.
Attendance is absolutely necessary for success in this class. You will get the most out of this class
if you come every day with all readings completed and ready to ask questions or discuss.
Coming to class late and leaving early is distracting and disrespectful to your fellow classmates
and to me. If you need to leave early or come in late, notify me beforehand. Repeated tardiness
will affect your participation/attendance grade.
                                                                            AHC 319D-Pittard/Lee 3


	                                     AHC 319D/CC319D/HIS 319D              	  
	                                       Ancient Mediterranean World         	  
                                                    Fall 2019	  
Absences may be excused for religious holidays with prior notice (14 days) or for family and
medical emergencies as long as you are able to provide documentation within one week of the
absence.
Etiquette:
     • You must be respectful of your classmates and me at all times. This includes not speaking
         when others are speaking.
     • Laptops, tablets and cell phones are permitted; however they should ONLY be used for
         class participation. If you use your electronics in other, non-class-related capacities, you
         will receive a verbal warning for your first offence. You will be asked to leave if you
         continue to misuse your electronics to prevent disrupting or distracting your classmates.
     • Eating during class is also disruptive and should not be done in class.
Tips for Succeeding in this Class
     •   Come to each class prepared and ready to ask questions and discuss the day’s material.
     •   Keep up with the readings and take careful notes while you read.
     •   DO NOT wait until the last minute to acquire or review the course material.
     •   Begin working on your readings, study guides, and projects early.
     •   Ask questions! If at any point you feel lost in any way (on lecture or reading material, exam
         preparation, while writing or revising your essays, etc), please contact me right away. I am here to
         facilitate your learning and will do everything within my ability to do so.
Academic Dishonesty
Academic dishonesty refers to a variety of practices that will not be tolerated in this class. ANY
attempt to pass off another’s work as your own constitutes academic dishonesty. This includes,
but is not limited to: Looking at classmates’ tests or quizzes in order to use their answers as your
own, discussing answers with another student during an exam or quiz, using notes during a quiz
or test, copying homework either from another student or online answer key, etc. All work done
in this class should reflect your own efforts and comply with the University of Texas Honor Code
(below). Any instance of academic dishonesty will result in zero credit for the assignment, exam,
or test and will be reported to the Student Judicial Services. For more information, contact
Student Judicial Services at 471-2841, or go
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
                                                                                  AHC 319D-Pittard/Lee 4


	                                  AHC 319D/CC319D/HIS 319D          	  
	                                   Ancient Mediterranean World      	  
                                               Fall 2019	  
Special Accommodations
The University of Texas provides upon request appropriate accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. You must go through SSD to receive accommodations. Contact the
Office of the Dean of Students for more information at 471-6259 or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. Once you have the proper paperwork, please let me know
immediately if you need accommodation for disabilities.
If you, or one of your fellow students, are having any troubles, the university provides a variety of
services.
The Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) is a good place to start. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-
concerns-advice-line
Important Dates
9/2: Labor Day (No class)
10/2: Exam 1
10/31: Withdrawal deadline
11/11: Exam 2
11/27-30: Thanksgiving Break (No class)
12/9: Exam 3
                                                                           AHC 319D-Pittard/Lee 5
