                          THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
               STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:         SW n393T30              Instructor: Meagan Anderson Longley, MSSW
Unique Number:         88805                   Email: mlongley@austincf.org
Semester: Summer 2019                          Office: 3.122A
Meeting Time/Place: M/W                        Office Phone: 512-791-5638
                       5:30 – 8:00pm           Office Hours: Wednesdays 5:00 – 5:30pm
                       Room 2.118                              Other times by appointment
 GRANT DEVELOPMENT AND FUND-RAISING IN HUMAN SERVICES
I.     STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
       This course examines the context of how mission-based human service organizations
       engage funding institutions and philanthropic donors to invest financial and technical
       resources into their community initiatives. The course explores the processes and
       frameworks of cultivating critical resources – through development of compelling grant
       proposals, donor-engagement programs, and collaborative resource development networks
       – amidst a competitive external environment and seemingly scarce resources. Within the
       context of organizational and administrative social work practice, there will be continuous
       focus in the course on the strategies for funding the basic needs and priorities of populations
       at-risk and diverse populations.
II.    STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
       Upon completion of the course the student should be able to:
    1. Apply the principles, knowledge, skills, values, and ethics of social work in the
       planning and implementation of resource development initiatives as strategies for
       advocacy, self-sufficiency and empowerment on behalf of at-risk and affected
       populations.
    2. Demonstrate understanding of federal (IRS) and state-based laws authorizing the
       mission, structure, governance, operations, and financing of 501(c)(3) tax exempt not-
       for-profit organizations, relating to philanthropic fund raising, grant writing,
       stewardship of donor gifts and grants, and engagement of financial resources that
       generate organizational sustainability.
    3. Demonstrate the ability to construct a mission-based and evidence-based case for
       giving, drawing on research principles in the gathering of constituent data, needs
       assessments, and within the projection of specific, measurable, constituent outcome
       objectives, for which funding is sought.
    4. Demonstrate an understanding of the identities and funding criteria of key institutional
       funders: government grant funders, private foundations, community foundations,
       family foundations, operating foundations, corporations, corporate foundations, and
       individual donors.
                                                                                                     1


   5. Demonstrate an understanding of the core processes of grant writing – funder research,
       program development, organizational development, network-building, community
       relationship-development, program development, and financial management; and,
       demonstrate the ability to construct the core components of a grant proposal.
   6. Demonstrate an understanding of the core processes of fund development – annual
       giving programs, campaigns, special events, direct solicitation, direct marketing
       programs – as well as emerging strategies such as social entrepreneurship, web-based
       donor cultivation, and social accounting principles such as social return on
       (philanthropic) investment and social cost-benefit analysis.
III.   TEACHING METHODS
       Teaching methods will consist of lectures, discussion, individual and group exercises,
       presentations, guest lectures by practitioners-in-the-field, case studies, and field trip(s).
IV.    REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
       Ciconte, B. & Jacob, J. (2009). Fundraising Basics: A Complete Guide (Third Edition).
       Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
       Additional required and optional readings will be made available on Canvas, or
       distributed in class.
V.     COURSE REQUIREMENTS - ASSIGNMENTS
   I. Grant Proposal Assignment
Students will choose a non-profit organization, develop a case for support, research funding
opportunities, and write a proposal for funding. This agency will also be utilized for the special
event exercise. The segments of the project are:
       1) Choose non-profit – students will select an agency to use in their project. This can be
           a local, regional, national, or international agency. It will be important for the student
           to be able to access programmatic information from this agency (brochures, annual
           reports, websites, etc.). It is not necessary for students to contact the agencies, but it
           is allowable. Note that the case for support and grant proposal must be the original
           work of the student, and not drawn from actual grant proposals or case statements
           from the agency. Certain information (outputs and outcomes, need, mission, history,
           short quotes) may be drawn on, but it is expected that the final proposal is a new
           product developed by the student.
                a. Output – one page description of non-profit agency with:
                         i. Name of agency
                        ii. Mission
                      iii. Population served
                       iv. 2-3 programs of the agency
                        v. Community Need
                b. Due Date – Monday, June 17th
                c. Points – not graded
                                                                                                      2


        2) Funder Research – students will research potential funders (foundation, government,
            corporate) to which they will submit their grant proposal. Students will turn in their
            list of at least 3 potential funders with explanation on the process utilized to identify
            them and the reasoning of the choices.
                 a. Output – Funder Research description with at least 3 potential funders,
                     descriptions of process and reasoning, and copies of secondary sources used
                     (i.e. pages from Foundation Directory about a chosen foundation).
                 b. Due Date – Monday, July 15th
                 c. Points – 10
        3) Grant Proposal – students will write a grant proposal to one of the selected potential
            funders to fund an aspect of the services / programs provided by their agency. The
            grant proposal will be 5-8 pages in length and will have all of the following elements:
                   Ø Summary
                   Ø Introduction
                   Ø Problem Statement / Needs Assessment
                   Ø Objectives
                   Ø Methods
                   Ø Evaluation
                   Ø Future Funding
                   Ø Budget
                 a. Output – grant proposal
                 b. First Draft Due – July 8th
                 c. Due Date – Monday, July 29th
                 d. Points – 45
II. Prospect Research Project
Students will identify a current or potential donor to their chosen agency, by reviewing the
agency’s website, materials, annual reports, etc., and/or identifying community individuals who
are not donors but could have the interest and affinity (donors to similar organizations, leaders
who have expressed public support, Fortunate 400, etc.).
Part 1: Prospect Profile
Once chosen, the student will compile prospect research (using only public, free sources) to
develop a prospect profile. The prospect profile should include as many of the following aspects
as possible (some will be easier to find then others): income; assets; family; corporate
connections; civic engagement; history with organization; voting / political donation records; and
other relevant information.
[NOTE: Once you have chosen your individual, please de-identify them by changing their name
(and that of their family members), for your paper. Instructor will ask for their real name in a
separate process, and will ensure that this information is destroyed after the assignment.]
Part 2: Strategy
Utilizing the prospect profile, students should next develop an “ask” strategy.
    •   How will you (as the agency) cultivate this individual?
                                                                                                      3


    •   How much will you ask for? Why? When? Where? Who will make the ask?
    •   How is the ask connected to their interests? Their capacity?
    •   Utilize your agency’s giving structure as possible. (i.e. if the agency has a “Vanguard
        Society” for donors over $10,000, you might strategize “Ms. Rodriguez will be invited to
        join the Vanguard Society” as part of your strategy).
    •   How will the donor be recognized and how will the gift be stewarded? (again – look to
        see what the agency already does, but feel free to be creative as well: “Ms. Rodriguez’s
        name will be put in our annual report and on our website, she will be invited to our VIP
        Vanguard party at SXSW, and ABC Agency will dedicate the front stairs to our agency in
        her name.”)
Output – Prospect Profile / Strategy (3-4 pages total)
            o Profile – 1-2 pages of listed research on donor / potential donor
            o Strategy – 1-2 pages of narrative on strategy for cultivating, asking, and
                stewarding
Due date – Monday, July 8th
Points - 15
III. Special Event Development
Students will plan a special event for their selected organization. You will plan an event that the
organization does not currently do. It can range from innovative (Hack-A-Thon) to well-tested
(Fun Run). The following guiding questions can help you with your planning. Use these as a
“jumping-off point”, not as a list of questions to answer.
    1) What – type of event, logistics (be specific on how it will work)
    2) When – day, time, reasoning behind choices, what else is going on (are you against a
        Longhorns football game? Are you planning a Fun Run in August? What other agencies
        do this type of event? What other non-profit events are scheduled against yours?)
    3) Where – be specific (not “at a hotel” but “at the Four Seasons in their ballroom” or “at
        Peter Pan Mini-Golf”)
    4) Who – who plans, who staffs event, who are your volunteers, who are your intended
        guests, who is the entertainment / emcee / speaker / celebrity / etc.
    5) Why – raise money (how much?), raise awareness (to what end?), etc.
    6) And… how will you market this? How will you gauge effectiveness? Is the event
        mission-related? How? How will you engage the media / your donors / policy makers /
        young tech workers / stay-at-home moms / people affected by _____ / whomever you
        need to engage?
    7) What is your budget? What does it consist of? What are your goals? How will you
        follow-up with attendees / nurture relationships?
This assignment should be presented as a paper or plan, but can include: PowerPoint or Prezi
presentation; web site for the event; mock event materials; or some combination of these things
and/or other creative ways to showcase the event. For electronic elements, please provide a
digital copy and/or printed copy. Include timelines, budgets, and other charts, lists, and
attachments you need to showcase your planned event. Students should be prepared to answer
questions about their event. There will not be a formal presentation.
Output – Special Events Plan (paper / plan approximately 3-4 pages plus attachments as needed)
                                                                                                   4


Due date - Monday, July 22nd
Points – 25
                                                           Percentage of
 Assignment                                      Points    Final Grade      Due Date
 Non-Profit Information Due                        0             0%         June 17, 2019
 Prospect Research Project                        15            15%         July 1, 2019
 Draft Grant Proposal                              0             0%         July 8, 2019
 Funder Research                                  10            10%         July 8, 2019
 Special Event Plan                               20            20%         July 22, 2019
 Grant Proposal                                   45            45%         July 29, 2019
 Attendance and Participation                     10            10%         Each class session
 Totals                                           100          100%
VI.     GRADES
        94.0 and Above              A
        90.0 to 93.999              A-
        87.0 to 89.999              B+
        84.0 to 86.999              B
        80.0 to 83.999              B-
        77.0 to 79.999              C+
        74.0 to 76.999              C
        70.0 to 73.999              C-
        67.0 to 69.999              D+
        64.0 to 66.999              D
        60.0 to 63.999              D-
        Below 60.0                  F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
        1. Students are expected to attend class sessions regularly and to participate in an
        interactive framework between collegiate students and professor. Students are expected to
        complete the readings prior to class, and should be well prepared to participate in
        discussions and experiential learning assignments. Failure to regularly attend the class and
        demonstrate through discussions that one has comprehended the readings will be
        considered in assigning the final grade. The instructor appreciates advance notice that
        classes will be missed. Students are responsible for any material missed due to absences.
        2. Except in the case of extreme emergencies, and then only with the permission of the
        professor, late assignments will not be accepted without penalty. Students are expected to
        turn in all required assignments on the agreed-upon due dates. If the due date is a problem,
        then the student should contact the professor and negotiate another due date well in
                                                                                                   5


         advance.
         3. Student feedback is welcome. Students are also encouraged to provide feedback
         during by phone, by e-mail, and by appointment if they desire.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities,
religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect
to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work
also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not
include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment we
will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas
expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with
civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of
electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social
worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings
at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could
jeopardize their professional image.
                                                                                                  6


Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material
should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might
lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally,
students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and
professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of
Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the
classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action
being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific,
express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and
an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing
includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing
those materials to other current or future students.
 DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to
the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed
and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations no later
than      five     business      days      before     an     exam.      For     more      information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student
must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy
day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, instructors, agency-based field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
                                                                                                      7


incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, or sexual
misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University resources.
Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Deputy for
the SSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report
incidents or to obtain information. Further information, including student resources related to
Title IX, may also be found at http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-
programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
 CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients,
and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements. Students
are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students
should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay
current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students
can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail address
athttp://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present
some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's
responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or
community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone
who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police
Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    -    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
                                                                                                   8


    -  If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week
       of class.
    -  In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    -  Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
       the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
   Date                     Topics                       Assignment Due                 Readings
            Class Overview
            Review of Syllabus
            Overview of Projects
 6/10       Proposal Guidelines                       n/a                       Ciconte, Chapter 1
            ***Class starts at 6:00***
            Non-Profit Sector / Philanthropy
 6/12       Developing a Fundraising Plan             n/a                       Ciconte, Chapter 5
            Building a Case for Support                                         Davis, Writing a
 6/17       Writing the Proposal – Part1              Non-Profit Information    Successful Grant Proposal
 6/19       Foundation Center Database Training       n/a                       none
 6/24       Developing Individual Donors – Part 1     n/a                       Ciconte, Chapters 8 & 9
                                                                                Ciconte, Chapters 6 & 15
            Developing Individual Donors – Part 2                               “The Ask” – Chapters 1, 5,
            Writing the Proposal – Part 2, Objectives                           7, 9 and pages 71-77 -
 6/26       & Methods                                 n/a                       Canvas
 7/1        Events                                    Prospect Research         Ciconte, Chapter 12
 7/3        NO CLASS
                                                                                Ciconte, Chapter 11
                                                      Funder Research &         “The Only Grantwriting
            Foundations                               Rough draft: Grant        Book You’ll Ever Need” -
 7/8        Writing the Proposal – Part 3, Evaluation Proposal                  Canvas
                                                                                                    9


                                                                             Ciconte, Chapter 10
                                                                             Timberland Case Study -
 7/10      Corporate Giving                         n/a                      Canvas
           Writing the Proposal – Part 4, Budget,                            “Storytelling for
 7/15      Future Funding, Attachments, Other       n/a                      Grantseekers” - Canvas
           Special Events Projects Activity
 7/17      Executive Director Roundtable            Special Events Plan      TBD
           Government Grants
           Review of Proposal Topics
           Writing Time for Proposals
 7/22      Individual Grant Consultations           n/a                      TBD
           Other Fundraising Issues –
           Social Entrepreneurship
           Business Income                                                   Ciconte, Chapters 7, 14 &
 7/24      Social Return on Investment              n/a                      15
 7/29      Class wrap-up                            Grant Proposal           n/a
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Ciconte, B. & Jacob, J. (2009). Fundraising Basics: A Complete Guide (Third Edition).
       Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Clarke, Cheryl. (2009). Storytelling for Grantseekers: A Guide to Creative Nonprofit
       Fundraising. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Davis, B. (2005). Writing a successful grant proposal. Retrieved from https://mcf.org/writing-
       successful-grant-proposal.
Fredricks, Laura. (2010). The Ask: How to Ask for Support for Your Nonprofit Cause, Creative
       Project, or Business Venture. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Karsh, Ellen & Fox, Arlen Sue. (2014). The Only Grantwriting Book You'll Ever Need, 4th
       Edition. New York, NY: Basic Books.
                                                                                                10


Keating, Elizabeth & Parsons, Linda & Roberts, Andrea. (2003). Cost-effectiveness of nonprofit
        telemarketing campaigns. New Directions for Philanthropic Fundraising. 2003. 79 - 94.
        10.1002/pf.43.
Kim, Peter; Perreault, Gail; & Foster, William. (2011). Finding Your Funding Model: A
        Practical Approach to Nonprofit Sustainability. Boston, MA: The Bridgespan Group.
Kiritz, Norton. (1980). Grantsmanship: Program Planning & Proposal Writing. The
        Grantsmanship Center.
Kiritz, Norton. (1979). Proposal Checklist & Evaluation Form. The Grantsmanship Center.
Sergeant, Adrian & Ford, John B. (2007). The Power of Brands. Stanford Social Innovation
        Review, Winter 2007.
                                                                                              11
