            PUBLIC COPY – PLEASE SEE CANVAS FOR FULL SYLLABUS
ANS 379-11/HIS 340U                      Capstone Seminar                          Dr. Chiu-Mi Lai (Léi 雷)
Spring 2020
Mondays 4-7 p.m.
Spring 2020 Capstone Topic:
The Cultural Outsider: Memoirs and Travelogues of East Asia
The focus of the capstone seminar is on the cultural outsider’s perceptions of East Asia as
addressed in greater literature originally written in English (with a few exceptions), in the
genres of memoirs and travelogues dating from the 19th century to works published in
contemporary America. Works selected for the seminar are to be read and discussed
within the broad context of “travel literature” written by a broad expanse of visitors to
greater East Asia: China (including Hong Kong and Tibet), Taiwan, Japan, and Korea.
These pieces of “travel literature” are written by a diverse group of “cultural outsiders”
that includes missionaries, journalists, POW’s, scholars, English teachers, students, and
tourists.
Some major concepts and themes that emerge from these works concern Asian
stereotypes, self-discovery and cultural identity formation, and exoticization of Asia and
all things Asian (or “Oriental”). We will pose open-ended questions about these
perceptions of Asia not as literary critics, but rather more as readers, or as fellow
“participant observer” travelers to Asia. In particular, we will discuss and analyze a
cultural outsider’s approach to memoir writing through the lenses of “layered memory”
and “gossip.”
Thus, the course focus will be on primary, rather than secondary, sources and materials.
Students will choose from selected works for oral panel presentations, leading class
discussion in a Roundtable forum, which in turn will form a focus for weekly written
responses and the final inquiry paper.
The course will be divided into two categories for in-depth discussion and analysis:
           Section I – The Adventurer Travelogue
           Section II – The Contemporary Traveler Memoir
                                Statement on Global Cultures and Writing Flags:
Global Cultures: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group,
past or present.
Writing: This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete
substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also
have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and to read and discuss your peers' work. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work.
                                                                                                                       1


REQUIRED TEXTS [Selected excerpts available on Canvas]:
        [All course texts available at the University Co-op Bookstore]
Isabella Bird, Unbeaten Tracks in Japan: The Firsthand Experiences of a British Woman
in Outback Japan in 1878 (Abridged edition)
Fuchsia Dunlop, Shark’s Fin and Sichuan Pepper: A Sweet-Sour Memoir of Eating in
China
Peter Hessler, River Town: Two Years on the Yangtze
Helie Lee, Still Life With Rice: A Young American Woman Discovers the Life and Legacy
of Her Korean Grandmother
Paisley Rekdal, The Night My Mother Met Bruce Lee – Observations on Not Fitting In
Writing and Resource References for Discussion, Oral Presentations and Paper*
        *Selected chapters available on Canvas/Files/Readings
Wayne Booth, The Craft of Research; 3rd Ed: 2008
Julia Crane et al. Field Projects in Anthropology; 3rd Ed: 1992
Michael Harvey, The Nuts and Bolts of College Writing, 2nd Ed: 2013
Course Grade Based On:
     •  This course is graded on the Plus/Minus System.
     •  There is a class attendance policy for this course. (Attendance is graded.)
         More than 5 unexcused absences will result in a failing grade for the course.
         (Extenuating circumstances will be taken into consideration in consultation with
         the Office of the Dean of Students.)
     • There is no written final exam.
15% Class and online discussion, participation and preparedness”; in-class informal
writing
60% Critical and Analytical Writing -- Weekly Written Responses (one drop allowed);
Final Inquiry Paper [Due 5/11] with First Draft
20%     Two Short Oral Presentations and Roundtable Lead Discussant work
5%      Self-styled Travelogue or Memoir (voice of the Cultural Outsider) [Due 4/14]
                                                                                         2


                                   COURSE READINGS
Required Selections for Focused Discussion:
        *Selected chapters for discussion (available on Canvas/Files/Readings)
        Introduction – On Memory and Gossip
        Jie Li, Shanghai Homes – Palimpsests of Private Life (excerpt on Canvas)
        Section I – The Adventurer Travelogue
FOCUS:           Isabella Bird, Unbeaten Tracks in Japan: The Firsthand Experiences of a
                         British Woman in Outback Japan in 1878
                 Isabella Bird Bishop, Korea and Her Neighbours -- A Narrative of Travel,
                         With an Account of the Recent Vicissitudes and Present Position of
                         the Country
For Presentation: Compare with Volumes below (select one):
Heinrich Harrer, Seven Years in Tibet
Bill Holm, Coming Home Crazy – An Alphabet of China Essays
David Mura, Turning Japanese: Memoirs of a Sansei
Orville Schell, In the Peoples Republic – An American’s Firsthand View of Living and
        Working in China
Janwillem van de Wetering, The Empty Mirror – Experiences in a Japanese Zen
        Monastery
        Section II – The Contemporary Traveler Memoir
FOCUS:
Fuchsia Dunlop, Shark’s Fin and Sichuan Pepper – A Sweet-Sour Memoir of Eating in
        China
Peter Hessler, River Town – Two Years on the Yangtze
Helie Lee, Still Life With Rice: A Young American Woman Discovers the Life and Legacy
        of Her Korean Grandmother
Paisley Rekdal, The Night My Mother Met Bruce Lee – Observations on Not Fitting In
For Presentation: Compare with Volumes below (select one):
Stephanie Elizondo Griest, Around the Bloc – My Life in Moscow, Beijing, and
        Havana
Mei-Ling Hopgood, Lucky Girl: A Memoir
Michael Meyer, The Last Days of Old Beijing: Life in the Vanishing Backstreets of a City
        Transformed
John Nathan, Living Carelessly in Tokyo and Elsewhere: A Memoir
James O’Reilly et al. eds. Travelers’ Tales: Hong Kong – including Macau and Southern
        China
Michael Shapiro, The Shadow in the Sun: A Korean Year of Love and Sorrow
                                                                                          3


Recommended, based on Student Interest:
     • A few volumes available on Googlebooks (limited view)
     • See instructor for selected volumes
Leslie Chang, Beyond the Narrow Gate
Duong Van Mai Elliott, The Sacred Willow: Four Generations in the Life of a Vietnamese Family
Hector Garcia, A Geek in Japan: Discovering the Land of Manga, Anime, Zen, and the Tea Ceremony
Rob Gifford, China Road – A Journey into the Future of a Rising Power (CANVAS)
John Hersey, Hiroshima (CANVAS)
Peter Hessler, Country Driving: A Chinese Road Trip
Heinrich Harrer, Return to Tibet (CANVAS)
Heinrich Harrer, Beyond Seven Years in Tibet – My Life Before, During and After
Donald Keene, Chronicles of My Life: An American in the Heart of Japan
Eric Liu, The Accidental Asian – Notes of a Native Speaker
Patrick Quinn, POW Korea: A Memoir
Tim Ward, What the Buddha Never Taught
Jan Wong, Red China Blues
Akiko Yosano, trans. Joshua Fogel, Travels in Manchuria and Mongolia
                                   COURSE EXPECTATIONS
•    This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
•    No assignments will be accepted after the last day of term. Your final course grade
     will be based on work completed up to this date.
• There is no written final exam for this course.
• Laptop Use Policy – Laptops may ONLY be used for your designated presentation
     day
• Any Electronic Devices Use Policy – All devices must be turned off during class.
     Any use of these devices, including texting, websurfing, etc. will lead to dismissal
     from class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat offenders will result in
     a filing of a report of academic problems.
• There is a class attendance policy for this course.
         Quality class discussion is vital for success in this course and thus attendance is
incumbent for such participation. As well, lectures will be vital for background on
literary and historical contexts and schools of thought, as well as fleshing out ideas and
concepts for discussion, all of which cannot be replaced by reading lecture outlines online.
There is no make-up for missed in-class writing and oral presentations.
ATTENDANCE POLICY – More than 5 unexcused absences will result in a failing
grade. Written documentation for excused absences must be provided within a week
of absence.
         It is your responsibility to inform me of extenuating circumstances
     •   More than 1 hour late to class will be marked as a “half” absence
     •   Leaving half an hour early from class will be marked as a “half” absence
                                                                                                4


Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
created for each course. Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys.
You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements.
As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated
disruptions. Notifications of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled
downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant
period of time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date.
Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400
Monday through Friday 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
The UT Library
The UT Library offers resource help and many services. The following link is for Undergraduate Students:
     Website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
The Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing to UT
undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment. Location: PCL 2.330.
          Website: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
The UT Public Speaking Center
The Sanger Learning Center and the School of Undergraduate Studies have partnered with the UT Libraries
to provide free public speaking support for all UT students. Location: JES 315
          Website: http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc/support/speaking-center
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
(Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students)
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for
checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of the
University, your e-mail address in Canvas is your employee address.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                                                                                                             5
