GSD W321W
Summer 2019
German Art History
Unique Number: ? Summer 2019
Instructor: Dr. Peter A. Süß
E-mail: peter.suesz@uni-wuerzburg.de
Class Day/Time: W, 4 PM-6 PM (start: 4:15 PM, end: 5:45 PM)
Class Room: Philosophiegebäude Room 18, Campus Hubland Süd, Am Hubland
Office Hours: by appointment only
Office Location: Philosophiegebäude, Hubland Süd, 7 / U / 1, basement on left
Course Goal
The goal of this course is straightforward: to improve your knowledge of German Art History.
Course Objectives
By the end of this semester you should
 be acquainted with and have experienced the best examples of German art.
 by means of instructive lessons and extensive familiarity of regional and nevertheless
    impressive examples possess a rather thorough basis in German art history and its local
    highlights in Würzburg.
 by participation in the several single day or weekend excursions provided by the Summer
    School program use the plenty of opportunities to enlarge your knowledge to encompass a
    spectrum of the whole of Franconia and further to examples to be seen in the German
    capital.
Course Content
The lecture (incorporating images and excursions with respect to special examples) will
outline the artistic development in the heart of Central Europe from the late post-antique
period to the 19th and 20th centuries. In the last 1300 years, art has witnessed the most
important changes in architecture as well as in painting and sculpture. The main examples of
all periods and branches of art in Germany will be explained and illustrated using images.
With respect to chronology, the lessons will deal with Carolingian, Romanesque and Gothic
art, followed by the Renaissance, Baroque and Neoclassical styles. Towards the end of the
Summer School, some recent influences of art in Germany, during the last and our centuries
are intended for discussion.
As there are local examples to be found in Würzburg’s historical buildings and museums for
many of these periods and branches of art history, you will be expected to develop your own
insights, at first hand, in front of these Franconian works of art.
Language in Class
The language of the class is English, but you should feel free to switch temporarily to
German.
Texts/Readings
No general reading required.
Participation
For the topic is dealt with consecutionally you will need to participate in all class sessions.
Participation includes taking an active part in class discussion, asking questions, and
answering my questions. Attendance is crucial, and unexcused absences will result in poor
grades for participation. Absences will be unexcused except in cases of documented
emergency (normally medical or family); late arrivals (30 minutes after begin of class) will
count as absences. Absences incurred because of personal travel will be unexcused. Please
check with me if you have any questions.


2
Participation Grade Profiles
A volunteers frequently and is well-prepared
B volunteers sometimes and is well-prepared
C does not usually volunteer but is usually prepared
D does not volunteer and is generally poorly prepared
F is consistently unprepared
Late Work
Late work will normally not be accepted, with the following exceptions: students can make up
work missed because of a religious holiday as long as they notify the instructor in writing at
least one week before the holiday occurs; in case of illness, documentation from a physician is
required and arrangements to make up missed work must be made promptly with the
instructor. Other cases will be handled on a case-by-case basis.
Essays
You will have to write two essays. One in the first third and one in the second third of our
period of eight weeks. The essays are based on assignments related to the lectures in class.
These essays should be up to two pages in length and be written in your best English. They
can be typed (12 point font, Times New Roman, 1,5-spaced), should be stapled (if in paper
form), and have a title (but not a title page). These essays will be due at the end of class in the
week following the assignment or, if submitted electronically, by midnight of that day.
Journal / Presentations and Discussions / Quizzes
None
Grading
Participation: 33%
Essays: 67%
Journal: –
Presentations: –
Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for students with disabilities. Any student with a documented disability who
requires academic accommodations should present the instructor with their official letter
outlining authorized accommodations as soon as possible.
Academic Dishonesty
The instructor takes academic honesty very seriously. All work submitted for this course must
be your own. Any act of academic dishonesty will be dealt with according to the guidelines
set forth by the Dean of Students Office. If you have questions about academic dishonesty,
please see <http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php>.
Classroom Etiquette
Cell phones must be turned off in class; laptops should only be used for class-related
activities.
No food—only water. Civil respect for all viewpoints expressed, and for all of your
classmates, is expected, though agreement with any particular position is not.
Questions?
Please come talk to me if you have questions about any of these items, concerns about the
course, or need any assistance or academic advice.
Required Texts and Technologies
None
Text Excerpts (PDFs) in Canvas
None


3
Syllabus
Week I (5/29):
a) Introduction: History of Art History, basic knowledge and terminology
b) Antique and late Antique Art
Week II (6/5):
Carolingian and Romanesque Art (lecture)
Week III (6/12):
Carolingian and Romanesque Art (visit to local examples)
Week IV (6/19):
Gothic and Renaissance Art (lecture)
Week V (6/26):
Gothic and Renaissance Art (visit)
Week VI (7/3):
Baroque Art (lecture)
Week VII (7/10):
Baroque Art (visit)
Week VIII (7/17):
Neoclassical style and art development in the 19th century (lecture)
Week IX (7/24):
Neoclassical style and art development in the 20th century (lecture)


University of Würzburg
Summer term 2019
Cross-Cultural Impressions: Germans in America, Americans in Germany
Mon 14-16, Z6 2.007
Molina Klingler
molina.klingler@uni-wuerzburg.de
Office hours: Tue, 14-15; 5.E6
Course Schedule
 Please note that this schedule is subject to changes. You will be informed about updates.
Session 1 27 May Orientation/Introduction: Stereotypes? OED definitions; “The
Universality of the Hermeneutical Problem” (Gadamer; excerpts)
 Please prepare: Mark Twain, A Tramp Abroad (excerpts) Jonathan Culler: “What is
Literature and Does it Matter?”; Homi Bhabha: “Introduction - Narrating the Nation”
 Session 2 3 June
 Jonathan Culler: “What is Literature and Does it Matter?” Homi Bhabha: “Introduction -
Narrating the Nation” Mark Twain, A Tramp Abroad
 Please prepare: Henry Adams, The Education of Henry Adams (Chapter V, “Berlin”)
Session 3 WED 12 June
Film session: Wim Wenders, Paris Texas Robert Wise, The Sound of Music “Western” from
West and East Germany
Please prepare: Henry James, The American (excerpts); U. Hegi, Tearing the Silence
(excerpts)
Session 3 17 June
Education: A Tramp Abroad continued, Henry Adams, The Education of Henry Adams
(Chapter V, “Berlin”); Alexis de Tocqueville: Democracy in America
 Please bring to class: Worksheet for film session
Session 5 24 June
(Auto)Biography, Memoirs, Life Writing: The Education of Henry Adams continued, Henry
James, The American (excerpts); U. Hegi, Tearing the Silence (excerpts) Please prepare:
Poems (selection on WueCampus)
Session 6 1 July
18th–20th Century German Views on America: Immigration, Literature, and “Wild West”
Dreams: Poems by J. W. v. Goethe, H. v. Fallersleben, H. Heine, R. Ausländer, B. Brecht, etc.
 Please prepare: Franz Kafka, Amerika, Peter Handke, Der kurze Brief zum langen Abschied
Session 7 8 July
Writing „Amerika“: Franz Kafka, Amerika, Peter Handke, Der kurze Brief zum langen
Abschied
 Please prepare: Paul Beatty, Slumberland
Session 8 15 July
 21st century: Paul Beatty, Slumberland


Please prepare: Recent newspaper articles, youtube videos, etc. on current German-American
relations (politics, culture)
Session 9 WED 17 July
Class Visit “Transatlantic Encounters” Current Views: German-American Relations; Revision
Contact for term paper/exam preparations: molina.klingler@uni-wuerzburg.de Office hours:
Tue, 14-15; 5.E.6
Session 10 22 July
FINAL EXAM
Course Requirements:
 Regular attendance and active participation.
All participants will have to hand in one reading response paper (2-3 pages) OR a minutes
paper (3-4 pages) OR give an in-class presentation (handout 1-2 pages).
There will be a final exam at the end of the course (ca. 60 min.).
If you need more than 3 credits for this course, you are required to write the exam AND hand
in/choose one of the options listed above (response paper/minutes paper/presentation) AND
hand in a short term paper (6-7 pages).
