                    PUBLIC COPY – COMPLETE SYLLABUS ON CANVAS
ANS 361-30/LIN 350 Spring 2018                                                              Dr. Chiu-Mi Lai (Léi 雷)
Why Chinese Has No Alphabet
MWF 12-1 pm.
RLP 0.118
           [All lectures, discussion and readings in English.]
Required Text: (Available at University Co-op Bookstore)
William G. Boltz, The Origin and Early Development of the Chinese Writing System
Recommended Texts: (Available at University Co-op Bookstore)
(Selections available on Canvas/Files)
Jerry Norman, Chinese
Tsuen-hsuin Tsien, Written on Bamboo and Silk – The Beginnings of Chinese Books and
Inscriptions, Second Edition, 2004.
Further Reading (selections available on Canvas/Files):
John DeFrancis, The Chinese Language: Fact and Fantasy
S. Robert Ramsey, The Languages of China
Michael Sullivan, The Three Perfections: Chinese Painting, Poetry and Calligraphy (Revised edition:
           George Braziller, 1999) [Out of print]
Statement on Global Cultures Flag: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Course Description
           This course will provide an introduction to the history of the evolution of the
Chinese writing system and language. This course is open to all students and while
recommended, no background in Chinese language, culture or linguistics is required.
Course emphasis will be given to the study of the writing system and the cultural contexts
that have preserved such a unique orthography from ancient to modern times. In this
context, the course will include some discussion of the history of the Chinese language,
including Chinese dialects. Lectures and discussions will focus on the cultural,
historical, social, and political background against which Chinese writing and language
have evolved.
           Introduction – Chinese Language and Writing; What is writing? What is an alphabet?
           I.          The Beginnings – Ancient Writing Systems, Proto-Writing, the Shang Bronze Age
           II.         The Han Dynasty Milestone – Invention of Paper, “classifiers” (“radicals”) and the
                       influential role of the Shuowen jiezi
           III.        The Song Dynasty Milestone – Calligraphy, Painting, Invention of Printing, and
                       “handwriting”
           IV.         The Modern Milestone – Language Reform, Script transformation, Japanese/Western
                       influence
           V.          Contemporary Era – Chinese writing in the global cyber age, influence of the English
                       language/alphabet
                                                                                                                                        1


 ***Applies to Graduate Students Only***
     For Graduate-Level Credit:
       • Complete a Conference Course Form and turn in by the add/drop date.
       • See me to discuss details on additional reading and assignments.
   COURSE EXPECTATIONS
Additional Course Expectations:
• This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
• No late assignments are accepted. There is no makeup of missed discussion or
   presentations. Your final course grade will be based on work submitted.
• There is no written final exam for this course.
• Academic honesty is imperative. Acts of academic dishonesty will result in a failing
   grade.
• Laptop/Tablet Use Policy – Laptops/Tablets may ONLY be used for your
   designated presentation day and for designated final project session days
• Electronic Device Use Policy – All devices must be turned off during class. Any
   use of these devices, including texting, social media, internet use etc. will lead to
   dismissal from class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat offenders will
   result in a filing of a report of academic problems.
• There is a class attendance policy for this course.
        • Please provide written documentation for legitimate excused absences
            within a week of absence.
            Attendance is vital for success in this course and I value your contribution to class discussion.
   As well, lectures will be vital to flesh out ideas and concepts for discussion, all of which cannot be
   replaced by reading lecture outlines online.
   ATTENDANCE POLICY – There is a class attendance policy for this course.
   More than 10 unexcused absences will result in a failing grade for the course. It
   is the student’s responsibility to inform the instructor regarding extenuating
   circumstances. (Extenuating circumstances will be taken into consideration in
   consultation with the Office of the Dean of Students.)
   Religious Holidays – Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules.
   If you miss an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy
   day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the
   absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your
   instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to
   observe a religious holy day.
   Your grade for this course will be based on the following (see below for details):
   I. 10%        Class and online discussion, participation and “preparedness” (informal
                      writing)
   II. 60%       Five Reading and Discussion Questions “Quizzes” (allowed 1 drop)
   III. 5%       One Discussion Group (Sections I-II “lead discussants”)
   IV. 15%       One Oral Presentation (Sections III-V Research Inquiry Panels)
   V. 10%        Final Roundtable Discussion of Group Project Presentations on language,
                 writing systems, and digital media
                                                                                                            2


ANS 361/LIN 350                          SCHEDULE OUTLINE
                               Detailed Section schedules of readings/assignments on CANVAS/Modules
Weeks 1-2           Introduction – Overview of Chinese writing and language
1/22 -1/31          What is writing? Writing systems and development of an alphabet or syllabary
                    Sign up for Section I or II Discussion Groups on Canvas
Weeks 3-5           I.         The Beginnings – Ancient Writing Systems
2/3-2/21            Ancient systems – Mesopotamian, Egyptian, Chinese
                    The Shang Dynasty – oracle bones, bronzes
                    Proto-writing
      o    2/14     Group 1 Discussion
      o    2/21     Reading and Discussion Questions 1 (in class)
Weeks 6-8           II.        The Han Dynasty Milestone
          Sign up for Section III or IV or V Research Inquiry Presentation
2/24-3/13           Old Text and New Text Debates
                    Invention of paper
                    “Classifiers” and the role of the Shuowen jiezi
      o    2/28     Group 2 Discussion
      o    3/6      Group 3 Discussion
      o    3/13     Reading and Discussion Questions 2 (take home)
      o    3/13     No Class – view the Gutenberg Bible at the Harry Ransom Center
                    WEEK 9                          SPRING BREAK
Weeks 10-11         III.       The Song Dynasty Milestone
3/23-4/3            Calligraphy, Painting
                    Invention of Printing
                    “Handwriting”
      o    3/27     Class in WCH 4.118 – calligraphy “practice”
      o    3/30     Research Inquiry Presentations 1
      o    4/3      Reading and Discussion Questions 3 (in class)
Weeks 12-14         IV.        The Modern Milestone
          Sign up for Group Project (Language/Writing Systems and Digital Media)
4/6-4/24            19th-20th century language reform
                    Romanization systems / Phonetic Symbols
                    Japanese/Western influence
                    Pinyin, Script transformation, Modification of “Radicals”
                    “Traditional” and “Simplified” Debates
      o    4/10     Research Inquiry Presentations 2
      o    4/17     Research Inquiry Presentations 3
      o    4/22     Reading and Discussion Questions 4 (in class)
Weeks 14-15         V.         Contemporary Times – Chinese Writing in the Global Cyber Age
4/24-5/1            Influence of English language/alphabet; technology
      o    4/27     Research Inquiry Presentations 4
      o    5/1      Class in WCH 4.118 -- Group Projects coordination
Week 16 Final Group Project Presentations and Roundtable Discussion
5/4-5/8             Roundtable Discussion of Group Project Presentations on language and/or writing systems and
                    digital media (internet, television/film, social media forums, etc.)
      o    5/4      Groups 1-2 Non-Latin Languages
      o    5/6      Groups 3-4 Constructed Languages
      o    5/8      Groups 5-6 Internet and Social Media Language
      o    5/10     Take-home Reading and Discussion Questions 5 due 11:59 p.m.
                                                                                                                3


Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
created for each course. Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys.
You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements.
As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated
disruptions. Notifications of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled
downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant
period of time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date.
Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400
Monday through Friday 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
The UT Library
The UT Library offers resource help and many services. The following link is for Undergraduate Students:
     Website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
The Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing to UT
undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment. Location: PCL 2.330.
          Website: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
The UT Public Speaking Center
The Sanger Learning Center and the School of Undergraduate Studies have partnered with the UT Libraries
to provide free public speaking support for all UT students. Location: JES 315
          Website: http://ugs.utexas.edu/slc/support/speaking-center
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
(Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students)
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for
checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of the
University, your e-mail address in Canvas is your employee address.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                                                                                                             4
