                                           AMS 356/HIS F356K:
                           Main Currents in American Culture Since 1865
                                     Instructor: Dr. Christine Capetola
                                       M-F, 11:30am-1pm RLP 0.112
                         Office Hours: M 1-2:30pm, W 10-11:30am in BUR 412
Description
Beginning at the end of the Civil War and ending in the late 2010s, this course mobilizes American
popular culture as a lens for studying the historical contexts in which it arises. Put differently, this
course proposes that we can use popular culture to study—and critically analyze—familiar historical
narratives. Moving through units on minstrelsy, the Harlem Renaissance, post-World War II culture,
and the 1980s, we will investigate together the ways that American inclusion (and exclusion),
political parties and ideals, and mainstream popular culture have changed over the course of the past
150 years. In the process, we will touch upon a variety of questions: What are the aspirations of a
(re)unified America? How do politics and culture simultaneously inform one another at the national
level? In which ways do race, class, gender, sexuality, and ability influence what becomes a part of
national ideologies? Underneath all of these is a fundamental question: What is our role in creating
the America in which we want to live? With a focus on music, literature, and film, we will explore
how creative works can function as spaces for imagining alternatives to predominant narratives.
With an attention to how parts of the past resonate in our contemporary moment, we will additionally
complicate the notion that history moves linearly—and that everything “gets better” over time.
Requirements
Students are expected to participate in class discussion in a respectful manner and complete all
readings and assignments in a timely manner. In addition to three weekly writing responses, students
will complete a group project and a final paper.
Grades
Attendance & participation        20%
Weekly writing assignments        30%
Group archival project            20%
Final paper                       30%
Readings
All readings for the course are available on Canvas.
Classroom Rules
    • Our classroom will be a welcoming space for people of all races, classes, genders, gender
        identities, sexualities, (dis)abilities, religion beliefs, documentation statues, and military
        statuses. Please do your part to help make this possible.
    • Since everyone has different ways of learning, laptops are allowed in class. However, if I
        sense that you are using your computer for something else besides taking notes during class,
        then I will (privately) raise this concern with you after we finish for the day.
    • We will be covering some difficult material in this course. If something is triggering or
        activating for you, please feel free to step outside the classroom for a minute. Please also feel
        free to come talk with me if you need to check in about activating content.


Your TA for this class is Christine Castro. Her office hours will be on Tuesday from 1-2:30pm
and Friday from 9:30-11am in BUR 436.
Grade Breakdown
Attendance & Participation (20%): This is a lecture course with a discussion component. You are
expected to come to class every day having completed the readings assigned for that day. While the
readings are not necessarily long, they might sometimes be theoretically challenging, so please keep
that in mind when preparing for class. As your presence in the classroom will be vital to how we
learn together, you are allowed two unexcused absences before missing class will start to affect your
grade. Please come see me during office hours or email me if you would like to catch up on material
you have missed or need to inform me about any kind of emergency.
Weekly writing assignments (30%): You will be asked to complete one weekly writing assignment
during weeks 2-4 of the class. On the Wednesday of that week, I will post a cultural artifact that we
have not studied together as a class on our Canvas page. I will then ask you to write a two-page-
long (double spaced) response in which you take the concepts from class that week and use them to
analyze and make an interpretation of the cultural artifact on your own. Since part of the objective of
this course is to help you become a more critical consumer of popular culture, these weekly writing
assignments will be opportunities for you to put these skills into practice. A strong weekly writing
response will be well-organized, make clear connections to the course material from the week, and
take chances/be creative with the interpretations that you make. Each weekly writing assignment
will be due on Canvas at 11am of the Friday of that week. Late responses will be marked down
one letter grade per day that they are tardy.
Group archival project (20%): You will have a group archival project due on Wednesday, July
3rd. This analysis will be based on a cultural object that your group selects from the Harry Ransom
Center (HRC). Groups for the project will be assigned class on Tuesday, June 11th. We will visit
the HRC together as a class on Wednesday, June 12th and Thursday, June 13th for sessions with
Jennifer Townzen, Instructional Services Coordinator, to learn more about accessing and interpreting
archival materials. Using material from the course, your group will write a blog post that 1) analyzes
your archival material and 2) discusses its significance in relation to the time period from which it is
from. Your blog post should be 1200-1400 words long and incorporate imagery of your object.
Late group archival projects will be marked down one letter grade per day that they are tardy.
Final paper (30%): You will also have a final paper due on Friday, July 11th. This five to six-
page-long (double spaced) paper is meant to work as a reflection of what you’ve learned in this
course. In this paper, you will make a connection between any one of the creative works from that
we studied together as a class and another creative work from contemporary culture (excluding the
contemporary artists on the syllabus (so, no Iggy Azalea, FKA twigs, Blood Orange, or Janelle
Monáe)). The following questions should guide your analysis: What are some aesthetic similarities
and differences between the two creative works under your review? How is each work a reflection of
its political moment? How does analyzing these two works together reflect the ways in which
culture and politics are intertwined? In answering these inquiries, you will also be required to apply
three theoretical, historical, or autobiographical sources from the course. A strong final paper
will adequately describe the aesthetics of both creative works, clearly discuss similarities and
differences between the two, and use your three sources from the course materials to expound on
what these resonances and dissonances tell us about the politics of our current historical moment.
Late papers will be marked down one letter grade per day that they are tardy.


The Fine Print: Various University Notices and Policies
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. Each student in this course is
expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted by a student in this course for
academic credit will be the student's own work. You are encouraged to study together and to discuss
information and concepts covered in lecture and the sections with other students. You can give "consulting"
help to or receive "consulting" help from such students. However, this permissible cooperation should never
involve one student having possession of a copy of all or part of work done by someone else, in the form of an
email, an email attachment file, a diskette, or a hard copy. Should copying occur, both the student who copied
work from another student and the student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a
zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to include failure of the course
and University disciplinary action. During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is
not permitted during the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any
way. Any collaborative behavior during the examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to
failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Please do not use the class email for selling football tickets or other activities unrelated to our course. All
students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail
be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for
updating your e-mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please notify me as
quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible (e.g., instructional videos need
captioning, course packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.). Please notify me as
early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced
notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility,
etc.).Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) or
reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line
to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education
may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for
dropping more than that number.”


Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire
alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to
evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my
instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the
Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Course Schedule
Week 1: Course Introduction
Jun 6             Introduction
Jun 7             The Stakes of Cultural Studies
                  Reading: Stuart Hall, “What Is This ‘Black’ In Black Popular Culture?” and
                  Francesca Royster, Sounding Like a No-No: Queer Sounds and Eccentric Acts in the
                  Post-Soul Era, 1-9
Week 2: Minstrelsy & Its Resonances
Jun 10            Minstrelsy as Cultural Practice
                  Reading: Karl Hagstrom Miller, “Revisiting Minstrelsy: Love & Theft at Twenty” and
                  Matthew Morrison, “Sound in the Construction of Race: From Blackface to
                  Blacksound in Nineteenth-Century America,” 1-12
Jun 11            Vaudeville and Minstrelsy’s Offshoots
                  Reading: Louis Chude-Sokei, The Last “Darky” Bert Williams, Black-on-Black
                  Minstrelsy, and the African Diaspora, 1-11
                  ASSIGNED: Groups for Archival Project
Jun 12            Archiving Sound and Performance
                  No reading!
                  DAY ONE OF CLASS VISIT TO HARRY RANSOM CENTER
Jun 13            Archiving Sound and Performance (cont.)
                  No reading!
                  DAY TWO OF CLASS VISIT TO HARRY RANSOM CENTER
Jun 14            New Manifestations of Old Appropriations
                  Reading: Brittney Cooper, “Iggy Azalea’s post-racial mess: America’s oldest race
                  tale, remixed”
                  https://www.salon.com/2014/07/15/iggy_azaleas_post_racial_mess_americas_old
                  est_race_tale_remixed/
                  DUE: Weekly Writing Response 1


Week 3: Harlem Renaissance
Jun 17       Harlem Renaissance and Post-War Modernism
             Reading: Houston A. Baker Jr., “Modernism and the Harlem Renaissance”
Jun 18       Golden Age of Writing
             Reading: Zora Neale Hurston, “How It Feels to Be Colored Me” and “Spunk;”
             Langston Hughes, “The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain” and “Harlem”
Jun 19       Dance, Music, and Modernity
             Reading: Susan Manning: Modern Dance, Negro Dance, 30-38
Jun 20       A Queer Harlem Renaissance
             Reading: Shane Vogel, The Scene of Harlem Cabaret, 1-6
Jun 21       Resonances of the Renaissance
             Reading: Roy Grundman, “Looking for Langston” (in class)
             Screening: Isaac Julien, Looking for Langston
             DUE: Weekly Writing Response 2
Week 4: Postwar Cultural Politics
Jun 24       Black Life in Postwar America
             Reading: Lorraine Hansberry, A Raisin in the Sun (1959)
             Screening: A Raisin in the Sun
Jun 25       Motown and Black Respectability
             Reading: Jaap Kooijman, “From Elegance to Extravaganza: The Supremes on The Ed
             Sullivan Show as a Presentation of Beauty”
             Screening: Clips from The Ed Sullivan Show
Jun 26       Radical Black Politics
             Reading: Angela Davis, “Political Prisoners, Prison, and Black Liberation” (1971)
             Screening: Clips from Black Power Mixtape
Jun 27       The Rise of Variety Television
             Reading: Gayle Wald, It’s Been Beautiful: Soul! and Black Power Television, 1-18
             Screening: Clips from Soul!
Jun 28       The Historical Through Lines of Black Lives Matter
             Reading: Keeanga-Yamahatta Taylor, From #BlackLivesMatter to Black Liberation
             (2016), 1-17
             DUE: Weekly Writing Response 3


Week 5: The 1980s
Jul 1        Queer Nation and AIDS Activism
             Reading: Queers, “Queers Read This”
             Screening: Robert Hilferty, Stop The Church (1990)
Jul 2        Black and Brown Queer Realities
             Reading: David Ansen and Abigail Kuflix, “Paris Is Burning” (in class)
             Screening: Jennie Livingston, Paris Is Burning (1990)
Jul 3        Black and Queer Culture Goes Mainstream
             Reading: bell hooks, “Madonna: Plantation Mistress or Soul Sister?”
             Screening: Madonna, “Vogue”
             DUE: Group Archival Project
Jul 4        NO CLASS
Jul 5        NO CLASS
Week 6: The 1980s (cont.)
Jul 8        The Golden Age of Music Videos
             Reading: James Baldwin, “Here Be Dragons”
             Screening: Prince, “When Doves Cry;” Michael Jackson, “Billie Jean”
Jul 9        Black Female Sexuality in MTV’s Early Days
             Reading: Combahee River Collective Statement
             Screening: Janet Jackson, “Nasty;” Grace Jones, “Slave to the Rhythm”
Jul 10       Feeling The 1980s Today
             Reading: Audre Lorde, “Uses of the Erotic: The Erotic as Power”
             Screening: FKA twigs, “Glass & Patron;” Blood Orange, “Augustine;” Janelle
             Monáe, “Make Me Feel”
Jul 11       Wrap Up
             DUE: Final Paper
