                                    Space and Place
                           AHC 378/CC 375 (33315/33495)
   Spring 2019               Tuesday-Thursday 12:30-2:00                              GAR 1.134
ὡς δ᾽ αὕτως καὶ ἡ ὠφέλεια ποικίλη τις οὖσα, ἡ µὲν πρὸς τὰ πολιτικὰ καὶ τὰς
ἡγεµονικὰς πράξεις, ἡ δὲ πρὸς ἐπιστήµην τῶν τε οὐρανίων καὶ τῶν ἐπὶ γῆς καὶ
θαλάττης ζῴων καὶ φυτῶν καὶ καρπῶν καὶ τῶν ἄλλων ὅσα ἰδεῖν παρ᾽ ἑκάστοις ἔστι,
τὸν αὐτὸν ὑπογράφει ἄνδρα, τὸν φροντίζοντα τῆς περὶ τὸν βίον τέχνης καὶ
εὐδαιµονίας.
And so too, its benefit being spectacularly diverse, not only for politics and the
practice of leadership, but also for the knowledge of the heavens and the things on
land and sea, animals and plants and fruits and anything else there is to be seen in
each place, Geography requires [for its study] the same sort of man [as the
philosopher], one who puts his mind to the art of life and human happiness.
                                                                                 Strabo, Geography, 1.1
Instructor: Prof. Adam Rabinowitz
Email: arabinow@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 17 (512-471-0197)
Office hours: Wednesday 2:00-3:30, Thursday 10:00-11:30 and by appointment
Required texts
Tuan, Y. 2001. Space and Place: The Perspective of Experience. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press. (this is the edition available on Amazon; any other is fine; also available through the library as
an e-Book).
Scott, M. 2012. Space and Society in the Greek and Roman Worlds. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Digital course resources
Course Management System: Canvas
         http://canvas.utexas.edu
Primary Texts: Perseus
         http://www.perseus.tufts.edu
Zotero course library (all bibliography for course; create account and I’ll add you to group)
         https://www.zotero.org/groups/ancient_space_and_place
Pleiades (spatial gazetteer)
         http://pleiades.stoa.org/
                                                                                                          1


There will be a number of additional resources that you will choose from for your digital projects or
website reviews, and that will be available for your research projects if you find them helpful. I will
provide a running list of these resources separately.
Course description and goals
In some ways, the experience of being human is the experience of being a body in space, oriented to
the physical features that surround us. As a result, we tend to take space for granted: it’s the
background for the real action, which plays out in our thoughts and our interaction with other
people. The same is true of the notion of “place” – although the concept provides the orientation
and direction that guides our movements through space, we usually use the word just to refer to an
area of space that happens to be of interest at the moment. Until recently, awareness of space in
Classical studies was limited to the documentation of architecture and the mapping of settlements,
and the term “place” was interchangeable with “site” or “city”.
In the late 1970s, however, social theorists became increasingly interested in the difference between
space and place, and the role of both in shaping and reflecting human culture and society. With the
rise of computers and new possibilities for spatial analysis, this momentum built further, and
somewhere between the 1980s and the 1990s spilled over into the humanities, where it became what
is known as “the spatial turn”. The fields of Classics and archaeology were on the cutting edge of
this turn. Now it is a commonplace that space and place are productive avenues of inquiry to help us
understand the ancient Mediterranean world – now, we see space everywhere we look (in the
scholarship). This course is meant to familiarize you with the concepts of space (a geographically
defined location that can be physically occupied) and Place (a space encoded with cultural meaning),
as they are applied across a range of disciplines related to study of ancient Greece and Rome. We
will use literary, historical, and archaeological sources as our points of entry into the exploration of
human interaction with the physical world, on the level of both landscape and the built
environment. We will also examine some of the online resources and digital tools and approaches
that have emerged from the “spatial turn” and are now opening new doors for Classical studies.
I have four fairly ambitious goals for you in this course:
     1. I want you to develop a solid understanding of the social-theoretical construction of space
         and place, and how this theoretical frame relates to Classics
     2. I want you to develop a familiarity with a wide range of primary sources (literary, historical
         and archaeological) that deal with space and place, and a sense of how these sources can be
         approached and queried productively by scholars from the perspective of spatial theory
     3. I want you to become familiar with – as a consumer or, better, as a creator – with a wide
         range of digital resources available to facilitate the study of space and place in the ancient
         world, and I want you to develop an understanding of the role of technological
         developments in the “spatial turn” that has affected the historical disciplines for the last 20
         or 30 years
     4. The fourth goal relates directly to that last point: I want you to learn what it means to be a
         Classical scholar – and here it is critical that you learn actively, by collecting and
         manipulating evidence yourself. This goal will be accomplished by a research paper that you
         will develop over the course of the semester. I want you to be active partners in this learning
         process – makers of knowledge, not just consumers. I want you to see some of the nuts and
                                                                                                         2


          bolts of the process of historical, literary, or archaeological research, and I want you to work
          on developing your own ideas and honing your ability to express them.
These four skills – engaging with a body of theory, applying it to primary evidence of various sorts,
dealing with secondary literature, crafting your own account and explanation – are fundamental for
your professional development if you plan to continue the study of Classical antiquity. Some of
them will undoubtedly come in handy whether you continue in this field or not: space and place are,
after all, among the fundamental organizing principles of our own lives, and digital approaches to
them permeate the world around us, from the GPS on your phone to 3D buildings on Google
Earth.
Grading
All readings of ancient sources will be in translation, although I encourage you to consult the Greek
and Latin original texts available together with English translations in Perseus, and I will be happy to
form a (casual) reading group with any of you who would like to pursue particular ancient sources in
the original. If you develop a research project on a literary topic and are a Classics major, I will
encourage you even more strongly to make use of the original sources. Grades will be based on
participation in in-class discussions (25%), a short writing assignment reviewing a digital resource
OR an original digital project (20%), the presentation of an article or issue (15%), and a significant
research paper that students will draft and revise over the course of the semester (40%).
I assign plus/minus grades in the following manner: 93-100 is an A, 90-92 is an A-, 87-89 is a B+,
83-86 is a B, and so on. A grade below 60 is failing. I round up from the half-point (so an 89.7
becomes an A-, but an 89.4 remains a B+). A note on subjective grading: where quantitative
methods cannot be applied, I assign grades according to the following framework: an A-range grade
indicates mastery of the material and skills involved in the course (for writing, this means few or no
problems with content, organization, and style and grammar); a B-range grade indicates advanced
competency; and a C-range grade indicates basic competency. If you feel you are having problems in
the class, I will work with you until we fix the things that are wrong – just ask me.
Flags
This course carries two flags: Writing and Independent Inquiry.
Writing
Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline.
In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing
projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also
have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss
your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical
Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board.
Independent Inquiry
Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of
a semester, providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question,
problem, or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
                                                                                                          3


Assignments
The assignments in this course have been designed to meet a broad and varied set of requirements,
so they may seem overly complex at first glance. I promise, however, that most are straightforward,
and we will spend time in class making sure that everyone is up to speed on those that are not.
Reading and discussion
This is one of the straightforward ones. I have provided a tentative schedule of readings below. I
reserve the right to adjust these as the class progresses (usually by reducing them, rather than
increasing them, though I might come across new works I think it would be helpful for you to read).
In general, we will read theoretical works and/or primary sources for Tuesday, and I’ll take some
class time to provide context and additional information. Our Thursdays will be occupied with the
discussion of case-studies that apply theoretical approaches to particular bodies of primary evidence,
either textual or material. Because there are a lot of us this year, we will have student presentations
on most class days, with those on Tuesday generally more oriented toward theory, and those on
Thursday generally more oriented toward application.
You should have read all readings thoroughly and taken notes by the time you come to the class for
which they are assigned. What you get out of this class will be directly proportional to what you put
in – so come ready to discuss, ask questions about, or challenge the articles I have asked you to read.
I will keep track of your contributions to our discussions, which will form the basis for your
participation grade (25% of your final grade).
Digital resource review/digital project
Discussions of space and place are now inextricably connected with the digital representation of
both of those concepts. The internet and digital mapping tools are largely responsible for the
“spatial turn” in the Humanities, and Classics was an early and enthusiastic adopter. It doesn’t make
sense, then, to approach this topic without taking the digital world into account. You will do this in
one of two ways – choose your approach carefully, taking into account your academic and
professional goals and the time you have. The first way is the more traditional: you will write a 1500
to 2000-word review of a website or online resource that deals in some way with space or place (I
will provide a list of suggestions; if you’d like to review a site that’s not on the list, you must clear it
with me first). The second way is to create a digital project of your own, again involving space or
place. The most obvious option is the creation of some sort of web-based map, but there are other
options too, including the addition of a place to the Pleiades platform, the annotation of a text or a
map in Recogito, the creation of a 3D environment using consumer software, or something more
complicated with spatial networks (as with the review, I will provide a list of suggestions, and I will
offer technical help with whatever option you choose; you’re also free to propose a project using
tools that aren’t on the list, though I have to approve it and I can’t guarantee technical help).
You will be expected to share this review or project with the class, thereby helping to create a larger
pool of resources and examples for all of us to build on. I will reserve ten minutes for each student
in class meetings during the first two weeks of March so that you can present your work to the class
on an informal basis. This presentation will not be graded, but since this assignment will be due
immediately before spring break, a good presentation is likely to attract useful feedback from the
class and from me, which will in turn improve your grade for the assignment (20% of your final
grade).
                                                                                                             4


Presentations
You will give two formal, graded presentations in this class. One of them will involve a work of
secondary scholarship that I think is particularly important for the class. I will ask you to read this
work thoroughly, provide a summary and some study/discussion questions to the class in advance,
present the article and its argument for 15-20 minutes, and actively lead the following discussion for
another 10-15 minutes. You may look at the syllabus to see which readings you might be particularly
interested in presenting, and I will provide a sign-up sheet for presentations through Canvas in the
second week of class – first come, first served, so if you want something in particular, be prompt. I
will ask your classmates to evaluate your performance in this presentation, and I will take their
assessment into account in the calculation of your grade for this assignment, which will count for
15% of your final grade.
The second presentation will come at the end of the semester and will be a formal overview of your
research project and preliminary conclusions. I will ask you to submit a 200-word abstract in
advance, and I will expect the presentation to be formal (you may find it easier to write up and read
your talk), 10-12 minutes long (timed), and supported with either a visual presentation (PowerPoint,
Prezi, etc.) or a printed handout. If the presentations hold to time, there will also be a few minutes
for questions after each. This research presentation will model the delivery of a paper at a
professional conference, and you should approach it accordingly. It will count for 5% of the 40% of
the grade for the final and most important assignment, the research paper.
Research paper
The research paper will be the core of course. It is designed to satisfy both the Independent Inquiry
and Writing flag requirements, and we will work on it throughout the semester. You should plan for
a final draft of about 15 double-spaced pages (3500-4000 words) in length.
In January, I will introduce you to some specialized bibliographic resources for research in Classics
and archaeology, and you will begin brainstorming about a research topic. You will submit a
proposal and preliminary bibliography in class on February 14, and I will meet with you to discuss it
over the following week. This proposal and bibliography will be graded (worth 5% out of the 40%
for the paper). You will then produce a first draft, which you will hand in to me on March 26. I will
provide feedback within ten days, so that you can then begin to revise. A second draft will be due on
April 15. Note that it’s due on Monday, not Tuesday, and I will ask you to circulate it to the class by
email. This way, we will all have the papers before our first meeting that week, and we will be able to
use our class sessions to workshop your papers as a group.
The presentation of your research at the end of the semester will count for another 5%, and the
remaining 30% will be based on the final version of your paper and on your engagement with the
process of revision, as shown by the development of your paper from the first to the final draft. The
final draft of your paper will be due in my mailbox in the Classics office no later than 5pm on May
17th.
Late Assignments
Unless you have a documented emergency, medical or otherwise, I will subtract one grade step for
each day one of your written assignments is late (so an A-level writing assignment will become a B if
it is two days late). Contact me as soon as you realize there will be a problem: unless your
emergency leaves you physically unable to communicate, I will look much less favorably on
excuses that are offered after the due-date.
                                                                                                        5


The Undergraduate Writing Center
I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center (FAC 211, 471-6222:
http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert
help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Any
undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any writing project.
They work with students from every department on campus, for both academic and non-academic
writing. Whether you are writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an application,
or your own poetry, UWC consultants will be happy to work with you. Their services are not just for
writing with "problems." Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a
successful writing project. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The
assistance they provide is intended to foster independence. Each student determines how to use the
consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that
preserve the integrity of your work. The UWC also maintains an extensive library of handouts on
various writing-related issues here: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/handouts
Important dates
January 25: last day of the official add/drop period
February 6: final enrollment count; last day to drop a class for a possible refund
February 14: research proposal and preliminary bibliography due; meetings to discuss proposals
March 15: digital project or review of digital resource due through Canvas by 5pm
March 18-22: spring break
March 26: first draft of research paper due in class
April 8: last day to change to pass/fail, drop the class, or withdraw from the University without
     academic penalty
April 15: second draft of paper due by email to class for peer workshopping
May 17: final draft of paper due by 5pm in my mailbox in the Classics Office (WAG 123)
Schedule of meetings and readings
Readings not in the required texts will be posted as PDFs in Canvas, available online as websites
(links posted on Canvas as well) or as eBooks through the library catalogue. For full bibliographic
references, please see the group library for the course in Zotero. I reserve the right to change the
readings for a given week, but I will not change assignment due dates or student presentation
readings without class consensus or student permission.
Week 1: Where am I?
1/22 Getting oriented (get it?)
1/24 Tuan, Introduction; Scott, Introduction (and bibliographic essay for Introduction); T. Creswell,
Place: A Short Introduction, Introduction
Week 2: An embodied sense of space and place
1/29 Tuan, chapter 2 (Experiential Perspective), chapter 4 (Body, Personal Relations, and Social
Values); selections from H. Lefebvre, The Production of Space (pp. 30-46) (this is all very dense stuff, so
leave some time to read it more than once; we’ll work through the meaning in class)
                                                                                                           6


1/31 Y. Hamilakis, Archaeology and the Senses, “Sensorial necro-politics”; Teather, Embodied Geographies,
“Introduction”
student presentation: S. Eve, “Augmenting phenomenology”
Week 3: Inscribing space
Strabo, Geography, 1.1 and 2.1
2/5 Tuan, chapter 6 (Spatial Ability, Knowledge, and Place); Scott, chapter 5 (The place of Greece
in the oikoumene of Strabo’s Geography)
student presentation: W. Koelsch, “Squinting back at Strabo”
2/7 J. Brotton, A History of the World in 12 Maps, chapter 1; K. Brodersen, “Mapping (in) the ancient
world”
student presentation: R. Talbert, “The Map”, in Images and Texts on the Artemidorus Papyrus
Week 4: Quantifying space
2/12 D. Romano and B. Schoenbrun, “A computerized architectural and topographical survey of
ancient Corinth”; G. Lock, “Representations of Space and Place in the Humanities”
student presentation: R. Witcher, “(Re)surveying Mediterranean rural landscapes”
2/14 L. Isaksen et al., “Pelagios and the emerging graph of ancient world data”; Opitz and Limp,
“Recent developments in high-density survey and measurement (HDSM) for archaeology:
implications for practice and theory”
*Research proposal and preliminary bibliography due
student presentation: E. Barker et al., “Writing space, living space”, in The Ideologies of Lived Space in
Literary Texts, Ancient and Modern
Week 5: Intimate space – inside the home
Homer, Odyssey, books 1, 17, 22 (pay attention to the description of Odysseus’ palace);
Vitruvius, 6.1-7
2/19 Tuan, chapter 3 (Space, Place, and the Child), chapter 10 (Intimate Experiences of Place)
recommended: Bourdieu, “The Kabyle house”
student presentation: J. Webster, “Archaeologies of slavery and servitude”
2/21 Mazarakis Ainian, “Architecture and social structure in Early Iron Age Greece”; L. Nevett,
“Separation or seclusion? Towards an archaeological approach to investigating women in the Greek
household from the fifth to third centuries BC”
                                                                                                           7


student presentation: B. Bergmann, “The Roman house as memory theater”
Week 6: Public space – out in the square
Vergil, Aeneid, 8.175-369; Ovid, Fasti, V.551-598; Propertius, Elegies, 2.31, 4.1, 4.2, 4.4;
Pausanias, Description of Greece, 2.5.5-2.11.2
2/26 Tuan, chapter 5 (Spaciousness and Crowding) and chapter 8 (Architectural Space and
Awareness); Scott, chapter 1 (Cyrene)
student presentation: D. Stewart, “Pausanias, analogy, and Classical Archaeology”
2/28 D. Favro, “Reading the Augustan city”; K. Rothwell, “Propertius on the site of Rome”; T.
O’Sullivan, “Urban walkers on display”
student presentation: J. Hartnett, “Streetside benches and urban society in Pompeii”
Week 7: The living and the dead in the urban fabric
3/5 B. Ault, “Living in the Classical polis: the Greek house as microcosm”; A. Wallace-Hadrill,
Houses and Society in Pompeii and Herculaneum, chapter 1; student project presentations
student presentation: D. Elia and V. Meirano, “Children and funerary space”
3/7 Scott, chapter 3 (tomb streets); C. Weiss, “Bodies in motion: civic ritual and placemaking in
Roman Ephesus”; student project presentations
student presentation: M. Grahame, “Public and private in the Roman house”
Week 8: Spaces of myth and religion
Pausanias, Description of Greece, 9.5.1-9.12.6, 9.16.1-9.18.6, 9.25.1-9.25.4
3/12 Tuan, chapter 7 (Mythical Space and Place); Scott, chapter 2 (Delos); student project
presentations
student presentation: E. McGowan, “Tumulus and memory”
3/14 R. Buxton, Imaginary Greece, “Landscape”; C. Eckerman, “Pindar’s Delphi”; student project
presentations
student presentation: D. Berman, “Dirce at Thebes”
*Digital reviews/assignments due 3/15
-- Spring Break --
                                                                                                  8


Week 9: Landscape
3/26 B. Bender, “Place and landscape”; Alcock and Osborne, Classical Archaeology, “The Essential
Countryside”
student presentation: C. Williamson, “Mountain, myth, and territory”
*First draft of research paper due
3/28 J. Carter et al., “The Chora of Chersonesos in Crimea, Ukraine”; C. Witmore,
“(Dis)Continuous domains: a case of “multi-sited” archaeology from the Peloponnesus, Greece”
student presentation: T. de Haas, “Beyond dots on the map: intensive survey data and the interpretation
of small sites and off-site distributions”
Week 10: History and distance
Herodotus, 4.1-132; Caesar, De Bello Gallico, books 1 and 4
4/2 Tuan, chapter 11 (Attachment to Homeland); Scott, chapter 4 (Corinth and Syracuse); A.
Riggsby, “Space”
student presentation: Purves, Space and Time in Ancient Greek Narrative, “Map and narrative”
4/4 Romm, “The boundaries of Earth”; Schadee, “Caesar’s construction of northern Europe”
student presentation: D. Krebs, “‘Imaginary geography’ in Caesar’s ‘Bellum Gallicum’”
Week 11: Spaces of the mind
4/9 Tuan, chapter 9 (Time in Experiential Space), chapter 13 (Time and Place); Scott, conclusion;
Taylor, “Roman Neapolis and the landscape of disaster”
student presentation: S. Alcock, Archaeologies of the Greek Past, “Archaeologies of memory”
4/11 Strauss Clay, “Homer’s Trojan theater”; de Jong, “Narratological theory on space”
student presentation: J. Klooster, “Authenticity and autochthonous traditions in Archaic and Hellenistic
lyric poetry”
Week 12: Peer editing workshops
*Second draft of paper due Monday 4/15
4/16 Workshopping: paper second drafts, group 1
4/18 Workshopping: paper second drafts, group 2
                                                                                                        9


Week 13: Contested places
4/23 Tuan, chapter 12 (Visibility: the Creation of Place); A. Loukaki, “Greece: ancient ruinous
landscapes, aesthetic identity, and issues of development”
student presentation: N. Sakka, “ ‘A debt to ancient wisdom and beauty’: the reconstruction of the Stoa
of Attalus in the ancient Agora of Athens”
4/25 M. Kozelsky, “Ruins into relics: the monument to Saint Vladimir on the excavations of
Chersonesos, 1827-1857”
student presentation: Ö. Harmanşah, “ISIS, heritage, and the spectacles of destruction in the global
media”
Week 14: Placing ourselves, I
4/30 Student research presentations
5/2 Student research presentations
Week 15: Placing ourselves, II
5/7 Student research presentations
5/9 Student research presentations
Final drafts of research papers due at 5pm on Friday, May 17, in my mailbox in the Classics
Office (WAG 123)
Administrative information
Dropping the class
The official add/drop period for spring classes runs until January 25; after this, you may need
approval of a department chair or the dean of your school. The last day for students to add a class or
drop a class for a possible refund is February 6. After this, you must use a Q-drop form to drop the
class. You can do so without academic penalty until April 8. You may only use Q-drops for six
classes during your time at UT, so choose wisely.
Office hours
These are meant for you, and I urge you to take advantage of them. I'm usually happy to set up
meetings outside the listed times – just send an email. Come by to ask questions, complain about
impenetrable academic prose, or simply chat.
Class etiquette
I expect you to be courteous and to treat each other and me as you'd like to be treated. Please put
away and turn off your cell phone during class time. Although much of our class time will be
occupied with discussion, we will be doing a good deal of digital work, so I encourage you to bring
and use a laptop or tablet (but please use all your willpower to keep yourself from using your device
                                                                                                      10


to engage in activities unrelated to class). Arrive on time and don’t leave until the end of class –
coming or going after class is in progress is rude to me and rude to your classmates.
Scholastic dishonesty
Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in zero credit on that
assignment. A second offense will result in an F in the class. Scholastic dishonesty includes
any kind of cheating on quizzes or assignments, including plagiarism. Plagiarism is the presentation
of someone else's work or ideas as your own, and applies both to word-for-word copying and to
paraphrasing or repetition of the original thoughts of another without proper citation. Be
particularly careful of this in your research paper: you do not need to cite basic facts, but where you
have drawn ideas or materials from other sources, you must cite each of them. For more
information, contact Student Judicial Services at 471-2841. If you are still unsure about the exact
definition of plagiarism or academic dishonesty, see
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
UT Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If students are worried about someone who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This
service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling
and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University
of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone) and arrange an official accommodation letter. Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD. Please notify me as quickly as
possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible. You may reference SSD’s website
for more disability-related information:
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php
Religious holidays
Students can make up work missed for a religious holiday if they bring a request and documentation
of the holiday fourteen days ahead of time.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside
when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following
policies regarding evacuation:
     •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building.
                                                                                                       11


• Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the
  building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
  class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
• Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
  the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                                                               12
