                               Social Media Journalism
                                 JF336F – Unique 73265
                                      Summer 2019
Class: Online
Professor: Robert Quigley
Office hours: Online class – office hours are online
Email: robert.quigley@austin.utexas.edu
Personal social accounts: @robquig on all major platforms
TAs:
If your last name begins with A-L:
Jordon Brown, jordonbrown@utexas.edu
If your last name begins with M-Z
Chenyan Jia, chenyanjia@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION
It’s no longer optional for journalists to know how to use social media effectively. In
this course, students will learn the top tips and trends in the industry and practice
what they learn through hands-on projects. This is an online course. Students will
not be required to attend any in-person meetings. The class is set up in a way that
allows for flexibility in schedule, though there are some things that must be done
each week. Students may work ahead on much of the material in the course. The
class is based on the following main components: Hands-on projects, participation
in live chats and quizzes based on selected readings and lessons.
OBJECTIVES
Students who complete all of the work for this course will be ready to run the social
media efforts for any organization.
To that end, they will:
* Understand what separates a journalist on social networks from the millions of
others who use social networking
* Gain intimate knowledge of the top social media platforms and how to use each
one to engage audiences, drive traffic and market themselves and their
organizations
* Know how to measure success for a social media campaign
* Learn how to cover breaking news using social media and crowdsourcing
* Build up their personal social media presence, making them more marketable to
future employers
* Learn how to identify trends that can become written journalistic stories


STRUCTURE
Hands-on projects
Here is an overview of the four major tasks you'll have to complete:
    •   Tweet the news from your personal Twitter account. If you already have
        a Twitter account, great! Use it. If you don't, please create one for the class (it
        must be public). "News" can be anything you can imagine being published in
        a metro newspaper. So hard news, local news, sports, movies, food, travel,
        fashion, etc. are all game. You will post what *you* care about. You'll write an
        essay about your experiences and share a few of your best tweets.
    •   Work as a social media editor for a news organization. You'll be working
        as a social media editor on Twitter accounts created for this class (Called
        SocialNN, for Social News Network). You'll sign up for your own shifts and
        then work them, turning in links to your tweets when you are done.
    •   Post to Instagram and Facebook as a journalist. Similar to the Twitter
        assignment, if you already have an Instagram, use it! If not, please create one
        for the class (it must be public). You'll do this on your own Instagram
        account, but you should think of yourself as a reporter. You may create a
        second Instagram account for this assignment if you do not want to make
        your Instagram account public). On Facebook, you'll be using Facebook Live
        as a journalist by posting a Facebook Live video in our class Facebook group.
        You'll submit links to each of these projects on Canvas.
    •   Learn how to find and write a journalistic story based on social media
        posts. Rarely do social media editors for news organizations *just* post on
        Facebook and Twitter all day. Finding and writing stories can be a big part of
        their jobs as well. In the last assignment for this class, you'll identify a
        trending story and aggregate it from another news organization, a common
        practice on web desks in modern newsrooms. Don't worry, these stories can
        be short and about any news topic you're interested in! This assignment is
        more about recognizing a trending, buzzy story than being a perfect writer.
Quizzes
You’ll take quizzes that cover the material found in the readings and the professor’s
tips. Students will have 30 minutes to take each quiz, so they should study and
prepare for it as if it were not an open-book quiz.
Personal tweeting
Students will be required to tweet about news at least three times a day for 10 days
(they don’t have to be consecutive). You must complete your tweeting before June
23.


At the end, you’ll write a short essay and share some of your best tweets (see
assignment for details). Note that you can interact with your classmates, including
when students are running our Socialnn accounts.
Live chats
There are four live chats during the semester using Facebook Live. This is your
opportunity to talk in real time with your professor and fellow students. They are
scheduled at various times of day (see Canvas for the times and dates). It’s best if
you can attend live so you can get your questions in, but don’t worry if you can’t.
You’ll be able to review the live chats to get credit after they are no longer live.
Instructions for how to get credit for these and due dates are on each of the “live
chats” assignments.
Late work
All assignments turned in after deadline will be marked down 10 percentage points
for the first 24 hours after the due time and then 10 percentage points for every 24
hour period after that. Quizzes cannot be taken late and will be counted as a zero if a
deadline is missed. Remember, you can work ahead and everything is on Canvas
from the first day of class.
Breakdown:             Major assignments (hands-on projects): 70 percent
                       Quizzes: 20 percent
                       Live chats: 10 percent
Grade scale:
Grade           Percentage
A               93-100
A-              90-92
B+              87-89
B               83-86
B-              80-82
C+              77-79
C               73-76
C-              70-72
D               60-69
Attendance
There is no attendance policy outside of doing the required work and participating
in the chats. I hope you engage regularly on the Facebook group and elsewhere so
we can have a great discussion. The Facebook group is linked to on Canvas.


Contacting the professor
The professor will be checking the Facebook group regularly, so that’s a great place
to ask a question. Plus, you might get an answer even faster from a fellow student.
Email is the next-best option. Email the professor at
robert.quigley@austin.utexas.edu with any questions. You will receive an answer
within 24 hours, though usually faster.
Trusted sources
When students are seeking information to post on social networks, they should try
to post content from the original source when possible (not from an aggregator).
Also, if there’s a sensational story from an untrustworthy or unknown source,
students should see if they can verify the information from a trusted, known news
source. For the purposes of this class, the instructor believes the students can trust
the information coming from the following sources (not an exhaustive list):
Top tier
The New York Times
The Washington Post
The Associated Press
Reuters
The Guardian
The BBC
The Wall Street Journal
USA Today
Dallas Morning News
Austin American-Statesman
Houston Chronicle
San Antonio Express-News
Other trusted sources:
Daily metropolitan newspapers
Major network TV – CNN, ABC, Fox, MSNBC, CBS
Major market TV stations
Major national news magazines
Major news blogs, including Huffington Post, if properly sourced
Note – I’m not saying smaller blogs, alternative publications, etc. can’t be trusted,
but if there’s a major breaking story, I’d feel more comfortable if one of the above
had the story.
Other important information
* Your grades and the submission of your evaluations will be handled through
Canvas. Quizzes will be administered through Canvas as well.
* University Honor Code: All students are expected to abide by the University of
Texas Honor Code, which reads: “The core values of The University of Texas at


Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and
responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.”
* Students with Disabilities Please notify your instructor of any
modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-related need.
You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office in
order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized
services are available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities.
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
*Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as
cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and
any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other
assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two
courses without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus,
you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty
damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future
demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University.
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php. For the University's
official definition of scholastic dishonesty, see Section 11-802,
Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities.
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi08-09/app/gi08.appc03.html#sec-11-802-
scholastic-dishonesty19
* Campus emergency information
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/terms/
