The University of Texas at Austin – School of Architecture
ARC 385K ARI 385K                       Construction One                    Fall 2019
Instructor:                  Francisco Gomes, AIA
                             fgomes@utexas.edu
                             office hours: by appointment - GOL 2.310
Teaching Assistants:         Eric Joyce                      eric.t.joyce@gmail.com
                             (please begin subject line of all class related emails with “Const One:”)
Course Schedule:             T/TH      9:30 – 11:00 am (lecture)            SUT 5.102
                             TH        12:30 – 3:30 pm (lab)                SUT 5.114
COURSE SUMMARY:
Construction One is a broad survey of construction, including materials, trades,
systems, and methods of fabrication and installation. For students of architecture,
Construction One is the first course in a series of four required building
construction/building structures courses. For students of historic preservation and
interior design, the course serves as an introduction to a range of building materials,
systems, and concerns to be followed by more discipline specific technical
coursework.
OBJECTIVES:
The material, assembly, and detailing determinations an architect makes in authoring
a project are vital design decisions. Developing a familiarity with the physical
characteristics of materials, functions of assemblies and systems, means and
methods of building, legal and cultural conditions affecting the work of the building
trades, and ecological ramifications of both the production and operation of projects is
a fundamental goal of this class. Upon this foundation of information and experience,
the student of architecture can begin to construct a deeper knowledge of how
architectural propositions engage the physical world. Construction and materiality can
be a rich source of architectural argument, and building understanding of this subject
enables invention and deployment of material and assembly strategies that reinforce,
as well as generate, architectural concepts.
FORMAT:
Two lecture and discussion sessions each week will include instructor presentations
followed by a brief question period. The course is structured as two sequential
phases. The first portion of the class is a ‘Construction Systems’ sequence examining
significant building trades and materials, including sources, physical properties, uses
in construction, means of fabrication, and methods of installation. In the latter portion
of the class, the lecture topics cover a series of influential issues which impact
material and building system decisions but are not tied to a single material category.
In addition, students are required to attend a laboratory once a week where you will
participate in field trips to manufacturing plants and/or construction sites, work on
projects and exercises related to building materials/methods/performance, and
present and work on your class projects. Please report to the assigned classroom for


lab unless an alternate meeting location has been announced in the prior lecture
session.
Students are expected to have the required reading completed prior to each lecture.
The content of the lectures and the reading will be complementary, and successful
completion of the course will require knowledge acquired from both sources. The
reading content will be the subject of an occasional pop quiz.
TEXTS:
Required:       Allen/Iano, Fundamentals of Building Construction: Materials and Methods
                6th edition (available as an electronic resource via UT library catalog)
Recommend.: Ching, Building Construction Illustrated - 5th edition
                Allen/Rand, Architectural Detailing: Function, Constructability, Aesthetics – 3rd ed.
Lib. Reserve: Ford, The Details of Modern Architecture – Vols. I & II
                Frampton, Studies in Tectonic Culture: The Poetics of Construction in Nineteenth
                and Twentieth Century Architecture
                Elliott, Technics and Architecture
                Deplazes, Constructing Architecture: Materials, Processes, Structures
                Addis, Building: 3000 Years of Design Engineering and Construction
                Ramsey/Sleeper, Architectural Graphic Standards
                Ballard Bell/Rand, Materials for Design
                Mostafavi/Leatherbarrow, On Weathering: The Life of Building in Time
                Allen/Iano, The Architect's Studio Companion
                2015 International Building Code
Additional required and recommended readings will be announced in class and posted on the class
Canvas site as the semester progresses.
ASSESSMENT:
EXAMS – 60% OF YOUR GRADE (3 exams, 20% each)
Closed book exams, scheduled following the completion of approximately each third of
the class sequence, will test each student’s ability to recall factual material and apply
construction knowledge. Comprised of 15-25 questions, exams will require short answer,
drawing and diagramming. Except as required by University policies, make up exams will
not be offered.
LAB EXERCISES, PROJECTS, HOMEWORK, AND QUIZZES – 40% OF YOUR GRADE
Lab exercises and projects assigned during the semester.
Grades are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work.
Group work requires equal participation from all members. Any individual not performing
a commensurate share of the work may be eliminated from the group, but is still
responsible for satisfaction of the assignment requirements. The Office of Graduate
Studies requires a grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree
in the School of Architecture.


COURSE POLICIES:
Field Trip Conduct:
Field trips to visit construction sites and building material manufacturing operations
will occur during both lecture and lab sessions. For these field trips, you must wear
long pants, closed toe shoes, and bring hard hats and safety glasses (which will be
provided by the school). Promptness and professional on-site conduct is essential to
the continued success of the visits.
Religious Observances:
A student who is absent from a class or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day may complete the work
missed within a reasonable time after the absence, if proper notice has been given.
Students should deliver written notice to the instructor, in person, as far in advance of
the class absence as possible, but not less than seven days prior to the classes
scheduled on the dates the student will be absent. A student who fails to complete
missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Care Program:
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health
professionals within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better
access to mental health support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or
academically. Faculty and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students
may directly contact the counselor: https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE
Students with Disabilities:
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a
letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or
471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should
be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester
and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Academic Integrity:
Students who violate University rules on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity
of University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Refer to the
Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and
procedures on academic integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
BCAL:
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants
(TA), or Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. Trust your instincts and share your
concerns.


ARC 385K / ARI 385K                                Construction I                                Fall 2019
Instructor: Francisco Gomes, AIA    schedule is preliminary and subject to change, with exception of exam dates
                                    Allen/Iano chapters refer to 6th edition.
Week                  T                                                                            TH                                                                     Lab
1                     27-Aug                                                                       29-Aug       Course Introduction                                       - no lab -
2                     3-Sep        Masonry I                                                       5-Sep        Masonry II                                                Mezger Stone site visit
                                   Allen/Iano Ch. 8 + 9                                                         Allen/Iano Ch. 10            [assign Masonry d/b project]
3                     10-Sep       JE Dunn site visit: 24th and San Gabriel                        12-Sep       Concrete I                                                CoreSlab site visit
                                                                                                                Allen/Iano Ch. 13
4                     17-Sep       Concrete II                                                     19-Sep       presentations: masonry project design                     Sebastopol House site visit
                                   Allen/Iano Ch. 14
5                     24-Sep       Concrete III                                                    26-Sep       Steel I                                                   Masonry project pinup
                                   Canvas reading: World Running Out of Sand                                    Allen/Iano Ch. 11
6                     1-Oct        Steel II                                                        3-Oct        masonry project build                                     Wood lecture: read Allen/Iano Ch. 5
                                   Canvas reading: Vibration Control-Steel
                      - exam review -
7                     8-Oct        EXAM 1                                                          10-Oct       Roofs/Membranes                                           MatLab & Masonry Wall Section lab exercise
                                                                                                                Allen/Iano Ch. 16
8                     15-Oct       Glass I                                                         17-Oct       Glass II                                                  screening: Hitchcock-Rear Window
                                   Allen/Iano Ch. 17                                                            no reading due                    [assign window project]
9                     22-Oct       Building Envelopes I                                            24-Oct       Building Envelopes II                                     Hygrothermal lab exercise
                                   Allen/Rand pp. 5-48                                                          Allen/Rand pp. 49-72
                      - exam review -
10                    29-Oct       Insulation/Sealants/Coatings                                    31-Oct       EXAM 2                                                    field trip (pending)
                                   Canvas reading: Evolution of Continuous Insulation
11                    5-Nov        Codes and Regulation                                            7-Nov        Movement and its Accommodation                            Building code lab exercise
                                   Canvas reading: Fire Escapes                                                 Allen/Rand pp. 81-102
12                    12-Nov       Constructors/Relationships                                      14-Nov       Embodied Energy                                           Window project pinup
                                   Canvas reading: Two Billion Buildings                                        Canvas reading: Sustainable Energy
13                    19-Nov       Foundations                                                     21-Nov       Systems Integration                                       field trip (pending), Window project due
                                   Alen/Iano Ch. 2                                                              Canvas reading: How AC Changed the World
                      - exam review -
14                    26-Nov       EXAM 3                                                          28-Nov       THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY                                      - no lab - (Thanksgiving)
15                    3-Dec        Construction Futures: Prefabrication + Automation               5-Dec        Final Studio Reviews (no class)                           - no lab -
                                   no reading due
