         The University of Texas at Austin – Department of Anthropology
                                            Fall 2019
     ANT 324L 45 and WGS 340 58 QUEER ETHNOGRAPHIES
 Unique                Day               Time                    Location
 31130                 TTH               11:00 - 12:30           SAC 4.118
 44840
                                   Instructor: Sofian Merabet
               Email: sofian.merabet@austin.utexas.edu Phone: (512) 471 0057
            Office Hours in SAC 5.156: Thursday 2:00 – 4:00 p.m. or by appointment
Course Description:
This upper-level undergraduate writing course deals with the anthropological analysis of
queer gender and sexuality. Its aim is to critically evaluate formative concepts and theories
that have been subject to recent debates within Anthropology, Gender Studies, and Queer
Theory. Through the reading of a variety of ethnographies from the Americas and the Asian
Diasporas, we will partly explore how terms like “women” and “men,” “femininity” and
“masculinity,” as well as “homosexuality,” “heterosexuality,” “bisexuality,” and
“transsexuality” structure people’s experiences, but also how local terminologies inform
sexual identity formations around the globe. In this vein, the course focuses on local-level
social and cultural processes that challenge a wide range of heteronormativities within a
regional and global framework. The basic theme of the material for this course concerns the
extent to which both realities and the ways in which they are perceived are socio-cultural
constructs that are subject to constant change. Next to regular class discussions based on the
assigned readings, students will benefit from a guided tour of the art exhibit “Jeffrey Gibson:
This Is the Day” at the Blanton Museum, visit the University Gender and Sexuality Center as
well as the Benson Latin American Collection and the Perry-Castañeda Library. Exceptionally,
this semester, the class will welcome artist Sean Dorsey for an in-class conversation on dance
and transsexuality. This conversation will be followed by a performance of Boys in Trouble at
the McCullough Theatre.
This course carries the Writing Flag. Throughout the semester, the class will closely work
with the Center for the Skills & Experience Flags along with the University Writing Center
(UWC). This collaboration will include a class visit of a staff member of the UWC. Writing
Flag courses are designed to give students experience with writing in an academic discipline.
In this class, you can expect to write and re-write regularly during the session and receive
                                                                                             1


feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to go to the University Writing Center, and you may be asked to read and
discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to
come from your written work. Because students fulfill three hours of their Core
Communication requirement with a Writing Flag course, courses flagged for writing address
the following new “core objectives”: Critical Thinking Skills: to include creative thinking,
innovation, inquiry, and analysis, evaluation and synthesis of information. Communication
Skills: to include effective development, interpretation and expression of ideas through
written, oral and visual communication. Teamwork: to include the ability to consider
different points of view and to work effectively with others to support a shared purpose or
goal. Personal Responsibility: to include the ability to connect choices, actions and
consequences to ethical decision-making.
Most Important Aspects of Content Mastery and Disciplinary Awareness:
    •    Writer shows increasing confidence in scholarly debate, approaching problems in the
         field creatively, interrogating and expanding disciplinary boundaries.
    •    Writing demonstrates some/increasing ability to apply personal experience in
         constructing disciplinary arguments. Experiences introduced in the writing are
         relevant and involve adequate reflection, as appropriate for ethnographic or
         participant observer inquiry.
    •    Writing engages with the course texts in a substantive way, demonstrating
         understanding of key concepts, and offering critical responses.
    •    Writer demonstrates growing confidence in vocabulary; disciplinary terms are the
         subject of critical engagement and some risks are taken to expand the language of
         the discipline and explore new ways of seeing.
    •    Writer shows an increased awareness of global and cross-cultural approaches to the
         course material.
Facility with college-level writing:
    •    Argumentation, claims and reasons are logical and grounded in experience and
         evidence. The writer extrapolates/infers/draws conclusions in ways that are logical
         and appropriate to disciplinary custom—understanding also that Anthropology as a
         discipline is concerned with scrutinizing received meanings.
    •    Key terms such as “women/men,” “femininity/masculinity,”
         “homosexuality/heterosexuality/bisexuality/transsexuality,” etc., are used
         appropriately in the disciplinary context. The writer is also willing to reimagine the
         use of disciplinary terms, and experiment with terminology that may bring new
         perspectives to the discipline.
    •    The writer is able to select noteworthy elements of gender and identity to discuss,
         and provides context to explain why they are focusing on one element or another.
         When appropriate, the writer conveys a sense of why these points were chosen to
         discuss, and why they are interesting and relevant.
                                                                                                2


     •   Writer demonstrates increased accuracy, clarity, and confidence in their summaries
         of others' work, and as the semester progresses, makes connections with previous
         readings.
     •   Description and discussion are increasingly relevant and productive. There is less
         repetition of ideas and more forward movement; details are well-chosen, illustrative,
         and helpful to the reader's comprehension.
     •   Increasing control of vocabulary over time; ideally, language also exhibits elasticity,
         pushing the boundaries of disciplinary terms in creative ways. Extraneous or
         incorrectly used words are reduced in frequency.
Required Texts/Audio-Visuals: (in alphabetical order)
Books (ordered at the University Co-op, www.universitycoop.com, 2246 Guadalupe St,
Austin, (512) 476-7211):
Gutiérrez, Laura G. (2010) Performing Mexicanidad: Vendidas y Cabareteras on the
Transnational Stage. Austin: The University of Texas Press.
Ochoa, Marcia (2014) Queen for a Day: Transformistas, Beauty Queens, and the
Performance of Femininity in Venezuela. Durham: Duke University Press.
Gill, Lyndon K. (2018) Erotic Islands: Art and Activism in the Queer Caribbean. Durham: Duke
University Press.
Weiss, Margot D. (2011) Techniques of Pleasure: BDSM and the Circuits of Sexuality.
Durham: Duke University Press.
Gopinath, Gayatri (2018) Unruly Visions: The Aesthetic Practices of Queer Diaspora. Durham:
Duke University Press.
Film Screening:
- Bad Hair (2013) Pelo malo (original title) 1h 33min
                                                                                               3


Course Requirements for Registered Students:
The class relies on the intellectual commitment and active participation of all students. It
will be run primarily as general discussions with some lectures based on the assigned
reading. In order for the course to be effective, all students must have the reading
assignments completed and ready for in-depth discussion before each class. Regular
attendance is required. Mere attendance in class, however, does not constitute
participation. You must come to class having carefully read all materials and be prepared to
discuss, question, and argue about issues raised in the readings. It will be beneficial for you
to take excepts/notes on any material that you find enlightening, controversial, or
objectionable. You should also take notes in class on themes, key terms, and debates we
discuss. These note-taking strategies will be crucial when you write your response papers. In
short:
     -   Attend all classes.
     -   Do all assigned readings (while taking excerpts/notes!) by the date indicated on the
         syllabus and participate actively in class.
     -   Regular two 10-minute presentations (by two students, based on turn-taking) on the
         assigned readings. The presentations are intended to launch the general seminar
         discussions. These presentations can be brief summaries of the materials read and
         should end with one or two questions the presenters want the class to engage with
         during the session.
     -   Three Take-Home Exams to be handed in during class on Tuesday, September 24th,
         Tuesday, October 22nd, and Tuesday, November 12th [the assignment should be
         exactly 3 full pages of text (double-spaced/12 points/Times Roman)], plus one cover
         page indicating your name and the prompt question. The prompt will be posted on
         Canvas the Thursday before it is due. It will cover a theoretical question based on the
         assigned readings.
         THERE WILL BE NO MAKE-UP EXAMS!
     -   One Three-page paper based on a joint/group project that is based on observation
         and deals with a topic focusing on queer life on and around the UT Austin campus to
         be handed in during the final week of the semester. The Project will be first
         discussed with and approved by the instructor. Groups will be constituted by an
         average of three individuals. There is one joint paper for each group and every
         member of the group will receive the same grade.
     -   10-minute presentations on the respective final group project during the last week
         of the semester. Every group member needs to present on one aspect of the joint
         project.
The three take-home exams are designed to develop critical reading, analytical, and writing
skills. Evaluation criteria include: critical and integrative analysis of texts, clarity of thought,
ability to synthesize readings and class discussions into your own argument, and ability to
formulate a theoretical grounding for it. A visit to the University Writing Center in The
Perry-Castaneda Library, 101 E 21st St #2.330 is highly encouraged! Students who consult
with the Writing Center and have the instructor officially notified by email will earn
additional 2 points on their respective papers.
                                                                                                  4


To sum up:
Style, organization, and citation:
    •   Overall style is clear and precise, avoiding vagueness, overly generic and
        unsupported claims. Wordiness and excessive jargon are avoided. Experimental uses
        of language do not impede reader comprehension. Grammar, mechanics, and syntax
        actively assist the reader to understand complex ideas in the writing.
    •   Tone is appropriate for a college-level audience.
    •   Paper follows a logical format from start to finish, with no extraneous sections, no
        conspicuous gaps, and with ideas presented in an order that is logical and facilitates
        the reader's progress through them.
    •   At the paragraph level, the writer provides a controlling idea/topic sentence, around
        which the paragraph is organized.
    •   Introductions provide readers an entrance to the project, preparing them for what
        the writer will cover.
    •   Conclusions provide summation and connections.
    •   All text is carefully edited and proofread, and the paper is neatly formatted.
    •   In-text citations are appropriate to the disciplinary style. They actively assist the
        reader in following the professional controversy being written about. Attributive tags
        and framing allow the writer's voice and ideas to be easily distinguished from those
        of outside sources.
    •   Quoted material is quoted exactly or, if elided/altered, appropriate bracketing and
        notes make these changes clear.
    •   Paraphrased material is also correctly cited and is paraphrased accurately, without
        altering the original meaning of the source.
    •   The number and variety of sources reflect a solid research effort, which may take an
        ethnographic or participant-observer approach.
 The Student Honor Code states: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
         abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
PLAGIARISM/CHEATING:
Anyone plagiarizing and/or cheating will first be given an “F” (Fail) and a report will be
forwarded to the appropriate university authorities.
Notice regarding academic dishonesty (e.g. Plagiarism)
    • Honor Code or statement of ethics.
             o University of Texas Honor Code: Each member of the university is expected
                 to uphold The University of Texas Honor Code through integrity, honesty,
                 trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
                                                                                              5


According to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, to “plagiarize” means
    • to steal and pass off (the ideas or words of another) as one's own.
    • to use (another's production) without crediting the source.
    • to commit literary theft.
    • to present as new and original an idea or product derived from an existing source.
In other words, plagiarism is an act of fraud. It involves both stealing someone else's work
and lying about it afterward.
All of the following are considered plagiarism:
    •    turning in someone else's work as your own.
    •    copying words or ideas from someone else without giving credit.
    •    failing to put a quotation in quotation marks.
    •    giving incorrect information about the source of a quotation.
    •    changing words but copying the sentence structure of a source without giving credit.
    •    copying so many words or ideas from a source that it makes up the majority of your
         work, whether you give credit or not (see our section on "fair use" rules).
Most cases of plagiarism can be avoided, however, by citing sources. Simply acknowledging
that certain material has been borrowed, and providing your readers with the information
necessary to find that source, is usually enough to prevent plagiarism.
    • Web site for more information:
    • http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
Grading Procedure:
    -    Regular attendance/participation: 10%
    -    Regular individual presentations of the reading material: 10%
    -    3 Take-Home Exams: 60% (20% each)
    -    Final Group Project (presentation and paper): 20%
Grading Distribution (Letter Grade: Points):
A: 100-95 A-: 94-90 B+: 89-87 B: 86-83 B-: 82-80 C+: 79-77 C: 76-73
C-: 72-70 D+: 69-67 D: 66-63 D-: 62-60 F: 59 and below.
Documented Disability Statement:
    • Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from
         the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
         Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
         http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd. Students need to inform the instructor
         and the teaching assistant(s) about their disability right at the beginning of the
         semester.
                                                                                            6


Please note that the instructor reserves the right to make changes in the syllabus when
necessary to meet learning objectives.
Reading Schedule: (this schedule is tentative and subject to possible revision)
Week 1: Queer Ethnographies
- Thursday, August 29th              Introduction and Orientation
Week 2:
- Tuesday, September 3rd             “CHAPTER 1. Sexing Guadalupe in Transnational Double
                                     Crossings” in Gutiérrez, Laura G. (2010) Performing
                                     Mexicanidad: Vendidas y Cabareteras on the
                                     Transnational Stage. Austin: The University of Texas
                                     Press, pp. 31-63.
- Thursday, September 5th            “CHAPTER 2. Gender Parody, Political Satire, and
                                     Postmodern Rancheras : Astrid Hadad’s “Heavy Nopal ”
                                     Aesthetics” in Gutiérrez, Laura G. (2010) Performing
                                     Mexicanidad: Vendidas y Cabareteras on the
                                     Transnational Stage. Austin: The University of Texas
                                     Press, pp. 64-100.
Week 3:
- Tuesday, September 10th            “CHAPTER 3. Fue en un cabaret : Nation, Melodrama,
                                     Gender, and Sexuality in Contemporary Mexican
                                     Performance ” in Gutiérrez, Laura G. (2010) Performing
                                     Mexicanidad: Vendidas y Cabareteras on the
                                     Transnational Stage. Austin: The University of Texas
                                     Press, pp. 101-131.
                                     “Writing in Process” Class visit of a staff member of
                                     the Undergraduate Writing Center | FAC 211 | 1
                                     University Station (G3000), Austin, TX 78712-3000 |
                                     Phone: 512.471.6222
- Thursday, September 12th           “CHAPTER 4. Nao Bustamante’s “Bad-Girl” Aesthetics”
                                     and “CHAPTER 5. Ximena Cuevas’s Critical Collages” in
                                     Gutiérrez, Laura G. (2010) Performing Mexicanidad:
                                     Vendidas y Cabareteras on the Transnational Stage.
                                     Austin: The University of Texas Press, pp. 135-166.
                                                                                           7


Week 4:
- Tuesday, September 17th  Visit of the art exhibit “Jeffrey Gibson: This Is the Day”
                           (https://blantonmuseum.org/exhibition/jeffrey-gibson-
                           this-is-the-day/) at the Blanton Museum | 200 E
                           Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd, Austin, TX 78701 | (512)
                           471-7324 (class will meet at the Blanton!)
- Thursday, September 19th “1. Belleza Venezolana: Media, Race, Modernity, and
                           Nation in the Twentieth-Century Venezuelan Beauty
                           Contest” in Ochoa, Marcia (2014) Queen for a Day:
                           Transformistas, Beauty Queens, and the Performance
                           of Femininity in Venezuela. Durham: Duke University
                           Press, pp. 21-58.
Week 5:
- Tuesday, September 24th  “2. La Moda Nace en Paris y Muere en Caracas:
                           Fashion, Beauty, and Consumption on the
                           (Trans)National” in Ochoa, Marcia (2014) Queen for a
                           Day: Transformistas, Beauty Queens, and the
                           Performance of Femininity in Venezuela. Durham: Duke
                           University Press, pp. 59-94.
                           1st Take-Home Exam to be handed in!
- Thursday, September 26th In-class Conversation with Sean Dorsey (students will
                           come to class prepared with questions for our guest).
- Friday, September 27th   Dance Performance: Trans choreographer Sean Dorsey
                           and his company, Sean Dorsey Dance, will
                           perform Boys in Trouble at the McCullough Theatre on
                           Friday 27 September at 7:30 PM
                           (https://texasperformingarts.org/season/sean-dorsey-
                           dance-mccullough-theatre-2019).
Week 6:
- Tuesday, October 1st     “3. La Reina de la Noche: Performance, Sexual
                           Subjectivity, and the Form of the Beauty Pageant in
                           Venezuela” in Ochoa, Marcia (2014) Queen for a Day:
                           Transformistas, Beauty Queens, and the Performance
                           of Femininity in Venezuela. Durham: Duke University
                           Press, pp. 97-126.
- Thursday, October 3rd    “4. Pasarelas y Perolones: Transformista Mediations on
                           Avenida Libertador in Caracas” in Ochoa, Marcia (2014)
                                                                                   8


                         Queen for a Day: Transformistas, Beauty Queens, and
                         the Performance of Femininity in Venezuela. Durham:
                         Duke University Press., pp. 127-153.
                         Visit of the Gender and Sexuality Center, Student
                         Activity Center, Room 2.112 (2201 Speedway)
Week 7:
- Tuesday, October 8th   “Interlude I. From Far Afield: A Queer Travelogue (Part
                         I)/Chapters 1 and 2” in Gill, Lyndon K. (2018) Erotic
                         Islands: Art and Activism in the Queer Caribbean.
                         Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 19-76.
- Thursday, October 10th “Interlude II. From Far Afield: A Queer Travelogue (Part
                         II)/Chapters 3 and 4” in Gill, Lyndon K. (2018) Erotic
                         Islands: Art and Activism in the Queer Caribbean.
                         Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 77-125.
Week 8:
- Tuesday, October 15th  “Interlude III. From Far Afield: A Queer Travelogue
                         (Part III)/Chapters 5 and 6” in Gill, Lyndon K. (2018)
                         Erotic Islands: Art and Activism in the Queer Caribbean.
                         Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 127-185.
- Thursday, October 17th “Interlude IV. From Far Afield: A Queer Travelogue
                         (Part IV) and Conclusion” in Gill, Lyndon K. (2018) Erotic
                         Islands: Art and Activism in the Queer Caribbean.
                         Durham: Duke University Press, pp 187-216.
Week 9:
- Tuesday, October 22nd  Visit of the Benson Latin American Collection in Sid
                         Richardson Hall at 2300 Red River Street (class will
                         meet at the Benson!)
                         2nd Take-Home Exam to be handed in!
- Thursday, October 24th “1. Setting the Scene: SM Communities in the San
                         Francisco Bay Area” in Weiss, Margot D. (2011)
                         Techniques of Pleasure: BDSM and the Circuits of
                         Sexuality. Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 34-60.
Week 10:
- Tuesday, October 29th  “2. Becoming a Practitioner: Self-Mastery, Social
                         Control, and the Biopolitics of SM” in Weiss, Margot D.
                         (2011) Techniques of Pleasure: BDSM and the Circuits
                                                                                9


                          of Sexuality. Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 61-
                          100.
- Thursday, October 31st  “3. The Toy Bag: Exchange Economies and the Body at
                          Play” in Weiss, Margot D. (2011) Techniques of
                          Pleasure: BDSM and the Circuits of Sexuality. Durham:
                          Duke University Press, pp. 101-142.
Week 11:
- Tuesday, November 5th   “4. Beyond Vanilla: Public Politics and Private Selves” in
                          Weiss, Margot D. (2011) Techniques of Pleasure: BDSM
                          and the Circuits of Sexuality. Durham: Duke University
                          Press, pp. 143-186.
- Thursday, November 7th  Film Screening/Discussion
                          Bad Hair (2013) Pelo malo (original title) 1h 33min
Week 12:
- Tuesday, November 12th  “Chapter 1 Queer Regions: Imagining Kerala from
                          the Diaspora” in Gopinath, Gayatri (2018) Unruly
                          Visions: The Aesthetic Practices of Queer Diaspora.
                          Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 19-58.
                          Third Take-Home Exam due!
- Thursday, November 14th “Chapter 2 Queer Disorientations, States of
                          Suspension” in Gopinath, Gayatri (2018) Unruly
                          Visions: The Aesthetic Practices of Queer Diaspora.
                          Durham: Duke University Press, pp. 59-86.
                          Visit of the Perry Castañeda Library (PCL 1.124)
Week 13:
- Tuesday, November 19th  “Chapter 3 Diaspora, Indigeneity, Queer Critique” in
                          Gopinath, Gayatri (2018) Unruly Visions: The Aesthetic
                          Practices of Queer Diaspora. Durham: Duke University
                          Press, pp. 87-124.
- Thursday, November 21st AAA Meeting
Week 14:
- Tuesday, November 26th  Group Project Meetings
- Thursday, November 28th Thanksgiving
                                                                                 10


Week 15: Student Group Presentations
- Tuesday, December 3rd             Final Group Project Presentations
- Thursday, December 5th            Final Group Project Presentations
Paper version of the final Group Project due on Thursday, December 5th!
                                                                        11
