                           THEUNIVERSITYOFTEXASATAUSTIN
                              ACC 362, Auditing and Control
                                           Course Syllabus
                                             Spring 2020
Time and Location:
    Mondays and Wednesdays from 8:00-9:30 a.m. (unique no. 02385) in CBA 5.328
Instructor
    Mark Bradshaw, J.D., M.P.A., M.B.A.
    Of Counsel, Matheson, Keys & Kordzik PLLC (2008-present)
    Audit Professor in Residence, KPMG (2007)
    Office: GSB.5.124E; Ph.: 512-475-8852; E-mail: mark.bradshaw@mccombs.utexas.edu
    Office hours: Mondays from 1:30 – 3:30 p.m. (and by appointment)
    Note: Please e-mail if you wish to schedule an appointment outside of office hours.
Teaching Assistant
    Xuanning Cui
    E-mail: cuixuanning@utexas.edu
    Xuanning will assist with the grading of cases and exams. After graded cases are returned, she
    will schedule office hours to discuss such assignments. If you have grading or other questions
    concerning a case that has been returned, please make every effort to attend her scheduled
    office hours. All other questions and communications concerning course-related matters
    (including course content, case and exam preparation and exam grading) should be
    directed to me.
Canvas
    We will use the web-based Canvas course site extensively. To access Canvas, follow the links
    from your MyUT Student Portal or the University website.
    I will use Canvas to post announcements, course materials and scores. Please check Canvas
    frequently and before every class, exam and case due date.
Enhancing the Enjoyment of this Course
    I prefer an informal classroom, as I have found such an environment to be more enjoyable and
    conducive to student attendance and participation. I hope you will begin or join the discussion
    if you have a question, response or comment. In this class, silence is not golden!
    Please assist me in maintaining a positive, productive learning environment by showing
    courtesy and respect for your fellow students (and me). To that end, please make all
    reasonable efforts to be on time to class and exams. Entering the classroom after class or an
    exam begins is distracting and disruptive to me and those around you.
    In my experience as an instructor and student, electronic devices are also distracting and
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                Page 1


    disruptive. Accordingly, the use of electronic devices in class is not permitted. Please turn
    off your cell phone, tablet, laptop and other devices before class begins.
    PowerPoint slides for each course topic will be available on Canvas before class. I recommend
    that you print out the slides (4 or 6 to a page) before each class and write your notes in the
    margins or space provided as we cover the material.
Required Course Materials:
    Course files. As noted above, I will provide PowerPoint and other files (including supplemental
        non-textbook readings, homework solutions, and cases) on Canvas. These materials do not
        substitute for class itself, so it is important to attend each class session.
    Auditing: a Risk Based Approach, 11th ed., by Johnstone-Zehms, Gramling & Rittenberg
        (Cengage Learning, 2019).
Course Objectives
At the end of the semester, you will have a better understanding of the following:
1. The audit profession, including the importance of auditing and other assurance services to the global
economy.
2. The crucial role of auditing in effective corporate governance and the reduction of fraud.
3. Auditing standards and the current audit environment.
4. Auditor liability and ethical responsibilities.
5. Internal controls and the integrated audit.
6. Audit planning, including the risk-based approach to auditing and audit risk model.
7. The need to gather sufficient, competent audit evidence to conduct a quality audit.
8. The use of data analytics in audits.
9. The framework for auditing a company's revenue and purchasing cycles.
10. End-of-audit issues and procedures.
11. Reporting audit findings.
12. Issues arising in past accounting and auditing scandals.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                     Page 2


Grading
        Course grades will be based on a 500-point scale, as follows:
                                                                  Points Possible
 Midterm examination 1                                            75 (15%)
 Midterm examination 2                                            100 (20%)
 Final examination                                                125 (25%)
 Cases (three)                                                    100 (20%)
 Group presentation                                               50 (10%)
 Class attendance and participation                               50 (10%)
 Total possible points                                            500
     I do not, prior to the semester, establish fixed point or percentage cut-offs regarding letter
     grades. I will make these determinations at the end of the semester based on both relative
     and absolute performance considerations. Historically, my grade distribution in this course
     has been approximately 25-35% A/A-‘s, 50-65% % B+/B’s and the remainder below.
     However, the foregoing is not a commitment to such a grade distribution and this
     semester’s distribution may differ.
     As students are naturally curious about grades and where they stand during the semester, I
     will endeavor to give the class a sense of what I view as A, B, etc. performance after the
     second midterm exam. However, any mid-semester indications of exam and course
     performance are merely to assist you in evaluating your performance to date and achieving
     your goals in this course. They are not guarantees or suggestions that you will receive any
     particular final grade in this course or indicators as to percentage cutoffs for particular
     grades.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                 Page 3


Each graded component is described below:
Examinations (two midterms worth 75 and 100 points; final exam worth 125 points)
         Examinations will emphasize concepts and issues discussed in class and/or addressed in
PowerPoint slides to be provided, although any material from assigned readings is "fair game" for
testing. Exams will contain multiple choice, true-false, short-answer and/or essay questions. I will
provide additional exam-related information prior to each exam.
         The first midterm examination will test material related to Chapters 1-3 of the text. The second
midterm will cover material related to Chapters 4, 15, 5 and 6. The final examination will emphasize
the remainder of the material covered in the course. Of course, as certain material in this course builds
on previous concepts, the second midterm and final exam will be “cumulative” in the broad sense of
that term.
Cases (three worth 100 points)
         To refine your writing skills and your ability to deal with more realistic and less structured
problems in auditing, there will be three case exercises based on real-world examples that have been
adapted for teaching purposes. Cases will be graded for breadth and depth of analysis, quality of
writing and professional impression. Some case questions will involve subjective issues for which there
may be no single “right answer” and multiple views can be defended. It is important to be both
complete and concise in your case analyses and to carefully follow case instructions. Do not repeat
or summarize the case facts, except where needed to support a position. Your case analyses will be
limited to three pages each and must be double-spaced, use a font no smaller than 10, and have left
and right margins of at least 1”.
         In the formative stage of a case assignment, you are welcome to discuss the case with other
students in this class (but not other classes, past or present), including on Canvas. However,
discussing a case with individuals not currently in this class (other than the University Writing
Center, as discussed below) or relying on or copying from another student's solution is scholastic
dishonesty and will be penalized severely. (See "Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty" later in this syllabus
for clarification.) You are also welcome to discuss and clarify case issues by posting to the Canvas
discussion forums, as well.
         The assigned cases and their point allocations are listed below:
  Case                                      Source                   Topic
  1. MHA Textiles (15 points)               PwC Case Series          Dealing with
                                            (2005)                   client requests
  2. Waste Disposal, Inc. (35 points)       Adapted from a           Evaluating risks
                                            case by                  in audit planning
                                            Ragothaman,
                                            Wilcox and Davies
                                            (American
                                            Accounting
                                            Association, 2003)
  3. Data analytics (50 points)
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                   Page 4


         All cases will be due in class (hard copy) on the day indicated in the Course Schedule (below),
unless otherwise instructed, and must also be submitted online via Canvas prior to class. We will
discuss cases in class, on or after the due date. Discussion of cases is an important part of the course, so
please be prepared to discuss and defend your positions in class (see “Class Attendance and
Participation,” below).
Group Presentation - "Pick a Scandal" (50 points)
          The capstone project in the latter part of the semester will involve assigned groups of three or four
students. Each group will choose an accounting / auditing scandal and investigate (1) the underlying
accounting issue(s) or nature of any accounting fraud, (2) why the audit failed to uncover the problem(s) and
what might have been done differently, and (3) the consequences for management and the auditors. Each
group will present the results from its investigation in a 15-minute presentation. Further details on this
assignment and a list of suggested scandals will be provided later in the semester.
Class Attendance and Participation (50 points)
          Your attendance and active participation will make this course substantially more enjoyable (for
you and me) and significantly enhance the clarity of points discussed in class. To give you an added
incentive to attend and participate, a component of the course grade will be based on your attendance and
my assessment of your cumulative participation and contribution in this class.
          Elements of participation and contribution are:
      • Asking and answering questions and offering insights in class discussions!
      • Attending and showing interest in other groups' presentations.
          I do not "micromanage" participation or expect that you will contribute in every class. Assessing
participation at the conclusion of the course requires my subjective judgment, but you can trust me to do my
best to form a fair assessment over the semester of your participation and contribution.
          I do not take attendance every class, as my expectation (being that you are seniors in a top accounting
program, business school and university) is that you will consistently attend class. However, I will take
attendance from time to time (and at least 10 times) during the semester, including on group presentation
days. Days on which attendance is taken will not be announced in advance, except for group presentation
days. Any student who is absent or materially late to class on 50% or more of the days on which attendance
is taken (as indicated by sign-in sheets I will circulate, and which are your responsibility to complete if
present) will receive an attendance and participation score of zero (out of 50) in the course.
           I will also take into account any violations of course policies, such as consistent tardiness or
arriving late for an exam, the use of electronic devices in class, or any other activities that are distracting
disruptive.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                       Page 5


See me for feedback and guidance!
         As in any course, it is common for some students’ early performance in the course to fall short of
their goals or expectations. Unfortunately, it is also common for many such students to not seek input or
assistance in a timely manner, leading to late-semester anxiety and diminished (or dashed) hopes for a
particular grade.
         If at any point you have a concern about your performance, please come by during office hours
or make an appointment to see me. I will be happy to provide suggestions on how you might improve
your performance in the course.
Discussion Forums
         Along with other features of Canvas, I strongly encourage you to take advantage of the
discussion forums for this course. Postings can relate to class discussions, case issues, exam-related
questions, career matters or any other topics/issues that are relevant to this course. I monitor the
discussion forums on a regular basis and more frequently prior to exams and case due dates.
Ground rules for discussion forums:
1. For questions or comments of general interest to the class (i.e., non-personal matters), please
      use Canvas, not e-mail!
2. Be professional and courteous. Discussion forums of this type are used throughout the business
      world. You do not need to be overly formal, but forums such as this offer a good opportunity to
      practice professional business communication. Please keep in mind that I will read your posts.
3. Do not be a free rider. If you benefit from reading others’ postings, consider adding your own
     insights. Also, reply to inquiries from your fellow students.
4.    I will establish special forums for exams, cases and group project selections. To maximize the
      usefulness of your posting, please use the designated forums.
Canvas downtimes and cases:
          As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes and
unanticipated interruptions of the Canvas system. Notification of these disruptions will
be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for turning
in a case late or failing to complete other course requirements. As downtimes are often
unpredictable, I advise you to print out case and other course materials as soon as they
are available.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                       Page 6


Homework
         Each chapter in the text is followed by multiple choice and true-false problems that you
can complete for practice. I suggest that you complete these problems following each full chapter
that we cover (we only cover a portion of Ch. 17). Solutions will be posted on Canvas.
         Homework is voluntary and will not be collected. Hence, homework does not technically count
as part of your course grade. However, I will consider the suggested homework problems when I
prepare each examination, i.e., certain exam questions will be similar or identical to homework
problems. I expect that students who put diligent effort into the homework will do better on
examinations.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
         In general, medical emergencies, family emergencies and university-sponsored conflicts are
the only valid reasons for missing an examination or the due date of a case. In all such instances, I
require some form of supporting documentation, such as a signed note from a physician or other
verification of the emergent situation or conflict. If appropriate, I suggest that you register any such
emergencies with the Office of Student Emergency Services. At that point I will decide the best
make-up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could mean a make-up exam, an extension, or
recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed component, depending on the circumstances.
Examinations or assignments that are missed for reasons other than emergencies or university-
sponsored conflicts will generally receive no credit. In the case of a conflict due to a university-
sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of the conflict and before the
examination date or assignment due date.
         Please note that interviews and office visits are not valid reasons for missing an examination
or turning in a case late. Although recruiting can be time-consuming and tiresome, I do not expect
such activities to create direct conflicts with exams (which will take place in class) and cases (which are
assigned several days before their due dates). If you must miss class and a case is due that day, you
should email the case to me (with a copy to our TA) before class begins.
Religious Holidays
          Religious holy days sometime conflict with examination and assignment schedules. If you
must miss an examination or case due to the observance of a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of
the University that you must notify me prior to the exam or case scheduled on the date you will be
absent to observe a religious holiday. Please provide as much notice to me as possible.
Policy on Students with Disabilities
         The University strives to accommodate qualified students with disabilities. Students with
disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). If you are a qualified student
with a disability, please provide your SSD letter as soon as practicable and see me to discuss any
appropriate accommodations that have been recommended for this course.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                    Page 7


University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
         All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your email address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Electronic Class Roster and Student Privacy
         The University has requested that students be notified of their privacy rights in regard to
electronic class rosters:
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at the
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information
that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail
rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of
the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1.
The University Writing Center
I encourage you to use the University Writing Center (UWC), now located in the
Learning Commons of the Perry Castaneda Library (PCL), to assist you with writing
your case analyses. The UWC offers constructive, expert help with writing, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis (although I suggest you make an appointment and not
wait until the “last minute”) on both academic and non-academic writing. This is not just
for writing with “problems.” Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal
part of a successful writing project. Consultants help students develop strategies to
improve their writing. Further, the assistance they provide is intended to foster
independence - each student determines how to use the consultant’s advice. The
consultants are trained to help you work on your writing in ways that preserve the
integrity of your work.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty and Working Together on Course Assignments
Policy of the Department of Accounting
        The Department of Accounting has a Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to which this
course shall adhere (as if this were a class in the MPA program, and in addition to any other applicable
department, school and university policies regarding scholastic integrity). It is available via the
Department website at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/MPA/Student-Code-of-Ethics.aspx.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                    Page 8


         The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both
students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the Department's Policy Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty
responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all
student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and
the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You
should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to
access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further
elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
         Integrity is a public good from which we all benefit and a trait of successful businessmen and
women. I intend to conduct this course in an environment of trust and cooperation. I can only
achieve this, however, if you maintain absolute ethical integrity in this course. If in doubt, ask me!
Personal Policy on Working Together (applies only to this course)
         For this class, you may discuss issues related to assigned cases with other students in this class
(but not others). You may work in the formative stages of an assignment with others in this class if you
wish to clarify facts and issues. However, I expect the final product of each case to reflect individual
composition and not be the result of joint or collaborative preparation (with the exception of the
“pick a scandal” presentations, or any other assignments expressly allowed to be completed in groups).
You may not copy or paraphrase from others' solutions. Examples intended to clarify this policy
follow.
Examples of acceptable collaborative efforts (applies only to this course):
• A student is confused about an ambiguous aspect of a case, and asks another student in this section
      what s/he thinks.
• Students ask questions and share helpful insights in class or on Canvas.
Examples of collaborative efforts that are unacceptable:
• Student A completes a case (or draft) analysis before student B. B asks A for or obtains A's
      solution. B bases his/her solution on A's solution, in whole or in part. Both A and B are guilty of
      scholastic dishonesty.
• A student finds a source relevant to a case and copies extensively from it, without using quotation
      marks, indentation or other references to acknowledge the source. This example constitutes
      plagiarism, which is a clear case of scholastic dishonesty.
•    A student reviews a case solution (graded or ungraded) completed by another person
     in a prior semester.
• Any collaboration, breach of security or other cheating on a course examination.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                         Page 9


Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the
Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
-- Occupants of buildings on the University campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
-- Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building.
-- Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class.
-- In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
-- Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
Services office.
-- Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
-- Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency.
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                           Page 10


Anticipated Course Schedule
Assigned chapters are from Auditing: a Risk Based Approach, 11th ed., by Johnstone-Zehms,
Gramling & Rittenberg (Cengage Learning, 2019). Various other readings and course files will
supplement this text and may be added from time to time.
IMPORTANT: Please complete each day's assigned reading before class. The readings provide
     background that is necessary for understanding classroom discussion.
 Date                    Topic                                                 Reading Assignment
 Jan.    22              Course introduction/                                  Syllabus; Ch. 1
                         Introduction to auditing and assurance services
         27              Introduction to auditing, continued
         29              The role of auditing in corporate governance and the Ch. 2
                         deterrence and detection of fraud
 Feb.     3              The role of auditing, continued
          5              Internal control over financial reporting             Ch. 3
         10              Internal control over financial reporting, continued
         12              Auditor liability and ethics                          Ch. 4
         17              EXAM 1 (in class), covering Chs. 1-3
         19              Auditor liability and ethics, continued
         24              Audit reporting                                       Ch. 15
         26              Audit reporting/ Case 1 due in class (and
                         online)
 Mar.     2              Audit concepts and the audit process (no              Ch. 5
                         class – audio lecture to be provided on
                         Canvas)
          4              Audit evidence                                        Ch. 6
          9              Materiality, risk and audit planning                  Ch. 7
         11              EXAM 2 (in class), covering Chs. 4, 15, 5, 6
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                                Page 11


         16/18   Spring Break!
           23    Risk and audit planning, continued
           25    Revenue and inventory fraud             SEC Complaint
           30    Case 2 due in class (and online)
 Apr.       1    Auditing the revenue cycle              Ch. 9
            6    DAY 1 OF GROUP PRESENTATIONS
            8    Auditing the purchasing cycle           Ch. 11
           13    DAY 2 OF GROUP PRESENTATIONS
           15    Special issues in completing the audit  Ch. 14
           20    Special issues in completing the audit,
                 continued
           22    Introduction to Case 3 – Data Analytics
           27    FINAL EXAM (in class)
           29    Case 3 – Part I
 May        4    Case 3 – Part II
            6    Case 3 – Part III
ACC 362
SPRING 2020
Mark L. Bradshaw                     Page 12
