 Main Currents in American Culture Since 1865
                     Spring 2020                                                           Prof. Alex Beasley
                     AMS 356 / HIS 356K                                                    Burdine 130
                     Unique #: 31160 / 38835                                               2:00pm – 3:30pm T/Th
Professor:           B. Alex Beasley (he/him)                         T.A.:                Gaila Sims (she/her)
                     Office: BUR 402                                                       BUR 436
                     beasley@austin.utexas.edu                                             gaila.sims@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tu/Th, 3:30-4:30pm;                                     Office Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays,
                     W, 12:30-1:30pm;                                                      12:30-2:00pm
                     or by appointment
  Sign up to meet with Dr. Beasley (during office hours or at another time) via Calendly: www.calendly.com/babeasley
“As I went walking I saw a sign there                                 In the shadow of the steeple I saw my people,
And on the sign it said "No Trespassing."                             By the relief office I seen my people;
But on the other side it didn't say nothing,                          As they stood there hungry, I stood there asking
That side was made for you and me.                                    Is this land made for you and me?”
                                     – Woody Guthrie, “This Land Is Your Land,” 1940
Description
This upper-division course surveys the cultural history of the United States from 1865 through the present, exploring the
social, political, economic, and cultural forces that have shaped the development of the nation since the Civil War. We
will examine how different communities organized around identifiers such as race, ethnicity, national origin, class,
gender, and ideology have negotiated with and contributed to changing conceptions of American identity.
As a survey of cultural history, this course revolves around one fundamental question: What does “America” mean? To
answer this question, we will consider the competing ideas of Americanness articulated since 1865. We will focus on the
cultural discourses embedded in historical texts (including diaries, letters, legislation, and manifestos). What stated and
unstated messages do these documents have about who belongs as an American, and who does not? We will pay
particular attention to the work that cultural forms (like art, literature, theater, and film) have done to showcase and
debate divergent ideas about American identity.
We will focus our analysis on two primary themes:
     1. How have racial categories been understood in American history? How have ideas about race and racial
          hierarchy been articulated? How have these categories changed over time, and across different communities?
     2. How have Americans understood the economy? How have Americans debated how the economy works and
          should work? How much agency have ordinary Americans had to change the nation, and how much does
          economic power determine social possibilities?
In the process of examining these themes, we will pay careful attention to changing ideas about gender and sexuality;
the formation and meaning of borders, migration, and immigration; and the connections between domestic life and U.S.
foreign power.


Required Materials
      • A required course reader is available for purchase at Jenn’s Copies (2518 Guadalupe).
      • Later in the semester, you will watch the film Wall Street, which can be rented in iTunes for $3.99. If there is
           enough interest, I will also organize a screening for interested students (which would be free to attend).
Course Format
This is a survey course. The majority of our time in class will take the form of your professor lecturing. On occasion, we
may have some small-group discussions or other in-class activities.
Although this is not a discussion-based course, the required reading is mandatory. You will not perform well on the
exams if you do not keep up with the reading.
The aim of this course is help you to think historically and analytically. We will work to figure out what we are able to
know about the past; which sources can help us to get at that knowledge; and what the limits and silences of various
types of sources might be. At the same time, we will consider how the authors we read construct arguments, and we will
critically evaluate the persuasiveness of these arguments. Ultimately, you will be working out the tensions inherent in
thinking through how the past can—and should—matter in the present.
Learning Objectives
At the end of this course, students will leave with:
      • A complex and layered understanding of U.S. history since 1865;
      • Knowledge of the diverse experiences that shaped American cultural history;
      • The ability to analyze and interrogate primary sources and place them into historical context;
      • The skill to begin to synthesize an original argument about key moments in U.S. cultural history.
Flags
This course fulfills a cultural diversity flag requirement. Cultural diversity flag courses “increase your familiarity with
the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. Courses carrying this flag ask you to explore the beliefs,
practices, and histories of at least one cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.” This course also
fulfills the core requirement in history (I).
Attendance and Participation
You are expected to attend every class and to come prepared. I will take attendance each day, and routine absences will
negatively impact your grade. More importantly, you will not perform well on the exams if you are not in class for the
lectures. You should bring the readings with you to class each day.
If you need to miss class for medical, religious, or sanctioned athletic reasons, your absence will be excused as long as
you notify your T.A. (Gaila) with the appropriate documentation. By UT-Austin policy, you must notify us of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. I require the same notice for
sanctioned athletic travel. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
                                                                                                                            2


If you have three unexcused absences, your final grade will be lowered by 1/3 of a letter grade for each subsequent
absence. This means that a final grade of A- becomes a B+ after four absences, or a B after five. Please note that
excessive tardiness will also affect your grade. Documentation for any excused absence must be received by one
week after the absence AT THE LATEST.
Laptops may be used for notetaking only. Please do not have your cell phone out during class. (If you are expecting an
emergency call or otherwise need to have your phone available during class, please let me know.)
Students adding the course after the first meeting must make up missed assignments. Please contact Gaila immediately
in person or via email to make up missed work.
I prefer to communicate by email. I will be communicating to the class via email throughout the semester, and I will be
using only your UT email address unless you instruct me otherwise. Please make sure that your UT email address is
working and that your mailbox has space. You must check your UT email daily. You are responsible for all
communications sent via email.
Assignments and Grading
     • Attendance and Class Participation                                     15%                          ongoing
     • 5 Pop Quizzes                                                          10%                          ongoing
     • Meme Assignment                                                        15%                          2/13 11:59p
     • Midterm (in class)                                                     20%                          3/10 2-3:30p
     • Cultural Artifact                                                      15%                          4/16 11:59p
     • Take-Home Final Exam                                                   25%                          5/14 11:59p
Your attendance/class participation grade depends on your coming to class. Seven times over the course of the semester,
I will give a pop quiz at the beginning of lecture. I will drop the lowest 2 quiz grades. Quizzes cannot be made up, even
in the event of an excused absence.
We will discuss your two short assignments (the meme assignment and the cultural artifact paper) in class. These two
assignments should be submitted electronically via the class Canvas site.
You need to secure an excuse from Dr. Beasley at least 3 days before the due date if you have a legitimate reason to
turn in work late. Unexcused late work will lose 1/3 of a letter grade per day late and will receive a failing grade after 5
days. No extensions will be granted for more than 3 days beyond the original due date except in the most extreme
circumstances.
Exam make-up policy: Avoid taking make-up exams at all costs – students tend to do worse on make-up exams than
they do on exams given on the original test day. But, if you are very sick on the exam’s given date, have an official
athletic commitment, a religious observance, or if an emergency circumstance arises, you are eligible to take a make-up
exam with the proper documentation. To request a make-up exam, email Dr. Beasley.
                                                                                                                             3


Extended time exam policy: For students who have documented disabilities or learning differences with the SSD that
require extended time on exams, these exams will take place the same day of the given exam. If you would prefer to take
your exam at the SSD on that day, you must discuss with Dr. Beasley your plans at least three weeks in advance of each
exam and must file all requisite paperwork with the SSD. Do note that the SSD requires at least two weeks’ notice for
you to request an exam to be proctored at their facility.
                                                        Grade Scale:
                     A 4.0 (93-100)                                                     C 2.0 (73-76)
                    A- 3.67 (90-92)                                                    C- 1.67 (70-72)
                    B+ 3.33 (87-89)                                                   D+ 1.33 (67-69)
                     B 3.0 (83-86)                                                      D 1.0 (60-63)
                    B- 2.67 (80-82)                                                    D- 0.67 (60-62)
                    C+ 2.33 (77-79)                                                F 0.00 (59 and below)
                         A: Exceptional; shows mastery of the material and fresh, original insight.
                B: Above average mastery of material; few grammatical mistakes; interesting argument.
                            C: Adequate comprehension of material; some grammatical errors.
                          D: Failure to adequately understand material; many grammatical errors.
                    F: Lacking basic understanding of course material or failure to fulfill assignment.
University Resources and Policies
I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-6222, http://www.uwc.utexas.edu.
The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis.
Students who are found guilty of academic dishonesty will fail the course and be reported to Student Judicial Services.
Plagiarism occurs if you represent as your own work any material that was obtained from another source, regardless of
how or where you acquired it. For examples of plagiarism, see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_plagiarism.php.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                                                                                                            4


What Do I Do If…
   • I have a question about course requirements, assignments, grades, or the course schedule?
       First, email Gaila. If your question is very complicated, feel free to cc: Dr. Beasley. Please put “AMS 356” in
       the subject line of your email. It may take us a day or two to get back to you, so plan accordingly if possible.
   • I missed class?
       You are responsible for your attendance. Your first action should be to get lecture notes from a classmate, and
       you should be sure that you have completed all of the readings. If you have questions after completing these
       steps, visit Gaila’s or Dr. Beasley’s office hours.
   • I have a disability that needs to be accommodated?
       Contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512.471.6529 (voice) or 1.866.329.3986 (video). I
       require a letter from SSD to provide accommodations. Present your documentation to Dr. Beasley.
   • Someone is behaving in a way that makes me uncomfortable?
       If you are worried or feel unsafe, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
       your concerns about another individual’s behavior. Call 512-232-5050 or visit
       http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
   • Our test is tomorrow and I’m really, really sick/some catastrophe happened?
       Email Gaila and cc: Dr. Beasley immediately regarding your unexpected absence (put “AMS 356” in the
       subject line). If you are sick, you will need documentation from your doctor or other medical professional.
   • I was working on the paper and I think I need an extra few days?
       If you find yourself needing more time, contact Dr. Beasley before the due date. No extensions will be
       granted on or after the due date except in cases of documented medical or family emergencies.
   • I want to use my laptop or phone in class?
       Plan to take hand-written notes during class. Studies have shown that retention of information is far
       superior among students who take handwritten notes over those who type them up (in other words,
       your grades may improve if you handwrite your notes!). You may use a laptop for note-taking in class if
       absolutely necessary, but I reserve the right to prohibit laptops if students are habitually distracted.
       Laptop users must sit in the first three rows of the classroom. Keep your cell phone in your pocket, your
       backpack, or purse—in other words, out of sight. No texting or phone usage in class.
   • I see a gun in the classroom?
       Students and faculty are permitted by law to carry concealed handguns, but they must remain invisible
       at all times. As per University policy, “The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus.
       Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do not attempt to question or approach the carrier, but immediately
       CALL 911. Police are trained to handle this situation.”
                                                   Whom To Contact
                           Gaila                                                      Dr. Beasley
   You have general questions about course logistics                       You need an extension on a paper
        You have questions about course content                  You need to request permission to make up an exam
  You have initial questions about grading or feedback                     You have a documented disability
 You know in advance you will miss a class for medical,              You are unexpectedly going to miss an exam
         religious, or sanctioned athletic reasons
   You are adding the course late and need to make up            You want to discuss the course or just have questions
               missed readings/assignments                                            about history
                                                                                                                        5


Course Outline
 **For the page numbers on which you can find a particular reading, refer to your course packet’s table of contents.**
Week 1
    • T 1/21: Welcome! + Introduction: What Is American Culture?
    • Th 1/23: The End of Slavery and the Birth of “Free Labor”
             o Reading:
                     § “Frederick Douglass to the Reconstruction Congress” (1866)
                     § “Speech of Frederick Douglass at the 1876 Republican National Convention”
Week 2
    • T 1/28: Urbanization and Immigrant Labor in the North
             o Reading:
                     § Horatio Alger, Ragged Dick (1868), Chapters 1, 11, 26, 27.
    • Th 1/30: The Closing of the Frontier
             o Reading:
                     § Frederick Jackson Turner, “The Significance of the Frontier in American History” (1893)
                     § Zitkala-Sa, American Indian Stories (1921), excerpt.
Week 3
    • T 2/4: The Rise of the Corporation and the Populist Moment
             o Reading:
                     § People’s Party, “Omaha Platform” (1892).
                     § Andrew Carnegie, “The Gospel of Wealth” (1889), pp. 1-15.
    • Th 2/6: Industry, the “New South,” and the Invention of Jim Crow
             o Reading:
                     § Ida B. Wells, “Lynch Law in All Its Phases” (1893)
                     § W.E.B. DuBois, “Of Mr. Booker T. Washington and Others,” from The Souls of Black Folk
                         (1903)
Week 4
    • T 2/11: The Business of Empire: Cuba, Hawaii, and the Philippines
             o Reading:
                     § Albert Beveridge, “The March of the Flag” (1898).
                     § Mark Twain, “The War Prayer” (1905).
    • Th 2/13: Empire at Home
             o Reading:
                     § Josiah Strong, “On Anglo-Saxon Predominance” (1891).
                     § Charlotte Perkins Gilman, Our Androcentric Culture, or the Man-Made World (1911),
                         excerpts.
             o MEME ASSIGNMENT DUE
                                                                                                                       6


Week 5
   • T 2/18: Radicalism: Anarchism, Feminism, Freedom
         o Reading:
                   § Emma Goldman, “Anarchism: What It Really Stands For” (1910).
                   § Big Bill Haywood, “The General Strike” (1911).
   • Th 2/20: Progressive Reformers Confront American Capital and American Stomachs
         o Reading:
                   § Upton Sinclair, The Jungle, excerpts (1906)
Week 6
   • T 2/25: Progressive Reformers Confront American Labor
         o Reading:
                   § Frederick Taylor, The Principles of Scientific Management, excerpt (1911)
   • Th 2/27: World War I at Home: Repressing Radicals
         o Reading:
                   § “The Negro and the War”: Reports in African-American Newspapers
Week 7
   • T 3/3: The Business of America Is Business
         o Reading:
                   § Excerpts from Suniland.
                   § Bruce Barton, The Man Nobody Knows: A Discovery of the Real Jesus (1925), excerpts.
   • Th 3/5: Making a New Deal
         o Reading:
                   § Hollace Ransdall, “Report on the First Scottsboro Trial” (1931)
Week 8
   • T 3/10: MIDTERM
   • Th 3/12: NO CLASS
Week 9
   • NO CLASS – SPRING BREAK
Week 10
   • T 3/24: World War II and America’s Limits
         o Reading:
                   § George I. Sanchez, "Pachucos in the Making": Roots of the Zoot (1943)
                                                                                                         7


   •    Th 3/26: The Postwar Strike Wave, Capital Flight, and the Industrialization of the Countryside
            o Reading:
                     § Women's Committee of UAW Local 400, "Listen, Brothers!," flyer (1945)
                     § Shirley Hall, “We Don’t Know What Will Happen to Our People” (1949)
                     § American Institute of Laundering, “The Laundry Loses Business to Its Customers” (1949)
                     § Dolly Lowther, “Among the Most Exploited” (1949)
Week 11
   • T 3/31: Suburban Landscapes, Suburban Politics
            o Reading:
                     § Richard Matheson, “Clothes Make the Man”
   • T 4/2: The Consumers’ Cold War: Mass Production and Mass Destruction
            o Reading:
                     § Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great American Cities (1961), excerpt.
Week 12
   • Th 4/7: The Cold War Economy: Science, Technology, and Defense
            o Reading:
                     § Henry Luce, “The American Century” (1941).
                     § National Security Council, NSC-68 (1950).
   • Th 4/9: The Other America
            o Reading:
                     § “Three Poverties” in Michael Harrington, The Other America (1962), pp. 86-106.
                     § Allen Ginsberg, “America” (1956).
Week 13
   • T 4/14: The Civil Rights Movement
            o Reading:
                     § Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, “Statement of Purpose” (1960).
                     § Malcolm X, “The Ballot or the Bullet” (1964).
                     § Stokley Carmichael, “What We Want” (1966).
                     § The Black Panther Party, “Ten Point Program: What We Want/What We Believe” (1966).
   • Th 4/16: The New Left and the Counterculture
            o Reading:
                     § Students for a Democratic Society, “The Port Huron Statement” (1962).
                     § “The Ideology of the Young Lords Party” (1971).
                     § Carl Wittman, “Refugees from Amerika: A Gay Manifesto” (1970).
                     § The Combahee River Collective Statement (1977).
            o CULTURAL ARTIFACT ASSIGNMENT DUE
                                                                                                              8


Week 14
   • T 4/21: The Silent Majority?
         o Reading:
                   § Richard Nixon, “Address to the Nation on the War in Vietnam” (1969).
                   § Phyllis Schlafly, “What’s Wrong With ‘Equal Rights’ for Women?” (1972)
   • Th 4/23: The Energy Crisis: “Limits” and “Opportunities”
         o Reading:
                   § Chapters 1, 2, 3, 23, and 24 in Douglas Adams, The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy
                        (1978), pp. 6-37, 164-172.
Week 15
   • T 4/28: The Rise of the Service Sector
         o Reading:
                   § None, watch the film Wall Street (1987).
   • Th 4/30: The Business of Security: The War on Terror
         o Reading:
                   § Nancy W. Jabbra, “Women, Words and War: Explaining 9/11 and Justifying U.S. Military
                        Action in Afghanistan and Iraq,” Journal of International Women’s Studies 8:1 (2006).
Week 16
   • T 5/5: A New Gilded Age
         o Reading:
                   § “Work (Sucks),” in Malcolm Harris, Kids These Days: Human Capital and the Making of
                        Millennials, pp. 66-103.
   • Th 5/7: Final Exam Review
                      Take-Home Final Due Thursday, May 14, 11:59pm via Canvas
                                                                                                              9
