       Course: Accounting Careers Exploration (ACE)
                                  Accounting 151
                          Fall 2019 Course Syllabus
                             Instructor: Tina Reed
                                 Course Information
Class: ACE 151                              Dates: August 28- November 13, 2019
                                            Class Time: 5:00 p.m.-6:30 p.m.
Instructor: Tina Reed
Email: tina.reed@mccombs.utexas.edu         Class Location: UTC 2.112A
Phone: 512-471-3527
                                            Course Website: Canvas
Office Hours:                               http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Mondays 9:00 a.m.- 11:00 a.m.
Tuesdays 1:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.
By appointment
Teacher Assistants (TA):                    MPA Career Services
Lauren Anderson                             Jo Chauvin
Email: ltanderson@utexas.edu                Email: Jo.Chauvin@mccombs.utexas.edu
                                            Phone: (512) 232-7728
Sierra Hawkins
Email: sierra.hawkins7@gmail.com
                                                                                 1


                                     COURSE GOAL AND OBJECTIVES
The purpose of the Accounting Careers Exploration (ACE) course is to develop your awareness of the
career opportunities that await you. Your first chance to exercise this knowledge will occur with
internship recruiting that will begin in a few weeks. Therefore, this course has immediate relevance to a
significant decision you will face very soon.
ACE develops a comprehensive framework through exposure to multiple talented professionals and
experienced fellow students. A comprehensive framework has multiple advantages.
             1. It enables you to explore and better understand the job opportunities that you may wish to
                  pursue in your internship and immediately thereafter.
             2. The framework maps into your MPA track options.
             3. In your first job, you will better understand other businesses with which you interact and,
             4. You will gain perspective on career options for long term career planning.
The class is also designed to help improve your professionalism, resume writing, networking, and
Microsoft Excel skills. This skill set is critical to your success in your internship and your future career as
a professional.
                                                CLASS FORMAT
The format of this class is unlike any other MPA class.
The class will bring in a variety of professionals from leading companies and give you an opportunity to
ask questions and learn about different career opportunities. We will also have a variety of educational
components that will be team-taught.
Important Note: Many of the participant firms will be interviewing students on campus in the near future.
This class gives you a chance to show your knowledge, enthusiasm, and professionalism. It gives you a
chance to make a great first impression and be favorably remembered!
                                    AMENDMENTS TO THE SYLLABUS
This syllabus may be amended at any time during the semester at the instructor’s discretion. You are
responsible for all information that has been distributed or communicated in class. You are also
responsible for checking Canvas for any announcements, changes, or updates that affect assignment due
dates or changes in topics covered in class.
                                            ATTENDANCE POLICY
Your TA will record your attendance based on your attendance in your assigned section and the course
instructor will evaluate attendance based on this record. Class will begin at 5:00 p.m.
There are no automatic excused absences. For full attendance credit, you must be in your seat and ready
to go no later than the start of your class time (5:00 p.m.). You must remain fully attentive until the
session is adjourned. Gathering materials, packing backpacks, and viewing your smartphone, tablet or
laptop during class are discourteous to our guests and may result in point deductions. Be attentive and
respectful until each session is officially adjourned.
Full credit will be awarded each session if you:
             1. Arrive and are ready to start by the beginning of class, and
             2. You are attentive (and not disruptive) until the class is adjourned
                                                                                                              2


              Point deductions will result if you fall below this standard, including zero credit for non-
              attendance.
Excused absence(s)
You will be excused from class if there is a “legitimate reason.” More than one excused absence will be
subject to review. An excused absence(s) requires:
              1. An e-mail request in advance sent to your TA or the instructor
              2. Documentation that supports the reason for your absence, and
              3. A “legitimate reason” which may include one of the following:
                      • Your illness or injury
                      • The illness, injury, or death of a family member
                      • The observance of an official religious holiday
                      • The birth of your child
                  Examples of items that are not “legitimate reasons” include:
                      • Office visits and recruiting events
                      • A “tight” exam schedule
                      • Preparing for an exam or project in another class
                      • Extracurricular activities (i.e.: cheerleading practice, intramural sports)
                      • Family reunions
                      • Sporting events
                      • A transportation failure
                      • And other events not listed under “legitimate reasons”
An unexcused absence will result in a 50-point reduction to your timely and full attendance grade.
                                              HOMEWORK
Homework assignments will be posted on Canvas and are indicated in the course schedule and explained
as follows:
     •   There are no group assignments (including the Microsoft Excel projects).
     •   It is expected that all assignments will be done on an individual basis and not in conjunction
         with other students.
     •   Acts of scholastic dishonesty will be reported to the Dean of Students.
ASSIGNMENT 1: Your Industry Night Preferences (10 points).
You will receive a survey link via your UT email address and be asked to list your industry night
preferences. Due: August 30, 2019 by 12:00 noon.
This assignment calls for you to research, select and rank order four of the entities from the companies
listed below. You will enter the preferences in the survey.
                                                                                                           3


For example:
                                  1.   Chevron
                                  2.   Stryker Corporation
                                  3.   Dell
                                  4.   Texas Instruments
The following companies will be present at the Industry Night on September 11 (subject to change):
                                   •    Caterpillar
                                   •    Chevron
                                   •    Daikin North America
                                   •    Dell
                                   •    Dow Chemical
                                   •    ExxonMobil
                                   •    Intel
                                   •    Phillips 66
                                   •    Stryker
                                   •    Texas Instruments
ASSIGNMENT 2: Company Research Activity (3 exercises - 60 points total) Due: September 11 at
5:00 p.m. Upload your project workpapers to Canvas. The workpaper templates for this exercise
will be available in Canvas.
         Exercise 1 (20 points): Pick an industry that is of interest to you. Research overall industry
         trends in that industry citing references from at least two of the five market research databases
         listed on the worksheet. Combine those insights and your own reflections and list them.
         Exercise 2 (20 points): Pick the one U.S. state that you are most likely to live in after graduation.
         Use the best COMPANY & INDUSTRY DATABASES on the worksheet to locate five
         companies within that state that fall into the industry you selected in Exercise 1. Display the
         information in the columns listed on the worksheet for each of the 5 companies.
         Exercise 3 (20 points): Pick two of your targeted companies from exercise 2 and utilize the listed
         databases to uncover major current events within those companies that happened within the last
         year. Please cite the databases you pulled your information from following your comments.
ASSIGNMENTS 3 & 4: Resume. The following summary will be explained further in our class on
September 4.
ASSIGNMENT 3: (50 points): Complete a draft of your resume and upload a copy to Canvas. Due:
September 11 at 5:00 p.m. Your resume will be evaluated and you will receive suggested corrections.
ASSIGNMENT 4: (100 points): Make the necessary corrections to the resume and submit to Canvas for
final evaluation. Due: October 23 at 5:00 p.m.
ASSIGNMENT 5: Your Career Portfolio (150 points) - This is the project that ties it all together. You
will create a comprehensive portfolio that includes a detailed plan and a set of tools for navigating your
career journey. This assignment will be discussed further on September 4.
                                                                                                             4


ACE Portfolio-
   1) Title Page
   2) Table of Contents
   3) Career and recruiting goals:
       My career interests:
           • First 5 years
           • Long-term
           • Dream job
       My recruiting plan:
           • 3rd Year – Fall
           • 3rd Year – Spring
           • 4th Year – Fall
           • 4th Year – Spring
           • 5th Year – Fall
           • 5th Year – Spring
   4) STAR Stories x 3
   5) Informational interview summary - Conduct 2 informational interviews with off-campus contacts.
           • Name
           • Company
           • Title
           • Email
           • What did you learn?
           • Were you able to facilitate a LinkedIn connection?
           • Do you have plans for a follow-up?
   6) ACE Learning Outcomes Response – please complete the template in Canvas and outline the
       following:
           a. Three things you learned about yourself in this class
           b. Favorite session – why?
           c. Least favorite session – why?
           d. What will you do differently because of participating in this class?
Due: November 13 by 5:00 p.m.
Microsoft Excel Projects (10 Projects) (320 points)
   •   You will use the Cengage SAM system to develop and improve your Microsoft Excel skills. The
       deadlines for each project are listed on the course calendar (page 8).
   •   Please make sure that you are completing projects not trainings or exams.
   •   To receive full credit: you must have each Excel test completed by the assignment deadline with a
       score of 80% or better.
   •   You will receive half credit if you completed the Excel test and received a score below 80%.
   •   You will receive no credit if you have not completed the test by its deadline or scored below
       50%.
                                                                                                       5


Note: If your score is below 80%, you may resubmit prior to the deadline. I would encourage you to do
so, since your Excel skills will be extensively utilized in your upcoming internship.
                       EXPERIENTIAL CREDIT (Must Choose Three (3) Options)
Choose 3 options. Credit may be earned once for each option. (30 points each)
Please note that options and dates are subject to change. Some options require appointments or RSVP and
have limited availability. To obtain credit, you must sign official event logs.
•    MPA Mock Interview Day Practice interviewing with real employers and gain valuable feedback
     that you can apply immediately. Sign-up through Recruit McCombs.
     September 3 - Ford Career Center (Interview Suites)
•    MPA Resumania Are you struggling with how to articulate your experience on a resume? Join the
     MPA career services team for 5-7 minute walk-in resume critique sessions in the MPA Conference
     Room to help you produce a dynamic resume.
     Date and times will be announced in class and posted on Canvas. Location: MPA Program
     Office
•    MPA Professional Communication Workshops: What do you convey with your facial expressions
     and body language? How do you want to present yourself to employers and others? You may have
     all the technical answers, but how confidently do you present them? By attending this workshop you
     will learn to communicate professionally, work in a team, keep a conversation progressing and
     present your body language in a confident manner. Sign-up through Recruit McCombs.
     September 12, 16, 18 & October 8, times vary, CBA Events Room (CBA 3.304)
•    Telling Your Career Story (STAR Development): You will learn how to master behavioral
     interviewing and construct relevant and compelling stories that recruiters will remember.
     September 17, 3:30 p.m.-4:30 p.m., Legacy Events Room
•    MPA Dress for Success Webinar & Quiz: This webcast has helpful tips for both men and women
     as they dress for social events, business casual and business professional.
     Anytime in Canvas
•    Career Consulting Appointment: Meet with an MPA career professional or peer career consultant
     (After August 30).
                                          EXTRA CREDIT OPTIONS
•    50 Points –You will have two opportunities to earn extra credit- Canvas will be updated with
     Dates, Times & Locations
                            LATE ASSIGNMENTS AND GRADING POLICIES
Accounting 151 is graded on a letter grade basis, with each assignment worth a specified number of
points. All Accounting 151 assignments must be completed independently, unless otherwise directed by
your instructor. Assignments are due at the beginning of class on the specified due date. No late
assignments will be accepted. If you have an emergency, notify your Accounting 151 instructor
immediately. The instructor will determine if the assignment will be accepted. If you cannot attend class,
                                                                                                           6


it is still your responsibility to turn in a hard copy of the assignment prior to the beginning of class on the
specified due date.
                                    POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities
of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA
Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-
Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that
document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of the Statement of Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments
is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University
rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
                                        STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                             RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                                CAMPUS SAFETY
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
      •    Occupants of buildings on the University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
           buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
           assembling outside.
      •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
           Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first
           week of class.
      •    In event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      •    Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
           University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
      •    Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050.
                                                                                                               7


Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                  FALL 2019 SCHEDULE/CALENDAR
 Week Date                          Topics                            Assignments Due
 1         8/28   Course Overview, Code of Ethics
           8/30   (not a class day)                        Assignment 1: Industry Night Preferences
                                                           Due: 8/30 at 12:00 p.m.
 2         9/4    Resume Writing, Employer Research,
                  Career Portfolio Overview
 3         9/11   MPA Industry Night (Required)            Assignment 2: Company Research
                                                           Activity (Upload in Canvas by 5:00 p.m.)
                                                           Excel Projects 1 & 2
 4         9/18   Academic and Career Updates              Assignment 3: Resume Draft and Excel
                                                           Project 3
 5         9/25   Recruiter Straight Talk Panel &          Excel Project 4
                  Academic Services
 6         10/2   Careers in Audit: Internal v. External   Excel Capstone Project 1-4
 7         10/9   Careers in Banking/Finance               Excel Project 5
 8         10/16  Careers in Tax: Domestic, International
                  & State/Local                            Excel Projects 6 & 7
 9         10/23  Careers in Advisory                      Assignment 4: Final Resume
                  Services/Consulting                      Excel Project 8
 10        10/30  No class
 11        11/6   MPA Networking: Making                   Excel Capstone Project 5-8
                  Connections
 12        11/13  Recap                                    Assignment 5: Career Portfolio
                                                           Experiential Learning Credits Due
                                                                                                    8


                                 FINAL GRADE COMPONENTS
         Assignments                   Date Due                          Points
           Attendance                 All Semester                         220
  Assignment 1: Industry Night            8/30                              10
       Preferences Survey
Assignment 2: Company Research            9/11                              60
            Activity
  Assignment 3: Resume Draft              9/11                              50
  Assignment 4: Final Resume              10/23                            100
 Assignment 5: Career Portfolio           11/13                            150
         Excel Projects                Throughout                          320
                                        Semester          (20 points per Excel Project-Total 8)
                                    (See Schedule for   (80 points per Excel Capstone-Total 2)
                                         Details)
 Experiential Credits (choose 3)          11/13                             90
                                        Total Points:                     1,000
                                        GRADING SCALE
                                 Grade                Grade Points
                                   A                   940-1,000
                                   A-                    900-939
                                   B+                    870-899
                                   B                     840-869
                                   B-                    800-839
                                   C+                    770-799
                                   C                     740-769
                                   C-                    700-739
                                   D+                    670-699
                                   D                     640-669
                                   D-                    600-639
                                    F                      <600
                                                                                                9
