               CONTEMPORARY AFRICAN POPULAR CULTURE
FALL 2018
Professor Xavier Livermon
AFR372G (30705), WGS 340 (46060), ANT 324L (31680)
MWF 2 – 3pm RLP 1.104
Office Hours MW 1-2pm Texas Expresso
email: livermon@utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION:
The aim of this course is to introduce students to some of the most significant aspects of popular
culture in contemporary sub-Saharan Africa. Manifestations of popular culture are considered as
markers of modern African identities, embedded in complex and varied socio-cultural, historical
and political contexts. Within the current era of global, diasporic, and transnational flows, it is
neither sufficient any longer to view Africa solely from the perspective of political economies,
nor to discuss contemporary African culture within the tradition-versus-modernity debate.
Manifestations of popular culture in Africa show that the continent is part and parcel of the
postmodern world, with cultural production simultaneously influenced by global trends and
specific African contexts.
The course will cover various forms of cultural expression and genres, including popular film,
music, literature, dance, comics and cartoons, fashion, sport, street art, theatre, and contemporary
visual arts. Attention will be paid to the production modes, audiences and sites of consumption of
these different genres and aspects of popular culture. Course instruction will include extensive
film and clip viewings, analysis of music, and reading fictional texts such as popular novels and
comics.
Learning Objectives
At the conclusion of this course, students will be able to:
    1) Identify major themes of Contemporary African Popular Culture.
    2) Understand Popular Culture Theory and its relationship to African lives.
    3) Understand the importance of popular culture in Africa as a site of politics.
Grading Policy
Attendance and Participation 20%
Group Presentation 20%
Quizzes 20%
Popular Culture Report 20%
Take Home Final 20%
                                                                                                     1


   Grading Scale
   A 94-100                          C 74-76
   A- 90-93                          C- 70-73
   B+ 87-89                          D+ 67-69
   B 84-86                           D 64-66
   B- 80-83                          D- 60-63
   C+ 77-79                          F 0- 59
Required Texts :
Aya: Life in Yop City Marguerite Abouet and Clement Oubrerie
East African Hip-Hop: Youth Culture and Globalization Mwenda Ntarangwi
Required Texts are available for purchase at The University Cooperative Bookstore 2246
Guadalupe St. (512) 476-721.
All other required readings will be posted on Canvas.
Course Requirements:
Attendance and Participation: Students are expected to attend class every session. Participation
in all aspects of the class is MANDATORY. All readings and assignments should be completed
before class meetings and students are responsible for adding to class discussions of material.
Please note that attendance and participation is worth 20% of your total grade. Late arrivals are
disruptive to class and I will not repeat concepts and assignments given during class. If you miss a
class or are late, you are still responsible for any announcements, assignments, lecture material
and/or deadlines that are made. Your grade will be affected if you have more than three absences
during the semester.
Active Learning Environment: This is a discussion -based course. While I will do some
lecturing, it is my expectation that students will come to class having completed the readings and
ready to discuss the articles assigned. It is my teaching philosophy that students will learn as
much from each other as they will from me. Discussion based courses allow
students to be active participants in their learning, giving the student the opportunity to place the
reading in the context of his or her lived experience. This does not mean that the student should
ignore the scholarly evidence presented or make arguments solely based on their opinion. Rather,
it allows students to enrich the scholarly environment in relation to their life experiences. My job
as the instructor is to facilitate and guide the discussion, create a safe participatory environment
and make sure that we stay on topic. Merely being
present does not count as active engagement.
Bringing Materials to Class: As part of an active learning environment, students are
required to bring all necessary materials to actively engage in the discussion to class each week.
These necessary materials include but are not limited to the books/articles/texts assigned
                                                                                                      2


for the day. While students are not required to print out hard copies of the pdf. materials for in
class discussions/assignments, they will be expected to have these materials accessible in
electronic form.
Group Presentation:
Students will form groups and be responsible for a short (15 minute) presentation to the class on a
current African popular culture phenomenon (i.e Skateboarding in Ethiopia, Surfing in Guinea-
Bissau, Romance Literature in Northern Nigeria) that deals with the issues relevant to the class, but
has not necessarily been covered in the readings. If students choose an issue covered in the
readings they should be careful to make sure that their presentation adds new insight or covers new
ground not discussed in the readings. Students should consult African popular culture websites,
                                                                          th
twitter, tumblr, and instagram for ideas. On Fridays, beginning in the 5 week of class, the group
will present their findings to the class and we will have a short discussion about the presentation.
Students may use information gleaned from their presentation to complete their popular culture
report.
Popular Culture Report:
During the class, students should be consulting African popular culture websites and news outlets
in order to enhance their knowledge of African popular culture. During Week 13 students should
turn in to the professor a short report (3-5 pages) discussing an aspect of African popular culture
not discussed in the readings. The report will introduce the form of popular culture, explain its
importance and significance, and connect the popular culture to the themes of the class. This
report is due by 3pm on November 19th .
African Popular Culture Blogs
The following are a list of continent wide popular culture blogs. I do encourage students to seek
out additional popular culture blogs beyond these, but this is a good aggregate list to begin learning
more about African Popular Culture. Keep in mind that occasionally mainstream western media
outlets such as The New York Times, FADER, and pitchfork will feature articles on African
popular culture. Furthermore there are many aggregators of African popular culture content on
tumblr and instagram.
    1.   Africa is a country: africasacountry.com
    2.   Brittle Paper: brittlepaper.com
    3.   This is Africa: thisisafrica.me
    4.   Okay Africa: okayafrica.com
    5.   Afripop! : afripopmag.com
    6.   Muse Origins: museorigins.net
    7.   Dynamic Africa: dynamicafrica.tumblr.com
    8.   African Hip Hop: Africanhiphop.com
Quizzes:
                                                                                                     3


Each week on Friday, beginning in the 4th week of class, unless noted, there will be a short (15
minute) quiz on the reading assignments for the previous week. These quizzes are designed to test
whether you have understood the main concepts introduced by the authors. 10 of these quizzes will
count toward the final grade.
Final Exam
Right before Thanksgiving Break, students will be given a take home final exam assignment. The
assignment will include Identifications and a Short Essay. The final Exam will be due by 3pm
December 10th .
Canvas: I will be in contact with you about updates in assignments through Canvas. It is the
students’ responsibility to make sure that Canvas has your updated email address.
Code of Mutual Respect: In general, this is not a lecture class, but one grounded in dialogue.
Feel free to be candid and direct in this class. Your insights are important, and your voice needs to
be heard, so look forward to the opportunity to chime in. I will respect you
as adults and assume that you will treat others in the class with respect as well. Because we will
be sharing many personal ideas which may conflict with your own personal ideas and
beliefs, it is important that you strive to be considerate, sensitive, and respectful. Be prepared to
offer constructive criticism as well as receive it. We will discuss work that includes lesbian, gay,
bisexual and transgender themes in this course. Students are expected to approach all class
material with maturity and academic rigor.
Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are
not your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action which will also be reflected in their grade. As a reminder, the honor code of the University
is as follows, “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values
of the University and uphold academic integrity.” For more information on the Honor Code
please see the following link
http://www.utexas.edu/about-ut/mission-core-purpose-honor-code
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive)
who requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY
for users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, please come talk to me.
Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, PCL
                                                                                                      4


2.330 , 471-6222: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The UWC offers free, individualized, expert
help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. These
services are not just for writing that has "problems": Getting feedback from an informed
audience is a normal part of a successful writing project. The UWC’s trained consultants work
with students from every department on both academic and non-academic writing. Using
methods that preserve the integrity of your work, they help you develop strategies to improve
your writing and become a more independent writer. Whether you are writing a lab report, a
resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your own poetry, UWC consultants
will be happy to work with you.
                                                                                              5


COURSE OUTLINE
  DATE                             Reading Assignment
  PART I: INTRODUCTION AND KEY
  TERMS
  WEEK 1
  8/29                             Introduction to Class No Reading
                                   In Class Film: Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie
                                   “The Danger of a Single Story”
  8/31                             In Class Film: Joburg Party
                                   In Class Film: Is Africa’s Future Online?”
  WEEK 2
  9/3                              NO CLASS : LABOR DAY
  9/5                             “How to Write About
                                  Africa” Binyavanga
                                  Wainana
                                   “African” Kevin Gaines
                                   “Culture” George Yudice
 9/7                               “Ethnicity” Henry Wu
                                   “Globalization” Lisa Low
                                    “Modern” Chandan Reddy
  WEEK 3
  9/10
                                   “What is Popular Culture” John Storey, Ch.1
                                  Film: Tuko Macho
  9/12
  9/14                              “Popular Culture and Public Space in
                                   Africa:The Possibilities of Cultural
                                   Citizenship” Nadine Dolby
  WEEK 4
  PART II: KEY DEBATES IN AFRICAN
  POPULAR CULTURE
                                                                               6


9/17                          “Introduction to Readings in African
                              Popular Culture” Karin Barber
  9/19                        “Talking About Tribe, Moving From
                              Stereotypes to Analysis” African Policy
                              Initiative Center
  9/21                        QUIZ 1
                              Film: An African City
  WEEK 5
  PART III: CASE STUDIES IN
  AFRICAN POPULAR CULTURE
  POPULAR FILM AND TELEVISION
  9/24                        FILM: The Wedding Party
  9/26
                               “Popular Culture and Social Change in
                              Africa: The Case of the Nigerian Video
                              Industry” AL Abah
  9/28                        QUIZ 2
                              GROUP PRESENTATION 1
  WEEK 6
  10/01                       TV Show: Shuga
  10/3                        “Heavy Sexual Content Versus Safer Sex
                              Content” Booker et. al.
                              “Yizo Yizo: Citizenship, Commodification
                              and Popular Culture”
  10/5                        QUIZ 3
                              GROUP PRESENTATION 2
  WEEK 7
  POPULAR MUSIC
                                                                       7


  10/8           “East African Hip-Hop” Mwenda Ntarangwi,
                  Ch 1 -2
 10/10            “East African Hip-Hop” Mwenda Ntarangwi
                  Ch 3-4
 10/12            QUIZ 4
                  GROUP PRESENTATION 3
 WEEK 8
 10/15             “East African Hip-Hop” Mwenda Ntarangwi
                  Ch 5-6
 10/17            “Body Politic: The Emergence of a Kwaito
                  Nation in South Africa” T. Pietela
 10/19            QUIZ 5
                  GROUP PRESENTATION 4
 WEEK 9
 DANCE
 10/22            “Sound of Kuduro Knocking at My Door”
                 Hershini Bhana Young
                  “Vintage Cru: Challenging the Status Quo in
                 South Africa With Dance”
10/24             “Transnational Circulation and Digital
                  Fatigue in Ghana’s Azonto Dance Craze”
                  Jesse Shipley
 10/26            QUIZ 6
                  GROUP PRESENTATION 5
 WEEK 10 FASHION
 10/29            “Sartorial Ecumenes: African Styles in a
                  Social and Economic Context” Hudita
                  Mustafa
 10/31            “Dream and Drama: The Search For
                  Elegance Among Congolese Youth” Ch.
                 Didier Gondola
11/2              QUIZ 7
                  GROUP PRESENTATION 6
 WEEK 11 COMICS
                                                              8


11/5                       Aya of Yop City Part I “Preface”, “Interview
                           with Author”
11/7                        Aya of Yop City Part II
11/9                       QUIZ 8
WEEK 12
11/12                     Aya of Yop City Part III
MAGAZINES & PRINT CULTURE
 11/14                     “Chimurenga: Communal Yard for Sick
                           Heads” Jamal.
11/16                      QUIZ 9
                           GROUP PRESENTATION 7
WEEK 13
11/19                     POPULAR CULTURE REPORT DUE
                           NO CLASS : THANKSGIVING
11/21
11/23                      NO CLASS : THANKSGIVING
WEEK 14 SPORT
11/26                      “Football Academies and the Migration of
                           African Football Labor to Europe” Darby et.
                           al.
11/28
                           “Women, Sport and Development” Martha
                           Saavedra.
                                                                        9


11/30              QUIZ 10
WEEK 15: NEW MEDIA
12/3               Tanja Bosch “Twitter Activism and Youth in
                   South Africa”
12/5               FILM: Fees Must Fall
12/7               QUIZ 11
                   GROUP PRESENTATION 8
WEEK 16
12/10               FINAL EXAM DUE BY 3PM
                                                              10


11