The University of Texas at Austin                                                   SOC302 (82430)
Department of Sociology                                                             Summer II, 2020
                                                                          Online On-Demand Course
                               Introduction to the Study of Society
Instructor:             Jess Goldstein-Kral
Email:
Zoom office hours:
Zoom ID:
Pronouns:               They/Them
TA:
Email:
Zoom office hours:
Zoom link:
Pronouns:
TA:
Email:
Zoom office hours:
Zoom link:
Pronouns:
Tech Support: help@utexas.edu
                 512-475-9400
Course Objectives
•       To cultivate a sociological perspective on key facets of modern society such as
        globalization and social inequality.
•       To gain a deeper understanding of the research process and its role in public knowledge
        and policy.
•       To learn how to craft a scientifically based argument and communicate it effectively.
Course Description
This course offers an introduction to the theories, methodologies, vocabulary, and themes of the
discipline of sociology. During the semester, we will explore the linkages between individuals
and the cultures, contexts, and institutions in which they live their lives. The over-arching
purpose of the course is to develop a “sociological imagination”, which students can then use to
make sense of current social issues and patterns of everyday life.
The course is delivered completely online, which gives students more latitude in completing their
work, though the class is NOT entirely self-paced. The course material is organized into sections
by week, and students are expected to complete all of a section’s reading assignments, lecture
videos (organized into “Modules”), quizzes, and discussion posts by Friday at 11:59pm each
                                                  1


week. See the course schedule for due dates. This design allows students to complete the work
within one week according to their own schedule.
Course Communication and Instructional Support
Announcements. Outside of the video lectures, any student communication initiated by
instructors and teaching assistants will be conducted via the “Announcements” page on our
course website, so please make sure to check the “Announcements” page daily.
Outside-of-Class Communication. Students who wish to contact the instructor or teaching
assistants can do so either over Zoom during office hours or via email. Do not assume that TAs
will receive communication submitted through Canvas comments.
Canvas and Course Tech
To access the class home page, students can go to http://canvas.utexas.edu/ and log into the
Canvas system with their UT EIDs. Students will be able to view class lectures through Canvas,
and all course material will be posted on this web page, including announcements and grades.
The home page on Canvas will have links to the course syllabus, the daily videos, a help section,
and several other important links you’ll use through the course.
Tech requirements. All students are required to have access to an internet-enabled laptop or
desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your computer should have
enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following requirements:
•       At least 2GB RAM
•       Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
•       Safari, Firefox, or Chrome (highly recommended) browser. Note that Safari and Firefox
        users should be prepared to use Chrome as a backup.
•       5Mbps internet connection speed (check here: http://beta.speedtest.net/)
Again, all students should confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by
visiting the test stream page at https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.php.
Technical difficulties. Students who experience technical problems playing or accessing class
videos should report the issue to tech support at Help@utexas.edu **The instructor and teaching
assistants cannot address the ramifications that technical problems might have on grades without
a record of the problem with tech support.**
Course Readings
Carr, Deborah, Anthony Giddens, Mitchell Duneier, and Richard Appelbaum. 2018. Introduction
to Sociology, Seagull Version Eleventh Edition. New York: W.W. Norton and Company. ISBN:
978-0-393- 63945-2. https://books.wwnorton.com/books/webad.aspx?id=4294994899.
This version of the textbook is shorter and cheaper than the standard version. It should be
purchased through the University Co-op. Purchase comes with free access to the ebook and other
resources, which can be accessed through: https://digital.wwnorton.com/introsoc11seagull.
                                                   2


Course Requirements
Attendance and participation (10%). All students are required to watch all of a section’s daily
videos by Friday at 11:59pm each week. Videos contain built-in instapoll questions to gauge if
students are actually watching. This means that you cannot simply play the video and then leave
the room and do something else! Having multiple course tabs open at the same time may
interfere with the instapolls on certain devices. Only keep one course tab open at a time.
Discussion posts (5%). In order to facilitate student interaction, we will have a running
discussion blog throughout the semester on Canvas. Each week, students are required to write
and post either a 100-200 word original discussion post, or a 100-200 word comment on another
student’s discussion post. Posts must reference course ideas or concepts from the week. These
posts are also due each Friday at 11:59pm.
Daily quizzes (50%). Students are responsible for completing daily quizzes. The quizzes will be
5 minutes long and contain 5 multiple choice questions covering the previous day’s lecture
and/or reading materials. The purpose of daily quizzes is to ensure that students keep up with
course materials and are grasping the basic course content. Note that there will be no makeup
quizzes. Instead, the two lowest grades on the daily quizzes will be dropped from the final
average at the end of the course. Quizzes are also due each Friday at 11:59pm.
Short papers (30%). Students must also complete TWO of the four short paper prompts during
the semester (15% each). These papers will be at least 2 single-spaced pages in length and are
intended to encourage you to think about current issues and events in a sociological way. More
details are located on each of the paper prompts (located in the “Assignments” tab on Canvas). I
will create a video that goes over paper prompts at the end of each week and papers you choose
to complete should be uploaded on Canvas by 12:00pm every Monday starting July 20th. These
due dates are:
Paper 1 due July 20th at noon
Paper 2 due July 27th at noon
Paper 3 due August 3rd at noon
Paper 4 due August 8th at noon
Because students are only required to complete two of the four possible papers, there will be NO
excused late or missing papers. This means that you should plan accordingly! If you already
know that you will be particularly busy during one weekend of the course, make sure that you
choose papers for different weeks. I also recommend that you do not choose to skip both of the
first papers in case you get sick or have a family emergency later on in the semester. All four
prompts are available on Canvas starting at the beginning of the course. I recommend that you
take a look ahead of time to see which two you might be interested in completing so that you can
plan ahead.
Reflection Letter (5%). Students will complete a reflection paper to be turned in at any point
during the semester (absolute last day to turn in is August 15th at noon, no exceptions). For this
paper, students will discuss one key concept from the course and apply it to their lives. This
means that you will be able to complete this paper any time after the first course lecture. These
                                                  3


papers will be at least one page single spaced in 12 pt. Times New Roman font with normal
margins on all sides. Note: I recommend not leaving the reflection paper to the last minute. I
would especially recommend turning the reflection paper in early if you have a final paper or
exam due in your other courses.
We will not have daily videos posted for Fridays. Instead, Fridays will serve as a writing
consultation day. The instructor and TAs will hold staggered office hours throughout the day to
address questions about papers.
Note, there will be no final given during finals week.
Grading Policies
Grading: Grades are assigned on a plus/minus scale, where A = 93-100, A- = 90-92.9, B+ = 87-
89.9, B = 83-86.9, B- = 80-82.9, C+ = 77-79.9, C = 73-76.9, C- = 70-72.9, D+ = 67-69.9, D =
63-66.9, D- = 60-62.9, F = 59.9 or below.
Late assignments. All short papers must be turned in through Canvas by 12:00pm on Monday on
the day they are due. If you turn in a paper late, it will be docked ½ letter grade (5 points) for
each day late. Again, because students may choose which papers to complete, there will be no
excused late papers. There are no make-up quizzes, instapolls, or discussion posts, although the
two lowest grades on the daily quizzes will be dropped. Be sure to complete these assignments
on a date/time of the week that works for you.
Course Integrity & Academic Dishonesty
University of Texas Honor Code. “As A Student of the University Of Texas at Austin, I Shall
Abide By the Core Values of The University and Uphold Academic Integrity.”
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit
the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/.
When taking daily quizzes, students cannot receive help from any source other than their own
class materials (e.g., notes, textbook). When completing short papers, students can only turn in
original work done exclusively by them. For any course assignment, students must not
collaborate or share information with others, and they are not allowed to provide their UT EIDs
to others for the purpose of engaging in class activities. Please note that the online format of this
course allows the monitoring and detection of issues involving identity verification, collusion,
collaboration, and plagiarism. All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a
tool that compares submitted material to an archived database of published work to check for
potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to determine if a paper is the student's
original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty member will
make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
                                                    4


Grade-related penalties for academic dishonesty can be routinely assessed (up to and including
an "F" in the course), and students can also be suspended or even permanently expelled from the
University for scholastic dishonesty.
Data security. All instapolls, quizzes, and writing assignments over the system will be saved and
stored for educational and general academic research. Any such stored data will be de-identified,
including the removal of names, UT EIDs, email addresses, and other information.
Other University Policies & Services
Religious holy days. Religious holy days should not affect students’ participation in this course,
since students can watch course lectures and take quizzes at times that are convenient for them.
Furthermore, if a paper due date interferes with a religious holy day, students are encouraged to
select that paper as one of their two to skip.
Students with disabilities. It is necessary that students with disabilities have equal access to their
academic experiences at the University of Texas at Austin. Please notify your instructor of any
modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-related need. You may
find out more information on the Services for Students with Disabilities website:
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Mental health needs and concerns. These are difficult times. If you are having a personal crisis,
please contact the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) Crisis Line at 512-471-CALL
(2255). If you have concerns about another student in the class or anyone else you encounter at
UT, please contact the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050.
                                       COURSE SCHEDULE
 WEEK 1: The Concepts of Sociology
 Date                      Topic                            Reading          Assignments
 Monday 7/13               Thinking Sociologically          On Canvas:       Videos
                                                            Excerpt from
                                                            Sociological
                                                            Imagination
                                                            and Ch. 1
 Tuesday 7/14              Social Construction                               Quiz and videos
 *Last day of the
 official add/drop
 period
 Wednesday 7/15            Social Organization              Ch. 3            Quiz and videos
                                                    5


Thursday 7/16         Units of Social Life       Ch. 6   Quiz and videos
Friday 7/17           Paper Writing &                    Due at 11:59pm:
                      Consultation                       -This week’s quizzes
                                                         -Finish watching all of this
                                                         week’s videos/answer
                                                         instapolls
                                                         -Weekly discussion post
Week 2: Sociological Theories and Practices
Date                  Topic                      Reading Assignments
Monday 7/20           Studying Deviance & Social Ch. 7   -Quiz and videos
                      Control                            -Paper 1 due at 12pm
Tuesday 7/21          Understanding Deviant              Quiz and videos
                      Behavior
Wednesday 7/22        The Sociological Method    Ch. 2   Quiz and videos
Thursday 7/23         Sociological Research              Quiz and videos
Friday 7/24           Paper Writing &                    Due at 11:59pm:
                      Consultation                       -This week’s quizzes
                                                         -Finish watching all of this
                                                         week’s videos
                                                         -Weekly discussion post
Week 3: The Stratification of Society
Date                  Topic                      Reading Assignments
Monday 7/27           Stratification             Ch. 8   -Quiz and videos
                                                         -Paper 2 due at 12pm
Tuesday 7/28          Money & Stratification I           Quiz and videos
                                            6


Wednesday 7/29         Money & Stratification II         Quiz and videos
Thursday 7/30          Social Mobility                   Quiz and videos
Friday 7/31            Paper Writing &                   Due at 11:59pm:
                                                         -This week’s quizzes
*Last day to switch to Consultation
                                                         -Finish watching all of this
pass/fail or credit/no                                   week’s videos
credit                                                   -Weekly discussion post
Week 4: Divisions in Social Life
Date                   Topic                     Reading Assignments
Monday 8/3             Racial/Ethnic Inequality  Ch. 11  -Quiz and videos
                                                         -Paper 3 due at 12pm
Tuesday 8/4            Gender Inequality         Ch. 10  Quiz and videos
Wednesday 8/5          Age Stratification                Quiz and videos
Thursday 8/6           Intersectionality                 Quiz and videos
Friday 8/7             Paper Writing &                   Due at 11:59pm:
                       Consultation                      -This week’s quizzes
                                                         -Finish watching all of this
                                                         week’s videos
                                                         -Weekly discussion post
Week 5: Contexts of Social Life
Date                   Topic                     Reading Assignments
Monday 8/10            Family                    Ch. 15  -Quiz and videos
                                                         -Paper 4 due at 12pm
Tuesday 8/11           School                    Ch. 16  Quiz and videos
                                             7


Wednesday 8/12 Church                      Ch. 17       Quiz and videos
Thursday 8/13  Conclusion                               Quiz and videos
Friday 8/14    Paper Writing &                          Due at 11:59pm:
               Consultation                             -This week’s quizzes
                                                        -Finish watching all of this
                                                        week’s videos
                                                        -Weekly discussion post
                 *Reflection paper due by 8/17 at 12pm*
                                    8
