   AFS 100/120L SYLLABUS
        Unique Numbers:
              30925/30930
Leadership Laboratory
           Spring 2019
          AFROTC Detachment 825
      The University of Texas at Austin
   Captain Zac Crippen, Assistant Professor
         Office Phone: (512) 232-2371
              Office: CLA 5.722


                                                                                     Spring 2019
MEMORANDUM FOR AS 200 STUDENTS
FROM: Captain Zac Crippen
SUBJECT: Welcome to AS200—Team and Leadership Fundamentals
1. Congratulations on making it to the halfway mark of year two of the General Military Course!
Up to this point in the AFROTC program, you have come to understand the moral, intellectual,
and physical foundations of the Air Force officer corps. You’ve learned about the sacrifices
many of our heroes have undergone to secure the freedoms we still enjoy to this day. Those
exceptional men and women left behind legacies for us to study, learn from, and internalize as
we strive to be exceptional leaders in the greatest Air Force that the world has ever known.
2. This semester, we continue to build upon those foundations. We will research various
leadership and management methodologies and explore these concepts through guided
discussions, case studies, and hands-on experience. In addition to examining these key
leadership principles, we will explore how to lead change, make critical decisions, and solve
complex, often life-threatening problems.
3. I expect all of you to come to class well prepared and ready to learn about leading America’s
Airmen as we work hard to stay ahead of our adversaries in the most complex, diverse, and
technologically advanced global battlefield ever known to mankind. You should expect me to do
the same. I look forward to a very rewarding and fun semester that will serve as a launch pad for
your career as an Air Force officer.
Integrity First—Service before Self—Excellence in All We Do!
                                                      ZAC A. CRIPPEN, Captain, USAF
                                                      Assistant Professor, Air Force Science
                                                                                                  2


Key Dates:
23 Jan – First Day of Class
18 – 23 Mar – Spring Break
24 May – Commissioning of ROTC Graduates
Course Location and Hours:
RLP 5.404, 0800-0900 (31005) 0900-1000 (31010)
Office Location, Hours and Contact Info:
RLP 5.722 (Hours by Appointment—calendly.com/zac-crippen)
(512) 232-2371
zachary.crippen@austin.utexas.edu
Course Text: Students are not required to purchase a textbook. All course materials are posted
on Canvas.
                                         Course Requirements
Course Objective: This course is designed to provide a fundamental understanding of both
leadership and team building. It is imperative that cadets are taught from the beginning that there
are many layers to leadership, including aspects that don’t always jump to mind. Such things
include listening, understanding themselves, being a good follower and problem solving
efficiently. The students will apply these leadership perspectives when completing team building
activities and discussing things like conflict management. Students should demonstrate basic
verbal and written communication skills. Cadets will apply these lessons at Field Training,
which follows AS200.
                               Student Responsibilities and Guidelines
Classroom Conduct:
    1. When a ranking officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to
         attention until told to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the
         classroom, the students must again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer
         leaves the classroom. Class members will select a class monitor and alternate who will
         make these announcements for all class sessions.
    2. You are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class discussions,
         but you must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address the instructor
         as sir/ma’am or by rank/grade.
    3. No eating, smoking, or use of other tobacco products while in class.
    4. During class, cell phones will be turned off or placed in the silent mode.
    5. No personal use of laptops or tablets during class unless otherwise specified.
                                                                                                     3


Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all military
officers outside and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all ranking cadet
officers, of all military services, when in uniform and outdoors. Unless told to enter at ease, you
must use proper reporting procedures when entering the office of a commissioned officer.
Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming and
weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and appearance
standards are followed on- and off-duty.
Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008 cadets will wear their
uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and for
Practical Military Training (PMT). GMC cadets will wear appropriate civilian attire to their AS
class. POC will wear UOD to their AS class. Appropriate civilian clothes may be worn at other
times while in the CLA building.
Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with
military order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of, or inflict cruelty on
subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or privilege to which
they are legally entitled. Be honorable, be respectful.
Drugs & Alcohol: No drugs, period. No drinking alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be
responsible—do not abuse alcohol and never drive while or after drinking.
Cadet Standards: Cadets must be aware of membership requirements (refer to AFROTCI 36-
2011). Here is a recap of your requirements (these are not all-inclusive):
    1. Report all negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72
        hours. If the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets
        may wait to report the involvement NLT 72 hours after their return to classes following
        the break.
    2. Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours and term and cumulative GPA of
        2.00 (2.50 for scholarship cadets) or greater. You must also pass all AS courses.
    3. Remain in good standing at your institution.
    4. Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with us in advance.
    5. Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
    6. Meet medical standards and advise us of any changes in your status.
    7. Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
                                           Administration
Textbook: All books are digital and will be posted on Canvas, please download as soon as
possible. Students will not purchase commercial texts.
Timeliness: Be on time; treat class as a military appointment.
                                                                                                    4


Instruction: Academic classes are conducted as a combination of lecture and guided discussion.
Be prepared for class by reading assignments in advance. Be able to share your knowledge and
personal views in class. Classes may be supplemented with films or videos.
Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011, each student will meet with
me for an academic plan review and counseling interview. We will have at least one per term,
with the first one occurring within the first few weeks of each semester. Utilize my Calendly link
(http://www.calendly.com/zac-crippen) to schedule a meeting. Plan on 30 minutes for your
appointment, be in uniform, and be on time.
Office Hours: My office hours are by appointment. Please utilize my Calendly link to schedule
an appointment. Be on time and use proper reporting procedures. (http://www.calendly.com/zac-
crippen)
Academic Freedom: Air University faculty, students, and staff are members of a learned
profession, and members of their respective educational organizations. The free exchange of
opinions and ideas is essential to the educational process and, to the greatest extent possible,
faculty, students, and staff are encouraged to speak and write freely. Even in this academic
setting, however, the importance of the University’s military mission requires limits on some
types of expression. Faculty, students, and staff should remember that the public might judge the
armed forces or Air University by their spoken or written statements. (AUI 36-2608)
Academic Integrity: You are expected to exercise uncompromising adherence to the highest
standards of academic integrity. You are prohibited from engaging in plagiarism, cheating,
misrepresentation, unprofessional relationships, or any other act constituting a lack of academic
integrity. Violations of academic integrity will result in, at minimum, a score of zero on the
affected assignment(s) and a conditional event. (AUI 36-2609)
                            Course Requirements and Grading Policy
Attendance: To pass this class you must attend 80% of scheduled classes. All absences will be
initially marked as unexcused, but at the discretion of the primary instructor, taking into account
extraordinary or extenuating circumstances and documentary materials (e.g. doctor’s notes),
unexcused absences may be later categorized as excused and will thus count towards the 80%
attendance requirement. This policy applies to ROTC cadets and non-cadet students alike.
Examinations: You will have two exams – a midterm and a final – each worth 25% of your
grade. The material for the exam will be taken from class lectures/discussions, readings, and
video/film presentations. The final exam will test your knowledge from the entire semester.
EXAM #1 will be on 27 February and will cover material from the first half of the course.
EXAM #2 will be on 1 May and will cover material from the entire course.
Writing Assignment: There are two writing assignments. Follow the Tongue and Quill format
(see Canvas) for the Field Training Goals memorandum, and use MLA formatting for the
Leadership Reflection Paper.
                                                                                                    5


         1. The Field Training Goals Paper: Write a 1-2 page reflective memorandum on field
        training goals and intended methods to achieve those goals.
        2. The Leadership Reflection Paper: Write a 1-2 page reflective memorandum or paper
        to relate personal attributes to lesson concepts covered in the AS200 curriculum (fall and
        spring).
All assignments are due at the beginning of class. Late assignments will result in a letter grade
reduction for each class and day late. Turning your writing assignments in early is encouraged;
however, you will not receive feedback until after the original due date. Writing assignments
that do not meet the page requirement will automatically earn a failing grade.
Briefing Assignments: There are two briefing assignments this semester. The briefing
represents 10 points or 10% of your grade.
        1. The AS200 ROTC Experience Briefing: Cadets will deliver a 3-5 minute prepared
        briefing in accordance with AFH 33-337, The Tongue and Quill, on how ROTC has
        positively influenced them and the most significant thing their ROTC experience has
        taught them thus far.
        2. The Field Training Goals Briefing: Cadets will deliver a 5-7 minute prepared
        briefing in accordance with AFH 33-337, The Tongue and Quill, on their goals for field
        training and intended methods to accomplish those goals.. I will instruct you on the topic
        and execution at a later date.
Grading Computation: Your grade in this course considers attendance, subject matter
knowledge, and communications assignments, and is computed using the following scoring
system. Please note the total score possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter
grade/4-point GPA scale used by The University of Texas at Austin. Under no circumstances
will the course be graded on a curve.
                         FALL SEMESTER                                        Grading Criteria
     Graded Area                                      Points
     Examination #1                                      20                Score        Letter Grade
     Examination #2                                      20                             (GPA Points)
                                                                          93-100            A/4.0
     Writing                                             30
                                                            10             90-93          A-/3.67
        1: Field Training Goals Memorandum
                                                            20             87-89          B+/3.33
        2: Leadership Reflection Paper
                                                                           84-86            B/3.0
     Briefing                                            20                80-83           B-/2.67
        1: AS200 ROTC Experience Briefing (3-5 mins)     10
                                                                           77-79          C+/2.33
        2: Field Training Goals Briefing (5-7 mins)      10
                                                                           74-76            C/2.0
     Class Participation & On-Time Attendance            10                70-73           C-/1.67
     Total                                              100                67-69          D+/1.33
                                                                           64-66            D/1.0
                                                                           60-63          D-/0.67
                                                                           0-60             F/0.0
                                                                                                     6


Writing assignments will be scored according to the following rubric:
Course critique requirement: Your feedback on the course and course instructor is critically
important for two reasons. First, the feedback helps ensure the course is meeting its objective.
Students with Disabilities: Students with Disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
Students with Disabilities, (512) 471-6259, http://utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Accommodations for Religious Holidays: By UT Policy, you must notify me of your
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about your safety or the
safety of another student, please call the BCAL at (512) 232-5050.
                                                                                                   7


AFS 321 COURSE OUTLINE – FALL 2018
      Date     Lsn#                 Subject                          Assignments
    23 Jan      1       AS200 Welcome and Overview
    30 Jan      2               Building Teams
     6 Feb      3              Human Relations
    13 Feb      4            Conflict Management             Writing Assignment #1 Due
    20 Feb      5        Comprehensive Airman Fitness
    27 Feb                                      Exam #1
     6 Mar      6           Student Briefings (#1)
    13 Mar      7          Ethical Decision-Making
    20 Mar                                    Spring Break
    27 Mar      8            Leadership Capstone
     3 Apr     N/A    Air Force Leadership: Case Studies     Writing Assignment #2 Due
    10 Apr     N/A          Student Briefings (#2)
    17 Apr     N/A          Student Briefings (#2)
    24 Apr                                 Final Exam Review
    1 May                                       Exam #2
                         This syllabus is subject to change.
                                                                                       8


Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
1. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
2. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
3. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
of class.
4. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
5. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                                                                                              9
