                               The University of Texas at Austin
                             College of Fine Arts – Art Education
                          Museum Education: History and Theory
AED 383                                                Instructor:
Museum Education: History and Theory                       Dr. Donalyn Heise
Course Day/time: Thursday 1-4 pm                           Office Hours: Wed 3:00-5:00 or by appt
Classroom: ART bldg. 3.408                                 Office—3.414
Term: Fall 2019                                            Office Phone—
                                                           Email: dheise2@utexas.edu
Course Description
Museum education practice is framed within contexts of cultural, personal, and
institutional values as well as narratives of history and theory pertinent to the field. This
issues-based course examines topics related to the social function of museums, theories
of object interpretation, the historical and contemporary struggle between education and
entertainment, the diverse nature of the museum audience, as well as contemporary
frameworks, models, and theories of museum learning. Students must be able to travel to
area museums.
Course Objectives
The course privileges a socio-constructivist approach to learning. Assignments will,
therefore, frequently engage students with each other in discussion and in interactive,
problem-based assignments. Through this course students will:
    •    Gain knowledgeable of the general functions and roles of museums in culture and
         how they relate to the public/educational mission of the museum;
    •    Become conversant in the historical and contemporary discourses that frame
         object interpretation, visitor engagement, and museum education practice;
    •    Identify current issues in art museum education and be able to situate those issues
         in relation to their roots in history and theory;
    •    Hone such pedagogical skills as inquiry, question construction, and discussion;
    •    Become familiar with the literature of museum education both online and off; and
    •    Use research and presentation (oral and written) skills to examine issues in
         museum education.
Textbooks
Villeneuve, P. (ed) 2007. From Periphery to Center: Art Museum Education in the 21st
Century. National Art Education Association, Reston VA. ISBN 978-1-890160-38-8
Simon, N. (2010). The Participatory Museum. Santa Cruz, CA: Museum 2.0.
(Available for purchase or reading online at http://www.participatorymuseum.org/)


Additional readings will be available in Canvas.
You are expected to be a member of NAEA to access selected resources.
Assignments
Assignment sheets outlining requirements generally (but not always) will be provided.
    1. Write TWO discussion questions on what you perceive to be an important and
       key topic from the weekly readings (due 24 hours prior to class).
    2. Write analytical, reflective response papers.
    3. Engage in a collaborative exploration and presentation of two local institutions of
       display.
    4. Research and write a final term paper plus make an oral presentation on the topic
       of the paper.
Grading
       Discussion Questions, Response Papers                          10%
       Museum Exploration and Presentation (due 10/13)                20%
       Class Activities nd Assignments                                10%
       Final Paper & Presentation (due 12/5)                          40%
       Participation                                                  20%
The factors that will contribute to assessing excellence in participation include:
    •  Composing and turning in all required key topics with accompanying discussion
       questions,
    •  Coming to class on time and not leaving early,
    •  Completing assignments in a punctual manner,
    •  Being prepared for class by having read and assimilated all readings,
    •  Talking to the points under discussion in class,
    •  Thoughtful response to fellow students’ points during discussions, and
    •  Engaging meaningfully in class exercises.
University Grading System (+/-)
A (4.00)         A- (3.67)       B+ (3.33)      B (3.00)      B- (2.67)       C+ (2.33)
C (2.00)         C- (1.67)       D+ (1.33)      D (1.00)      D- (0.67)       F (0.00)
Course Information
Changes to Course Schedule: The course schedule and assignments are subject to
change. All changes will be announced in class, through email, and/or on Canvas. Be sure
to check your email and Canvas daily for any announced changes. When you miss a class
session, it is your responsibility to find out about any new or changed assignments.


Full participation in this course can only be achieved by attending all sessions. Missing
more than one class could adversely affect your grade. Please check with the professor,
should you need to miss more than one class session.
All assignments are due on the date written on the course schedule or stated in class.
Some assignments will be submitted to Canvas, and others will be submitted in class as a
hard copy. As listed on the schedule, discussion questions are due via canvas at noon on
the Wednesday prior to the class session. No assignments are to be submitted through
email.
Work turned in late will be lowered by one full letter grade. No late work will be
accepted after one week unless otherwise negotiated with the professor. Appeals to have
a grade raised must be made within two weeks of the return of the graded assignment.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Plagiarism
Plagiarism will not be tolerated. In addition to copying whole or partial material from
another source without proper referencing, plagiarism includes copying short passages or
ideas from another author that are not referenced or marginally changing words from a
source without giving proper credit. You are always safest to make the ideas your own by
being able to translate them into your voice. If you have questions regarding what
constitutes plagiarism, sources can be found online at at
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/cwgs/_files/pdf-4/ai2012.pdf .
University Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Safety
For information regarding safety procedures at UT, see: https://besafe.utexas.edu/
Including SUREwalk https://www.utsg.org/request-a-sure-walk/
Safety Tips: https://besafe.utexas.edu/safety-tips-apps


Counseling and Mental Health https://cmhc.utexas.edu/vav/index.html
Behavior Concerns Advice Line https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line
Night Rides https://parking.utexas.edu/night
SURE Walk is a student-run volunteer group that provides pedestrian escorts to the
university community on school nights. Thanks to the Student Government, this service
is available to university students, staff and faculty, so improving your safety is as simple
as contacting SURE Walk and asking for a walk home (campus vicinity) or to another
part of campus. Any student or employee of The University of Texas at Austin can
contact the SURE WALK help desk and ask for a walk. Two volunteers—one male and
one female—will walk you home or to another location on campus or to the greater
campus area (including west and north campus, etc.).
Cell Phone Usage
Refrain from texting and phone calls during class time. If you have an emergency, step
outside so that you do not distract others from learning.


I have received a copy of the syllabus for AED 383 Museum Education History and
Theory. I am aware and agree to abide to the academic, ethical and safety
requirements as described in the syllabus.
SIGNATURE:
PRINT Name:
DATE:
STUDENT ID:
EMAIL:
PHONE:
