                                                                            ADV 338K
                              DigiPort                        Unique Number 06310
Who are you people?
Person 1: Ryan Romero
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com
Office: BMC 4.306
Hours: T/R @ 11-12:15, 2-3
         M/W @ 3:30 - 4:30
Person 2: Keke Zhang
Email: ​kz3793@utexas.edu
Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: TBD
Man, what did I sign up for?
If you’re here, you already understand basic advertising creativity. Big ideas, conceptual
thinking and the like are all your bag. Here we’re going to take that bag and put it inside a
bigger bag of digital concepts, strategy, and processes. Hopefully you’ll leave here with a
better idea of how to play in the sandbox of the digital realm.
Do you have to code? Will there be high level php humor? Do you need to start collecting
original Battlestar Galactica figurines mint in box? No. You’re not a developer…or maybe you
are. The point is, it doesn’t matter. A person who races motorcycles may not know how to
build the engine they ride on top of, but they know how to corner. Here, we learn to corner.
Also, building motorcycles is cool. We should all probably learn that too.
“So, we made an app.” & other ways to fail
You are advertising creatives and that means you have to think. In this class you will be
expected to produce the amazing ideas I know that are lurking around in that brain of yours or
your partner. That isn’t to say they can’t be very simple, the best ones generally are. They
might even include an app. It just better be awesome and relevant. In short, don’t bring none of
them weak answers up in here. Low-hanging fruit buys you nothing in the digital world. In this
class it buys you low-hanging grades.


Embrace the beep borp
The basic structure is like other portfolio classes in the sequence. The first step will involve
discussion about the landscape of digital. We’ll talk about what you like, what I like and why we
like these things. Participate and have an opinion. It’s part of your grade.
After talking about other people’s work we’re going to do our own. Bring tons of ideas, present
them, and then we will collectively mock those ideas forcing you to come back with better
ones. I kid. Maybe.
        NOTE: Thicker skin through advertising
        Advertising is not a private endeavor. Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes
        harshly, by your target audience. We improve by sharing our ideas early and often with
        other creatives. Fair and honest critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. Don’t
        take it personally, keep your cool and know that very few ideas ever make the final cut.
You’ll be expected to properly describe your project as you would to a client. We’ll work
together to decide how that should be done, but plan to work just as hard as you do in
Portfolio. This class assumes you (or your partner) possess basic comp skills that can shape
your idea into pretty pictures for all to admire.
Grading
Your final course grade will be calculated by my big ol’ brain like so:
70% = Digital Portfolio Projects
15% = Class Assignments
15% = Participation and Professionalism (see Wheaton’s Law)
Note that there is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum
grade of C in all communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major.
‣ Nerd out - Keep up to date on new technology, applications and online experiences
‣ Fail big - Make mistakes and own them. We all learn from them.
‣ Play nice - Be a good partner. Seriously. Do your end and then some.
‣ Do cool - Make good ideas happen for no reason other than the joy of doing it.
Legal stuff. Read it anyway.
Attendance + Late Work
As a budding professional in a deadline-driven industry, you are expected to complete every
project on time – no exceptions. I don’t take attendance per se, but being there means
participating in more discussion which, I promise you, leads to better work. Show up and
speak up and you’ll make better projects which in turn get you better grades.


Cheating
The usual rules apply to cheating and plagiarism. If you are caught doing either, you will
automatically fail this course. Please familiarize yourself with U.T.’s policy on plagiarism​ ​here.
E-Mail
In this course, email will be used as a means of communication. I’m usually very reachable on
my email. So you will be as well. Make sure your Canvas email is updated to a current,
reachable account. You will be responsible for checking your email regularly for class work and
announcements.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.


But, when? WHEN?!​ ​                                     (subject to change as new awesomeness comes to light)
Note: This calendar is a broad look at the semester. However I will mix in, when you least expect them, short
assignments and exercises meant to bend your brains a bit. Stay frosty.
T, 1/22          Welcome: Syllabus, Introductions, etc. / Project 1 and 2 kickoff
R, 1/24
T, 1/29          Project 1 - Big concepts. Big Fails. Lots of ‘em.
R, 1/31
T, 2/5           Project 2 - Big concepts. Big Fails. Lots of ‘em.
R, 2/7
T, 2/12          Project 1 - Focused approaches. Better executions. More detail.
R, 2/14
T, 2/19          Project 2 - Focused approaches. Better executions. More detail.
R, 2/21
T, 2/26          Wrap up both projects 1 and 2. As detailed and final as possible.
R, 2/28
T, 3/5           Catch up day / Kick off projects 3 and 4
R, 3/7
T, 3/12          Project 3 - Big concepts. Big Fails. Lots of ‘em.
R, 3/14
3/18 - 3/22      Spring Break
T, 3/26          Project 4 - Big concepts. Big Fails. Lots of ‘em.
R, 3/28
T, 4/2           Project 3 - Focused approaches. Better executions. More detail.
R, 4/4
T, 4/9           Project 4 - Focused approaches. Better executions. More detail.
R, 4/11
T, 4/16          Any Project
R, 4/18
T, 4/23          Any Project / Complete project list and preferences due (google drive)
R,4/25
T, 4/30          Last chance feedback on everything, presentation polishing, dry-runs
R, 5/2
T, 5/7           Presentations to real-world “clients”
R, 5/9
