Professor Zhao                                 ACC 327 Fall 2018                              page 1
                                      ACC 327 – Fall 2018
                                Financial Statement Analysis
Professor                            Wuyang Zhao
E-Mail                               Wuyang.zhao@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office                               CBA 4M.256 (mailbox in CBA4M.202)
Office Hours                         Tuesday and Thursday 9:30 – 10:30, or by appointment
Office Phone                         (512) 471-2163
Course Web Page                      via Canvas (http://canvas.utexas.edu/)
Teaching Assistants                  Adam Landefeld (landefeldadam@yahoo.com)
                                     Annie Peng (anniepeng@utexas.edu)
                                     Sarah Shao (chengcenshao@gmail.com)
TA office Hours                      TBD
TA office                            TBD
Course Meeting Times and Location
 Unique #                   Days                     Time                    Location
 02420                      Tue, Thu                 11:00am – 12:15pm       UTC 1.146
 02425                      Tue, Thu                 12:30pm – 13:45pm       UTC 1.146
Course Objectives
         To go through 10-Ks and other corporate filings
         To learn a framework for making investment decisions using financial statement
          information
         To practice applying the framework, primarily from the perspective of an equity investor
         To practice communicating our decisions using written and oral communication skills
A concrete objective of this course is that you should be able to analyze stocks and publish your
analysis on semi-professional outlets such as Seeking Alpha (SA for short – I will refer to this
website numerous times).
Although we will review some accounting concepts, the primary objective of the course is NOT
to improve your understanding of Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). Instead the
goal is to improve your ability to interpret and manipulate financial statements.


Professor Zhao                                     ACC 327 Fall 2018                               page 2
Materials
   Required text:
         Course reader: supplemental readings packet available at McCombs Copy Service (Room
          3.136)
         Financial Statement Analysis & Valuation 5e, by Easton, McAnally, Sommers and Zhang
   Optional texts:
         Financial Reporting, Financial Statement Analysis, and Valuation - A Strategic
          Perspective 8e, by Wahlen, Baginski, and Bradshaw.
         Business Analysis and Valuation: Using Financial Statements 5e, by Palepu and Healy.
         Financial Statement Analysis and Security Valuation 5e, by Penman.
         Regular readings of The Wall Street Journal, Barron’s, Business Week, Fortune, Seeking
          Alpha, and various short-selling reports.
Course Structure
During the semester we will learn a framework (I call it “PH framework” as it is highlighted by
Palepu and Healy in their famous textbook listed above) and a set of in-depth tools for business
analysis and valuation. The steps in the framework include: (1) business strategy analysis, (2)
accounting analysis, (3) financial analysis, and (4) prospective analysis (i.e., valuation).
       1. Business (or Industry/strategy) analysis (Session 3)
           The purpose of business strategy analysis is to assess the profit potential of the firm at
              a qualitative level. This step involves industry and competitive strategy analysis.
       2. Accounting analysis (Sessions 4-13)
           The purpose of accounting analysis is to develop an understanding of whether a firm’s
              accounting captures its true underlying economic condition. This step involves
              analyzing management incentives, identifying areas of accounting flexibility, and
              evaluating the appropriateness of accounting policies and estimates.
       3. Financial analysis (Sessions 15-16)
           The purpose of financial analysis is to assess the firm’s historical financial performance
              in the context of its stated goals and strategy. Tools used for financial analysis include
              ratio analysis, cash flow analysis, and common size financial statements.
       4. Prospective analysis (Sessions 17-22)
           The purpose of prospective analysis is to forecast the firm’s future. Tools used for
              prospective analysis include forecasts of financial statements and valuation models.
The course will be taught using a combination of brief lectures on textbook materials, discussion
on cases and assignment questions, and extension related to research insights and current events –
there will also be a “real-time” aspect to the class. We will use Amazon (AMZN) as the master
case that appears in most of our classes and assignments.
I have attached a tentative schedule of class meetings (Appendix A) and the framework (Appendix
B) to the end of this document. I will also post a “plan for the week” to Canvas that will outline


Professor Zhao                                 ACC 327 Fall 2018                                 page 3
what we plan to cover that week. It is possible that we may have to periodically revise the
schedule. Should significant revisions be required, I will post a revised schedule on Canvas.
Course Requirements and Grading
Your grade in the course will be determined as follows:
          Components                     Weights                             Notes
          Homework Assignments              20%            1 point per assignment
          Group Project                     20%            5/10/5 points for mid/final/presentation
          Midterm 1                         25%            Covering business/accounting analysis
          Midterm 2                         25%            Covering financial/prospective analysis
          Class Participation               10%
                                           100%
The historical distribution of grades is roughly as follows: 35% A’s, 60% B’s, 5% below B.
Plus/Minus grading applies to this course.
Description of Course Requirements
I design the class in a way that all course requirements are served the same purpose: to reinforce
your understanding of the framework and to enable you to write a complete analyst report.
Homework Assignments
One primary objective of homework assignments is to help you review the lecture material before
attending class. For this purpose, each assignment should be submitted before the according
session starts (see the class schedule in Appendix A). For example, you should submit Assignment
1 (#1 hereafter, which is on business analysis) by the time your section starts on September 6
(session 3 on business analysis). Then we will spend time discussing #1 on that day.
Another objective of homework is to help you understand the framework and prepare for both the
group project and the exams. Many assignments are associated with AMZN. In #1, #11, #14, and
#19, you are asked to write-up the four parts of the framework by analyzing AMZN. In #20, you
need to combine all these four parts together and write-up a complete report on AMZN.
To “force” you to write in a clear and concise way, please use the following format in all
assignments (except #1, #11, #14, #19, and #20): maximum two pages, font 12, 1 inch margin
for all, and 1.5 space.
Assignments will be graded based on an effort basis. You will receive 0 if you did not hand in the
assignment, 0.5 if your effort appears to be unreasonably low and 1 if you made a reasonable
attempt to answer all of the questions.
Unless explicitly discouraged, you can work in groups on all assignments, but each person should
turn in his or her own solution. Failure to turn in your own work could result in a zero score
for that assignment.


Professor Zhao                                          ACC 327 Fall 2018                                         page 4
You will submit all assignments via the course Canvas site. Let me repeat: all assignments are
due by the start of class, and you must submit one copy before the beginning of your class
section. Also you may consider bringing a copy for your use during class so that you can participate
in that day’s discussion.
Assignments will not be accepted after the stated date and time. There are no exceptions to this
policy, including sleeping late, computer problems, etc. I realize this is tough, but a deadline
is a deadline. In fairness to the many students who submit their work on time, I will not grant
extensions. In general, neither excused nor unexcused absences will change assignment deadlines.
Mid-terms
There will be two computer-based midterms scheduled on October 16, 2018 and November 27,
2018 from 6-9 pm in the MOD lab (GSB 5th floor). 1 Midterm 1 covers business analysis and
accounting analysis, while Midterm 2 covers financial analysis and prospective analysis. You will
find out that the best way to prepare for the exams is to put your effort into assignments and group
projects. I will post sample exams two weeks before each midterm.
You will be using the desktops in the MOD lab. The use of internet is strictly forbidden except (1)
in the first five minutes when you download the exam from Canvas and (2) in the last five minutes
when you upload your report to Canvas.
Group Project
In this course, as in life, working effectively in a team is important. This is reflected by the fact
that a large portion (20%) of your final grade will be based on a semester-long group project, which
includes a midterm report, a presentation, and a final written report. In the second week of class,
you will self-select into groups (4-5 members/group). As a group, you will choose one from
the four: Walmart (WMT), Target (TGT), Best Buy (BBY), and Costco (COST). You may
notice that all of them are from the retail industry.
As in PH framework, a complete firm analysis has four parts: (1) a business (or industry/strategy)
analysis, which includes an analysis of the primary industry or industries in which the firm
operates, and an analysis of the firm’s competitive and corporate strategies; (2) an accounting
analysis, which includes an analysis of the firm’s accounting flexibilities, management incentives
to potentially misreport, featured accounting practices, and procedures and any adjustments
necessary to bring reported numbers closer to economic reality; (3) a financial analysis, which
includes profitability and credit risk analysis; and (4) a prospective analysis, which includes
forecasts of future performance and valuation. The midterm written report will cover parts (1)
and (2) of the firm analysis described above. The final written report will cover all four parts
(you can revise the first two parts in your mid report), and will require you to make an
investment recommendation (buy, hold, or sell/short) based on your analysis. You will also
present your analysis in class toward the end of the semester.
Due dates and times are listed on the course schedule. I will post detailed requirements for the
midterm and final projects to Canvas no later than four weeks prior to the due date for each project.
1
  The time and location of the midterms are still subject to change. I will let you know as soon as there is any update.


Professor Zhao                                 ACC 327 Fall 2018                               page 5
Grades for the midterm project, final project and presentation will be numerical scores (with full
marks of 5, 10, and 5 points, respectively). Each member of the group will receive the same score.
To make sure all group projects are on the right track, each group should have a brief
meeting with me about two weeks before the each deadline. All group members are required
to attend. We can have such meetings in the classroom (e.g., right before or after the lecture) or
in my office (e.g., during office hour or by appointment). After your submissions, I will provide
each group with detailed feedback that should be useful in improving future work.
I strongly encourage all groups to submit their reports to Seeking Alpha. This is very beneficial
for several reasons. First, you will find that the investing community cares about your work –
people read your report and provide comments. Second, you can improve your analysis and/or
your delivery by addressing other people’s comments. To provide some additional incentives, I
will give a bonus of maximum five points to students who publish their individual work (3 points)
or group project (2 points for every member) on Seeking Alpha by the last class (December 6
2018).
Grading Disputes
My TAs and I will do our best to grade your work fairly, but grading errors can occur. If you
believe we have made an error, you may request a re-grading of the assignment, project, or
midterms. Be aware, however, that grading errors can occur in both directions—errors can make
grades too high as well as too low. Therefore, if you request a re-grading, your entire work (either
an assignment or group project or mid-term) will be re-graded, and all grading errors will be
corrected. By requesting a re-grade, you accept the possibility that your grade may go either up or
down.
To request a re-grade, you must submit a written request to me within 48 hours from the time
when the assignment was first returned. The request must state (1) the specific area of dispute,
(2) your recommendation for change in grade, and (3) an explanation or justification for your
recommendation.
Class Participation
I will ask for self-reporting of class participation prior to two midterms. For each round of
evaluation, class participation is graded on A (Outstanding Contributor: 4 points), B (Good
Contributor: 3 points), C (Marginal Contributor: 2 points), D (Non-participant: 1 point), and F
(Disruptive Contributor: 0 point). The details of the participation grading policy can be found in
Appendix C (Interim and Final Assessment). Those who attend the group meetings with me
will get one point for each meeting (i.e., one for midterm report and one for final report).
To help me more effectively evaluate your participation, I’ll make a tremendous effort to learn
everyone’s name so that I can easily identify contributions. You should also display your name
cards in class. You’ll receive an interim assessment of your participation around the middle of the
semester so you can gauge your performance in this area to date (you’ll also have a chance to give
me interim feedback). At the end of the semester, you’ll receive a final assessment which is for
your participation in the second part of the course. So for your own record, please also keep a
brief note on every important participation you make in this class.


Professor Zhao                                   ACC 327 Fall 2018                                page 6
I view class participation as both an opportunity and a responsibility. Class participation provides
an opportunity for students to practice important career skills in a low cost environment. Among
other skills, these include the ability to express and defend one’s ideas. (Remember, we may
challenge ideas, but we will not challenge people. Rude classroom behavior will result in a
reduction in class participation points.) The cost of not developing these skills will increase as your
career progresses (e.g., lost promotions). Class participation is also a responsibility because
students who attend a top business school expect to learn from the viewpoints of their classmates.
Non-participating students do not provide their classmates with this important benefit. I therefore
reserve the right to “cold call” students who are not participating in class discussions. My intent is
not to embarrass you; rather it is to help you get involved in the discussion where your classmates
can benefit from your ideas.
McCombs Classroom Professionalism Policy
The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the McCombs community. The
collective class reputation and the value of the McCombs experience hinges on the execution of
this policy. Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and
every class session. Students are expected to be professional in all respects. The McCombs
classroom experience is enhanced when:
    Students arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and finish at the
     scheduled time. On time arrival shows respect for both fellow students and faculty and it
     enhances learning by reducing avoidable distractions.
    Students display their name cards. This permits fellow students and faculty to learn names,
     enhancing opportunities for community building and evaluation of in-class contributions.
    Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment improves when
     disruptions are limited.
    Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning at McCombs takes place
     during classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they cannot contribute to the
     overall learning process. This affects not only the individual, but their peers who count on
     them, as well.
    Students attend the class section to which they are registered. Learning is enhanced when
     class sizes are optimized. Limits are set to ensure a quality experience. When section hopping
     takes place some classes become too large and it becomes difficult to contribute. When they
     are too small, the breadth of experience and opinion suffers.
    Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and debate are
     encouraged. Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.
    Laptops are closed and put away. When students are surfing the web, responding to e-mail,
     instant messaging each other, and otherwise not devoting their full attention to the topic at
     hand they are doing themselves and their peers a disservice. Those students around the
     offending students face additional distraction because fellow students cannot benefit from the
     insights of the students who are not engaged. In addition, faculty office hours are spent going
     over class material with students who chose not to pay attention, rather than adding value by
     helping students who want a better understanding of the material or want to explore the issues


Professor Zhao                                    ACC 327 Fall 2018                              page 7
     in more depth. There are often cases where learning is enhanced by the use of laptops in class.
     Faculty will let you know when it is appropriate to use them. In such cases, professional
     behavior is exhibited when misuse does not take place.
    Phones and wireless devices are turned off. We’ve all heard the annoying ringing of a phone
     in the middle of a meeting. Not only is it not professional, it cuts off the flow of discussion
     when the search for the offender begins. When a true need to communicate with someone
     outside of class exists (e.g., for some medical need) please inform the professor prior to class.
Academic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. Students who
violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Because dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty
will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/) or the General Information Catalog Sec. 11-402
(http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-
conduct/) to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty. If the
application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is
your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Students with Disabilities
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) is housed in
the Office of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth floor of the Student Services Building.
Information on how to register and registration documentation (e.g., downloadable forms,
including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request letters, and releases of
information are available online at http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/. Please do not hesitate to
contact SSD via phone (512) 471-6259, videophone (512) 410-6644, or e-mail
ssd@austin.utexas.edu, if you have any questions.
Class Web Sites and Student Privacy
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at The University.
Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available
within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions
and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a component of the sites.
Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their
directory information by notifying the Office of the Registrar in the Main Building, Room 1. For
information             on            restricting          directory        information           see:
https://registrar.utexas.edu/students/records/restrictmyinfo/rmifaqs
Accommodations for Religious Holidays


Professor Zhao                                ACC 327 Fall 2018                                page 8
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as
possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Quantitative Reasoning Flag
This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning flag. Quantitative Reasoning courses are designed
to equip you with skills that are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments
you will regularly encounter in your adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world
problems.


                     Professor Zhao                                  ACC 327 Fall 2018                                     page 9
                                              Appendix A: Tentative Schedule of Classes
                                                Readings: (M: Module; L: Learning objective; CP:                                Group Project
Session Date   Day 2018 Topics                                                                   Assignments:
                                                Course packet)
1       30-Aug Thu Introduction
2       4-Sep  Tue Review of Accounting         M1: L2-3, 1A; M2: L1-5, L10;
3       6-Sep  Thu Business Analysis            M1: L4-5; CP: Industry structure                 #1: Business analysis
4       11-Sep Tue Management incentives        CP: Numbers game; Earnings quality               #2: Management incentives Member list & stock due
5       13-Sep Thu Revenue I                    M5: L1; CP: Apple case                           #3: Revenue recognition
6       18-Sep Tue Revenue II                   M5: L2, L3, L5-7                                 #4: Income statement items
7       20-Sep Thu Asset I                      M6: L1-6                                         #5: Assets
8       25-Sep Tue Asset II                     CP: Cisco case A&B                               #6: Case questions
9       27-Sep Thu Liability and Equity         M7: L1; M8: L1, L3, L6, L8                       #7: Liability and equity
10      2-Oct  Tue Cash Flow Analysis           Appendix B: L1, L5, L6                           #8: Cash flow analysis
11      4-Oct  Thu Leases                       M10: L1, L4                                      #9: Lease items
12      9-Oct  Tue Taxes                        M10: L3, L6                                      #10: Tax items
13      11-Oct Thu Accounting analysis wrap-up                                                   #11: Accounting analysis
14      16-Oct Tue Midterm 1
15      18-Oct Thu Profitability Analysis       M3: L1-8                                         #12: Profitability ratios
16      23-Oct Tue Credit Risk Analysis         M4: L3                                           #13: Credit ratios             Mid-term report due
17      25-Oct Thu Forecasting I                M11:L1-4                                         #14: Financial analysis
18      30-Oct Tue Forecasting II               M11:L5-8                                         #15: Forecasting
19      1-Nov  Thu Cost of Capital              M12: L1-4                                        #16: Cost of capital
20      6-Nov  Tue Cash Flow Based Valuation    M13: L1, L2                                      #17: Valuation model 1
21      8-Nov  Thu Income Based Valuation       M14: L2-4                                        #18: Valuation model 2
22      13-Nov Tue Market Based Valuation       M15: L3, L4                                      #19: Prospective analysis
23      15-Nov Thu Sophisticated Users          CP: Financial analyst                            #20: Wrap-up whole report
24      20-Nov Tue Course Review & Wrap-up
        22-Nov Thu Thanksgiving
25      27-Nov Tue Midterm 2
26      29-Nov Thu Group presentation                                                                                           Final report due
27      4-Dec  Tue Group presentation
28      6-Dec  Thu Group presentation


Professor Zhao                    ACC 327 Fall 2018      page 10
Appendix B: Financial Statement Analysis Course Overview
The PH Framework


Professor Zhao                                   ACC 327 Fall 2018                                page 11
             Appendix C: Midterm/Final Participation & Professionalism Evaluation
In recognition of the high value I place on professionalism, my assessment of your participation
and professionalism will make up approximately 10% of your course grade (specifically, 8% based
on two evaluations and 2% based on group meetings with me – see Group Project on pages 4-5).
Here’s how I plan to grade your class participation over the course of the semester:
     Outstanding Contributor (A±: 4 points): Contributions to large-group discussions reflect
      thorough preparation. Ideas offered are usually substantive, provide good insights and
      sometimes change the direction of the class for the better. Arguments, when presented, are
      generally well substantiated and often persuasive. If this person were not a member of the
      class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished significantly. In addition
      to exceptional large-group discussion contributions, also actively participates in small-group
      discussions.
     Good Contributor (B±: 3 points): Contributions to large-group discussions reflect satisfactory
      preparation. Ideas offered are usually substantive, generally provide useful insights, and
      occasionally offer a new direction for the discussion. Arguments, if presented, are reasonably
      well substantiated. If this person were not a member of the class, the quality of the large-group
      discussions would be diminished. In addition, also offers comments in small-group
      discussions.
     Marginal Contributor (C±: 2 points): Contributions to large-group discussions reflect some
      minimal preparation. Ideas offered are occasionally substantive but seldom provide clear
      insights or new directions for the discussion. Arguments may be occasionally presented but
      are generally not well substantiated. If this person were not a member of the class, the quality
      of the large-group discussions would be diminished only slightly. This grade is warranted for
      those who participate only in small-group activities with no large-group contributions.
     Non-participant (D: 1 point): This person has maintained attendance to some extent but has
      said little or nothing in class; hence there is no adequate basis for evaluation. If this person
      were not a member of the class, the quality of the discussions would be unchanged.
     Disruptive Contributor (F: 0 point): If present in class at all, contributions to discussions
      reflect inadequate preparation. Ideas offered are rarely substantive, provide few, if any,
      insights and never offer a constructive direction. At best, contributions are obscure, confused,
      and indicate a lack of familiarity with the fact of the issues under discussion. At worst,
      comments demonstrate disrespect for others. If this person were not a member of class,
      valuable airtime would be saved.


Professor Zhao                                 ACC 327 Fall 2018                             page 12
Name _________________________________
YOUR assessment of your participation and professionalism in class since mid-term.
[Please circle one of the letter grades below. If you believe you deserve a “+” or a “–“ please add
it to the corresponding letter grade]
A                B              C              D                 F
Please provide evidence to support your above assessment.
MY assessment of your participation and professionalism in class since mid-term.
[Please note I am not assigning pluses or minuses at this point in the semester]
A                B              C              D                 F
