                          THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                         STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number: SWN393T29                          Instructor: Robert Ambrosino, Ph.D.
 Unique Number: 87665                              Email: Robert.ambrosino@utexas.edu
 Semester: Summer 2020                             Office: On-line (see hours below)
 Meeting Time: Tues/Thurs 5:30-8:00pm              Office Phone: (210) 268-9043
 & Place: On-line*                                 Office Hours: T/TH 11am –12:30pm
                                                   and by appointment via Zoom
*This class will be conducted using asynchronous (non-face to face) on-line format, with the
exception of the 1st and last classes and three lab days, all of which will be held using Zoom.
______________________________________________________________________________
                    FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT IN HUMAN SERVICES
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This advanced management course will cover the knowledge and skills necessary to guide
nonprofit organizations through a variety of important financial decisions. Students will learn
how to create budgets, analyze financial statements, record common financial transactions
through basic accounting, manage cash flow, analyze costs, and support key financial decisions
in a nonprofit at executive or management levels. The course will examine how financial
management is used in social work practice with case studies and exercises that will be directly
applicable when beginning in a new nonprofit organization. Hands-on experience will include
the opportunity to create one’s own non-profit program budget, practice basic accounting,
interview an Executive Director to better understand how finances are dealt with in practice,
create a financial analysis and sustainability plan on a nonprofit of one’s choosing, analyze cost
structures and recommend revenues for a nonprofit case, and hear from practitioners in the field.
Through readings, exercises, videos, and guest speakers, students will come away with a toolbox
for applying the latest in financial management theories to human service organizations. Students
will learn to define and practice financial management topics to become a social worker with
financial literacy.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
By the end of this course, students will be able to:
    1. Critically examine and apply theories of financial management to non-profit human
        service organizations.
    2. Explain common financial management concepts and terminology to effectively
        communicate with organizational stakeholders.
    3. Construct and analyze different types of budgets and understand the budgeting process in
        nonprofit and public entities.
    4. Analyze value dilemmas, ethical issues, and social justice issues in the financial
        management of human service organizations.


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
    5. Explain basic accounting principles, how to record common financial transactions, and
        software that supports this accounting.
    6. Understand how to manage cash flow in an organization and the importance of
        monitoring cash budgets to support financial stability.
    7. Understand different costs in a nonprofit organization and how to conduct a cost analysis
        to develop cost-effective programming.
    8. Analyze financial statements of nonprofit organizations and provide constructive
        feedback on their financial conditions, financial performance, and fiscal vulnerabilities.
    9. Describe the multiple revenue streams that finance nonprofits and the advantages and
        disadvantages of different funding sources.
    10. Utilize differential cost-benefit analysis in making executive-level organization and
        policy decisions (e.g., make or buy, keep or stop, expand or reduce, fund or reject).
    11. Understand internal controls and the importance of audits in supporting the overall
        financial health of an organization.
    12. Apply financial knowledge to starting a non-profit business in social work.
III. TEACHING METHODS
The class will use a form of blended learning in which students learn content both in
synchronous and asynchronous on-line formats. Specially-designated lab days will serve as
protected time for students to work on class assignments as well as a means for the course
instructor to check-in with students.
Several of the course assignments will involve the use of Microsoft Excel or Google Sheets.
Students will need to be comfortable with using this software for the course. Students are
expected to complete assigned readings prior to each class period and actively participate in the
class through on-line communication.
Canvas will be used as the learning platform for this course instructor, including communication
between students and the course instructor. The course Canvas site can be accessed at
http://courses.utexas.edu or the Social Work web page (requires Internet connection and
computer UT EID and password). The Help Desk available through the UT home page
(www.utexas.edu/its/help) or at 475-9400 is available to assist students with Canvas-related
questions.
IV. REQUIRED TEXTS AND MATERIALS
Zeitlow, J., Hankin, J., Seidner, A., & O’Brien, T. (2018). Financial management for nonprofit
organizations: Policies and Practices (3rd edition). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Note that the 3rd edition of this text is required.
                                                    2


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
Additional reading material will be posted on the course Canvas site throughout the semester.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
The grade in the course will be comprised of the following:
Assignment #1 - Creating a Non-Profit Program Budget (15% of course grade)
For this assignment, students will create a small nonprofit organization with a specific mission
and objectives, select one program provided by the organization, and create a revenue and
expense budget for that program.
The following information is to be provided as part of this assignment:
    • Agency mission (no more than 5 sentences)
    • Agency objectives (2 - 3 short, one-sentence objectives)
    • Brief description of one program that is provided by the organization (no more than one
        paragraph)
    • 12-month calendar or fiscal year budget for the program, with revenues to support the
        program and expenses that demonstrate how the funds will be used (a spreadsheet
        template will be posted to the Templates folder on the course Canvas site to capture this
        information)
    • Variance report for the first three months of program operation (a spreadsheet template
        will be posted to the Templates folder on the course Canvas site to capture this
        information)
This assignment is due on June 25.
Assignment #2 - Creating a Cash Flow Budget Report (15% of course grade)
Using the program budget identified above, students will create a cash flow management report
for the next year. The budget should include both cash receipts and cash payments, showing the
ending cash balance for each month (a spreadsheet template will be posted to the Templates
folder on the course Canvas site to capture this information).
This assignment is due on July 9.
Assignment #3 - Understanding Non-Profit Audits (15% of course grade)
Non-profit financial audits combine the basic financial statements with notes on the organization
and other aspects of operations. Nonprofit executives need to be well versed in the terminology
of audits and be able to understand how the statements and notes combine to paint the overall
picture of the agency.
                                                  3


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
Two sample audits will be posted on the course Canvas site. Each sample includes a set of
questions designed to help students delve deeper into the audit. Students will choose ONE of the
two audits and respond to the set of questions presented for that audit.
This assignment is due on July 23.
Assignment #4 – Discussion assignments (15% of course grade)
Each student will complete three (3) discussion assignments posted on the course Canvas site.
Instructions for completing these assignments will be included in each posting.
Assignment #5 - Agency/Organization Financial Analysis & Sustainability Plan (40% of course
grade)
Students will work in teams of three to four members each to complete this assignment each
(team membership to be determined by the course instructor). The selected nonprofit must have
an annual operating budget of at least $500,000 and have been in existence for at least three
years. The non-profit agency selected can be one that a member of the team interacts with
directly as a volunteer, employee, or field placement, or one that members of the team would like
to learn more about. In either case, teams must be able to access sufficient programmatic and
financial information for a full calendar or fiscal year (sometimes, these are the same) to
complete the assignment.
Each team will prepare a 6 to 8 page written report (excluding attachments) about the
organization based on a review of financial statements and budget documents, and interviews
with key leaders within the organization such as the Chief Executive Officer or Executive
Director, Chief Financial Officer or Financial Manager, Chief Program Officer or Program
Director, and Chief Operating Officer or Operations Director.
The report is to include the following information:
    • Brief description of the organization (2 pages)
        - Mission and overview of organization (size, age, field of activity, location)
        - Overview of main programs
        - Overview of key agency officials
        - Sources of revenue
        - How financial matters are communicated within the organization
    • Current calendar or fiscal year financial position (2 to 3 pages)
        - Liquidity (how much unrestricted cash is on hand)
        - Statement of Financial Position (Balance Sheet)
                o Are unrestricted current assets greater than unrestricted current liabilities? By
                    how much?
                                                  4


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
                o Are there unrestricted long-term investment assets that could be used as
                   needed?
                o What is the unrestricted net asset position (cumulative impact of each annual
                   surplus or deficit since the organization started)?
        - Statement of Activities (Income Statement)
                o Is there an annual deficit?
                o Are revenue streams diversified?
                o Are management costs reasonable compared to total annual costs?
        - Financial condition of the non-profit (use two of the following ratios in your
            response: liquidity, solvency, efficiency, profitability)
    •   Recommendations for sustained or improved finances (2 - 3 pages)
        - Steps agency could take to explore new revenue streams
        - Strategies that agency could deploy to reduce costs while not jeopardizing
            agency operations
        - Ways that agency could improve communication of agency finances (internal
            and external)
        - Internal controls used within the organization (accountability and transparency)
    •   Copies of organization documents reviewed as part of the assignment.
Each team will prepare a PowerPoint presentation to be delivered during the last class via Zoom
that contains an overview of their findings, including recommendations for sustainability. The
order of presentations will be determined by the course instructor. Each team will have 20
minutes to make its presentation, plus 5 - 10 minutes to respond to questions posed by the course
instructor and other classmates at the end of the presentation. Class presentations are scheduled
for July 28.
The written portion of this assignment is also due on July 28.
A summary of course assignments can be found in the following table.
                                                   5


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
                                                                               Due            %
                                    Assignment
                                                                               Date        Grade
  1     Creating a nonprofit program budget                                    6/25          15%
  2     Creating a cash flow budget report                                      7/9          15%
  3     Understanding nonprofit agency audits                                  7/23          15%
  4     Discussion postings                                                  Various         15%
  5     Financial analysis and sustainability plan                                           40%
                                                            Written report     7/28          25%
                                                        Class presentation     7/28          15%
                                                                                 Total      100%
VI. GRADES
The following distribution will be used to assign grades in this course:
         94.0 - 99.999           A              74.0 - 76.999          C
         90.0 - 93.999           A-             70.0 - 73.999          C-
         87.0 - 89.999           B+             67.0 - 69.999          D+
         84.0 - 86.999           B              64.0 - 66.999          D
         80.0 - 83.999           B-             60.0 - 63.999          D-
         77.0 - 79.999           C+             Below 60               F
VII. CLASS POLICIES (Some policies have been modified to reflect the fact that the class is
being conducted on-line)
 Conduct and Civility: Social work students adhere to the Student Standards for Professional
Conduct of the NASW Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for their conduct. Scholastic
honesty and integrity are to be consistent social work values. The instructor will comply with
University guidelines regarding scholastic dishonesty, including plagiarism. Social work
practitioners respect others; therefore, differences in values, opinions, and feelings of class
members and guest speakers will be respected. Students will help create and support a learning
environment that does not interfere with the learning of fellow students. When students voice an
opinion with which you do not agree, feel free to voice opinions in a civil manner that can
enhance the flow of ideas and dialog.
Readings and Preparatory Assignments: Students are expected to be active participants in the
learning process by completing all assigned readings and viewing all Power Point presentations
and related videos.
                                                   6


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
Professional Communication and Interactions: Disrespect toward the professor, students, or
others is unacceptable and will be handled directly and in the context in which it occurs.
Disrespectful behavior includes overt acts, such as talking over others or making derogatory
remarks toward others, and covert acts, such as excluding class members from completing
assigned tasks.
Class Attendance Policy: All students are expected to participate in all synchronous on-line
class sessions (classes presented using Zoom).
Assignments and Grades: Assignments should be turned in via Canvas on the date they are due
barring serious, unforeseen medical illness or family emergencies. Penalties for late assignments
will factor into the grade achieved for the assignment.
Electronic Devices: All communication devices should be turned off or placed on silent mode
and put away during on-line class sessions, unless otherwise required for the class.
Writing Style: The Publication Manual of the American Psychological Association Sixth
Edition (APA) is the style manual to be used by all students in this course.
Use of Canvas: The professor will use Canvas Web-based course management /collective
workspace for this class. An orientation will be given to the course Canvas site on the first day of
class.
Course Modification: To ensure achievement for course objectives, the professor reserves the
right to make modifications to any part of this syllabus related to schedule, assignment due dates,
and links to documents and videos available through the Internet. Should any modifications be
made, students will be notified both in class and by email and the modifications will be posted to
Canvas.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
                                                  7


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
                                                     8


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
                                                   9


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    ·       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    ·       If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    ·       In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    ·       Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                   10


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
Highlighted dates signify that class will be held via Zoom.
 Date               Topic                             Readings                       Assignment(s)
 June
   4    ▪ Introductions             Canvas (Supplemental Materials folder)     ▪ Complete and post to
        ▪ Review of course          ▪ Glossary of finance terms                  Canvas a list of at
          assignments               Power Point Slides                           least five attributes of
        ▪ Financial                 ▪ Financial challenges facing contemporary   the ideal nonprofit
          challenges                   nonprofit organizations                   financial manager (due
          facing contemporary       ▪ Leadership maxims for nonprofit            Sunday, June 7)
          nonprofit                   financial managers                       ▪Complete and post to
          organizations             ▪ Paradigms                                  Canvas responses to
        ▪ Leadership maxims for                                                  survey of interests,
          nonprofit                                                              management
          financial managers                                                     experience, and
        ▪ Paradigms                                                              financial
                                                                                 understanding (due
                                                                                 Sunday, June 7)
   9    ▪ Understanding nonprofit   Chapter 1 of course text                   ▪ Discussion #1 –
           organizations            Canvas (Supplemental Materials folder)       Nonprofit starvation
        ▪ Why some nonprofits       ▪ IRS classification of nonprofit agencies   Cycle (Available 9/9 –
           fail in achieving their  ▪ Pay-what-it-takes philanthropy             9/12)
           mission                  ▪ Nonprofit starvation cycle
        ▪ Leadership challenges     Power Point Slides
           in nonprofit             ▪ Nonprofit organizations
          organizations             ▪ Why small nonprofits fail in achieving
                                      their mission
                                    ▪ Leadership challenges in nonprofit
                                      organizations
                                    ▪ The independent sector
                                    Videos
                                    www.youtube.com/watch?v=bfAzi6D5Fp
                                    M
  11    ▪ Managing mission,         Chapter 3 of course text                   ▪ Discussion #2 – Why
          strategy, and financial   Canvas (Supplemental Materials folder)       nonprofits do not
          leadership                ▪ Success by 6 Strategic Plan                engage in strategic
                                    ▪ AISD Strategic Plan                        planning (available
                                    Power Point slides                           6/11 – 6/14)
                                    ▪ Strategic planning process
                                    ▪ Financial policies
  16    ▪ Understanding the         Chapter 7 (pp. 267 – 305) and Chapter 8
          budgeting process         (all) of course text
        ▪ Different types of        Power Point slides
           budgets                  ▪ Financial reports and ratios
        ▪ Developing financial      ▪ Developing operating and cash budgets
           reports
                                                   11


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
 Date              Topic                               Readings                       Assignment(s)
  18  Lab Day                       Instructor check-in (Zoom), protected time
                                    to work on class assignments
  23  ▪ Understanding financial     Chapter 6 of course text                   ▪ If a Form 990 could
        accounting basics and       Canvas (Supplemental Materials folder)        talk – the case of
        financial statements        ▪ World Wildlife Fund consolidated            Southwest Key
                                       financial statements                       Programs, Inc.
                                    ▪ Wonders and Worries Form 990
                                    ▪ Southwest Key Form 990
                                    ▪ Meals on Wheels America financial
                                       statements
                                    ▪ Meals on Wheels Central Texas financial
                                       statements
                                    Power Point Slides
                                    ▪ Accounting basics
                                    ▪ IRS Forms 990, 990-EZ, and 990-N
  25  ▪ Continuation of topics      See block immediately above                ▪ Creating a
        from June 23                                                             nonprofit budget
  30  ▪ Developing financial        Chapter 5 of course text
        policies and procedures
 July
   2  ▪ Managing structure,         Chapter 4 of course text
        accountability, and
        ethics
   7  Lab Day                       Instructor check-in (Zoom), protected time
                                    to work on class assignments
   9  ▪ Managing risks and          Chapter 10 of course text                  ▪ Creating a cash flow
         liabilities, legal issues, Canvas (Supplemental Materials folder)       budget report
         and human resources        ▪ Summary of Principles of Good
                                      Governance and Ethical Practice
                                    ▪ Impact of failure to complete single
                                      agency audit
                                    ▪ Farewell letter
                                    Power Point Slides
                                    ▪ Audits
                                    ▪ Fall from grace
                                    On-line resources
                                    www.charitynavigator.org
                                    https://independentsector.org/programs/
                                    principles-for-good-governance-and-
                                    ethical-practice/
  14  Continuation of topics        See block immediately above                ▪ Discussion #3 -Need
      from July 9                                                                for a nonprofit agency
                                                                                 audit (available 7/14 –
                                                                                 7/17)
                                                    12


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
 Date               Topic                             Readings                       Assignment(s)
  16     ▪ Sources of nonprofit      Canvas (Supplemental Materials folder)     ▪ Non-profit revenue
            revenues                 • Ten Nonprofit funding models               exercise
         ▪ Nonprofit revenue         • Nonprofits’ many roads to revenue
           strategies                  generation
                                     Power Point Slides
                                     ▪ Understanding nonprofit revenues
                                     ▪ Earned income myths
                                     ▪ Operating reserve
  21     Lab Day                     Instructor check-in (Zoom), protected time
                                     to work on class assignments
  23     ▪ Special topic in NP       No readings                                ▪ Understanding
           financial management                                                   nonprofit agency
          (to be announced)                                                       audits
  28     ▪ Last day of class         Power Point Slides                         ▪ Financial analysis
         ▪ Nonprofit sector          ▪ Nonprofit forecast                         and sustainability
           financial forecast                                                     plan (written report +
         ▪ My biggest takeaway                                                    supporting
           from this class                                                        documents)
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Additional readings
Alexander, J. (2018). Financial planning & analysis and performance management. Hoboken, NJ:
  Wiley.
Batts, M.E. (2017). Nonprofit financial management oversight: The concise and complete guide
   for boards and finance committees. Orlando, FL: Accountability Press in cooperation with
  Batts, Morrison, Wales, and Lee Certified Public Accountants.
Bragg, S.M. (2020). Nonprofit accounting: A practitioner’s guide (3rd edition). Centennial, CO:
  Accounting Tools.
Bryson, J.M. (2018). Strategic planning for public and nonprofit organizations: A guide to
  strengthening organizational achievement (5th edition). Hoboken, NJ. Wiley.
Estrada, E. (2019). Understanding nonprofit law and finance: Forty-eight principles for
  philanthropic leaders. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Freeman, R.J., Shoulders, G.D., McSwain, D.N. & Scott, R.B. (2017). Governmental and
  nonprofit accounting (11th edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson.
Gross, M.J., McCarthy, J.H., & Shelmon, N.E. (2010). Financial and accounting guide for not-
  for-profit organizations (7th edition with 2010 cumulative updates). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
                                                   13


SW SWN393T29
Summer 2020
Hutchinson, K. (2016). Survive and thrive: Three steps to securing your program’s sustainability.
    Ottawa, Canada: National Library of Canada.
Ittelson, T. (2020). Financial Statements, Third Edition: A Step-by-Step Guide to Understanding
   and Creating Financial Reports (3rd edition). Newburyport, MA: Red Wheel/Weiser.
Lang, A. (2017). How to Read Nonprofit Financial Statements. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Larkin, R.F., & DiTommaso, M. (2019). Interpretation and application of Generally Accepted
   Accounting Principles. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Martin, L.L. (2016). Financial management for human service administrators. Long Grove, IL:
     Waveland Press.
McLaughlin, T. (2016). Streetsmart financial basics for nonprofit managers (4th edition).
    Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
Nowicki, M. (2017). Introduction to the financial management of healthcare organizations.
    Chicago, IL: Health Administration Press.
Valcik, N.A. (2016). Strategic planning and decision-making for public and nonprofit
    organizations. Washington, DC: American Society for Public Administration.
                                                 14
