                                   Audience Development and Engagement
                                                       Spring 2020
 Class Meets: Tuesdays | 9:30 – 12:30 | BMC 4.206 classroom AND CMA 6.154 lab
  Instructor: Prof. Erin Reilly                                Office: BMC 4.368
  Email: ebreilly@utexas.edu                                   Erin’s Office hours: By Appointment.
  Phone: 207-251-1617                                          To avoid the back and forth of finding a time to meet.
                                                               (https://calendly.com/ebreilly)
  TA: Jeongmin Ham                                             Jeongmin’s Office: BMC 4th floor
  Email: jham112@utexas.edu                                    Office hours: By appointment
  Lab TA: Jesse Easdon                                         Lab: CMA 6.154
  Email: easdonj@utexas.edu
                                                               Lab is open the following hours:
  Undergraduate Lab Manager: Joshua Ramirez                        Mon: 11:30 AM – 2:00 PM
                                                                   Wed: 11:30 AM – 4:00 PM
  Email: joshramirez@utexas.edu
                                                                   Tues / Thurs: 6:30 - 9:00 PM
                                                                   Fridays 11:00 AM – 4:00 PM
 Jeongmin Ham is my TA who is your first point of contact for questions about assignments or your grades.
 Jesse Easdon is my TA who is working on TXI Client projects and responsible for my lab. He is here to help you learn
 any of the tools necessary to be successful in immersive.
 Joshua Ramirez is my Undergraduate Lab Manager who organizes the monthly Moody Meetups and is an
 approachable, near-peer mentor whose purpose is to help you learn during and outside of class. Joshua will often
 be the first person you contact if you have questions about demo / lab assignments. I encourage you to take
 advantage of his time during Lab hours (Mon-Thurs above).
                                            Course Description
Course Description:
Traditionally, audiences for content were broken up into four simple quadrants – male, female, young and old – but
now it’s possible to develop much more nuanced audience models based on the users’ intention, expectation,
interaction and relationship to the space. Rather than the “blunt instrument” of who is accessing the content,
content producers and advertisers can now gain a better understanding of why people are accessing and
participating in content that is experiential and offer better opportunities to deepen the users’ engagement.
In this course, students will be introduced to the latest thinking on better understanding audiences wants, needs,
emotions and motivations, practice new approaches and tools through hands-on activities to energize your brain
and mobilize creativity in understanding audiences in different spaces and develop engagement strategies in ways
that prove valuable to content creators, marketers and audiences.
 What will I learn?
 Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
                                                                1


    •   Positive attitude
    •   Team collaboration
    •   Thinking skills (develop observation skills, convergent and divergent thinking and new ways to
        identify patterns)
    •   Self-management
Learning Outcomes
     1.  Expose students to real-world challenges facing the media industries
     2.  Introduce students to different models to leverage engagement
     3.  Encourage students to use ethnographic research methods to measure and collect data
     4.  Understand audience’s intention, expectation, interaction and relationship to space in developing
         immersive experiences.
     5. Design immersive spaces related to audience engagement
How will I learn?
     •   Writing Assignments                                          •   Field Trip
     •   Lectures                                                     •   Hands-on Activities
     •   Demos & Discussions                                          •   Final Team Projects
Pre-requisites for the course:
If you are a SRS student: ADV 325 (Intro to Creative Advertising). If you are a Non-SRS student, comparable pre-
requisite has to be approved by Professor Reilly.
How to succeed in this course:
My role is to be a “guide on the side”… to help you acquire the skills needed to succeed as a strategist /
engagement expert.
Your role is to show up, be present, have a willingness to learn, do good work and accept constructive feedback
from myself and your peers.
                        Overall, let’s have some fun …we’re talking about our passions after all!
                                          Course Requirements
Required Book
     1. Frank Rose. The Art of Immersion (New York: W.W. Norton & Company, Inc., 2011)
Recommended Books
    1. Dave Gray, Sunni Brown, and James Macanufo. Gamestorming: A Playbook for Innovators, Rulebreakers, and
        Changemakers (California: O’Reilly, 2010)
    2. Carolyn Handler Miller. Digital Storytelling 4th Edition: A creator’s guide to interactive entertainment (New
        York: Taylor & Francis Group CRS Press, 2020)
    3. Penelope Muse Abernathy and JoAnn Sciarrino. The Strategic Digital Media Entrepreneur (New Jersey: John
        Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2019)
    4. Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green. Spreadable Media: Creating Meaning and Value in a Networked
        Culture (New York: New York University Press, 2013)
I will post additional required readings to the class website at Canvas. These readings will be book chapters and
mainstream publications, such as newspapers and magazines, that help shed contemporary light on issues
                                                               2


discussed in this course.
Required Devices
Computer, ability to record and edit videos.
Classroom expectations
Class attendance
Attendance is required at all class, presentation and team meetings. We may also have a few meetings that are off
site and/or outside the scheduled class time. There will be no excused absences. Failure to attend any of these
meetings will affect your grade and could reduce your final grade by as much as two letter grades. Attendance
means showing up to the class, participating in the activities or meeting on time. Habitual lateness will affect your
grade.
Class participation
Teamwork: This course is primarily structured around teamwork. You will be randomly assigned to a team and a
group, and the bulk of your work in the course will be carried out and evaluated based on these collaborations and
the individual work you do within the group. Teams will consist of varying personalities, skills and interests and you
must find a way to manage these differences. The ability to cooperate, to communicate and to work effectively is
essential to creating successful strategies and creative briefs, both in this class and in the real world. Once students
have been assigned to teams, I will not adjust the membership of these teams. Although I don’t anticipate any
problems, if issues do arise I expect you to resolve them yourselves, just as you would in a real-world job situation.
Deadlines: This class simulates the real world, and in the real world, deadlines are non-negotiable. All assignments
must be handed in on time. Late assignments or projects will not be accepted and you will not earn any points (i.e.
you will receive a grade of 0) for that assignment. The usual litany of excuses (I slept through my alarm, I missed the
bus, I have a cold, my grandmother died) won’t work. In the real world, failure to meet a deadline could result in
you losing your job. Now is the time to practice time management and adherence to deadlines.
Time management: This course is very demanding on your time. Your teammates in this class will judge you on
how much, and the quality of, work you contribute to your class project. Do not lose track of what is most
important.
Communication: The primary way I will communicate with you outside of class is through Canvas. You are
responsible for making sure you get any messages from me and you are responsible for the content of those
announcements. I may notify you via Canvas Announcements about a change in meeting times or assignment
deadlines. Failure to check your Canvas and the Discord Server does not excuse you from meeting the
responsibilities outlined in the message. At a minimum, you should check both of these once every day.
Plagiarism: Everything you produce in this class must be your original work. If you have help from anyone outside
this class it will be considered a breach of UT’s policy on Scholastic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
Assignments
Readings / Quizzes | 10% | 100 Pts Each for 500 Pts
    • Required Text: The Art of Immersion (100 pts)
             • Due Week 11: Have completed reading book and Submit 3 questions for Frank Rose conversation
    •   Engaging Cities White Paper & QUIZ (100 pts)
             • Due Week 2
    •   Chapter 6 of The Strategic Digital Media Entrepreneur (Abernathy & Sciarrino, 2019) (100 pts)
             • Due Week 5
                                                               3


   •    Digital Storytelling, 4th Edition by Carolyn Handler Miller 2020 & QUIZ (100 pts)
             • Chapter 3: Interactivity and its Effects
             • Chapter 7: Your Audience
             • Due Week 8
Participation in Class / Activities | 10% | 10 Pts each week for 150 Pts
Participation in this class is critical. The following activities are actual hands-on activities used by professional
experience designers who are working to innovate and make change. These should be considered part of your
Experience Designer Toolkit going forward.
   • 7 P’s (30 minutes)
   • Affinity Mapping (60 minutes)
   • Bodystorming (90 minutes)
   • Affinity Map (60 minutes)
   • Map Digital Media Value Offering (60 minutes)
   • Design the Box (180 minutes)
   • Force Field Analysis (60 minutes)
Type of Space Team Projects
        Understanding Roles (15%) | 100 Pts each for 300 Pts
        There are three projects spread out across the initial 9 weeks of this course. You will rotate across these 3
        roles for each project. You will take on one role for each project. This will give you a chance to learn
        different roles and practice varied identities within a team. By rotating roles over 3 projects, you will be
        better prepared to know what role you like and how to communicate and work within a larger team for the
        final project.
        These roles are:
             1. Writer – developing the crux of the story
             2. Researcher – collecting data to back the story
             3. Designer – making it presentation ready
        The goal is for you to practice each role, getting familiar with what is required from different people on a
        team and discovering what area you prefer and what area you excel at… sometimes these are not always
        the same. It also helps to ensure that the entire team is vested in all the work and not only one particular
        strand or outcome. It also will help you do your best in each role, knowing that the next person on your
        team will take over from where you left off. You wouldn’t want to take over sub-par work so it holds each of
        you accountable.
        Deadlines for Self-Assessment & Peer Review due every time switch roles:
             • 1st Role Week 4 (Release Week 3)
             • 2nd Role Week 5 (Release Week 4)
             • 3rd Role Week 11 (Release Week 10)
        Understanding Intention of Audience Profile | 10% | 100 Pts
        Based on your qualitative research you will develop a PDF to include a cover sheet with your team, an
        Empathy map, 3-page report defining your audience’s intentions in the space in relation to a particular
        emerging technology, referencing your case study as necessary. Appendices should include location photos
        and the 6 transcribed and coded interviews with link to the actual Mp4 video footage. I would recommend
                                                                   4


      you transcribe these yourself to learn the content better. The 6 interviews your team will conduct need to
      be recorded videos whether they are in person in the field or over video conferencing. It’s better to conduct
      these in the field in the particular space you’re studying offering you opportunities to collect data from a
      more varied audience. Don’t just interview your friends or people your age.
          •    Part 1 -- Week 3 Deadline: Interview template, Summary of Case Study, DRAFT Empathy Map (10
               Pts) – Jeongmin / Progress
          •    Part II – Week 4 Deadline: 6 Interviews, Coding System for your team (10 Pts) – Jeongmin / Progress
          •    Part III – Week 5 Deadline: Type of Space Team Homework Understanding Intention of Audience
               Profile PDF (80 Pts) – Erin Rubric / Jeongmin Grade
      Understanding Intention of Space | 20% | 300 Pts
      The BOX project has teams participate in multiple in-classroom activities to create and revise a physical
      “box” that considers the importance of functionality issues while also addressing cultural trends that
      warrant audience experts to consider higher-order value in the design of an experience.
      This project has the Type of Space team switch roles for the last time and offer the following deliverable:
          • DESIGNER: Final BOX, help with design of presentation and binder
          • RESEARCHER: Combine into a binder a combination of all your Field Notes and Data for the semester
               working as a team. This should include:
                   • Understanding Intention of Audience Profile (PDF developed and due WEEK 5)
                   • Your Team’s Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Studies (Individual work due
                         WEEK 8)
                   • Notes and Data from the two BOX activities and the Forced Field Analysis activity
                   • Summary to explain how the team used each activity to learn about their audience + type
                         of space + emerging technologies.
          • WRITER: Presentation content that offers an Executive Summary of your Type of Space’s (work to
               date) to support the culminating BOX experience pitch.
      Part 1 – Week 9: 100 Pts for Box; 100 Pts for Binder; 100 Pts for Presentation
Type of Space Individual Project
      Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Study | 15% | 100 Pts
      The goal is for weeks 5, 6 and 7 is for each student to play with a game, interactive story or immersive
      experience and develop a case study showing you understand the audience’s expectations and interaction
      with chosen experience.
               What is a Case Study? A case study is like looking down through a magnifying glass at one flower.
               You focus in on one experience in particular, telling the story of how the audience benefits from
               using its application, service, product or platform. The focus is on the experience (what worked,
               what didn’t). The message is from the user’s point of view. Roughly 2-3 pages or 1500 words max.
               The format is slick …I’m expecting a PDF with photos or embedded video.
      Continue to return to the demo over the 3 weeks identifying what the user brings to the experience, how the
      experience will be perceived and the quality of the interactions and how it greatly impacts the user’s
      experience. This experience does not need to be within your Thematic Group space nor your Type of Space
      team you’ve been working with so far. However, whatever experience you choose, you must offer in the
      case study how its key affordances can be applied to your Type of Space. The goal is to nurture others to
      learn more about how it impacts your Thematic Group’s space. It doesn’t need to have been built for “said
      space,” but your case study should end with take-aways and what you can or cannot apply to your Thematic
                                                               5


        Group’s space. The classroom presentation material and activities all apply to building out a strong case
        study and should give you frameworks and language to develop this.
        GRADING
            • Part 1 -- Week 7: Digital Media Value Offering map of experience (10 Pts)
            • Part 2 – Week 8: Individual Case Study (90 Pts)
Individual Project for Grad Students ONLY | Thematic Group Progress Report | 5% | 100 Pts
Return to the 7 Ps Activity from week 1 and overall offer a progress report for your Thematic Group. What is the
current status and where does your group go from here as we move into the next part of the course? Take the
information from the Affinity Map activity today and summarize the progress of your Thematic Group. In thinking
about Intention of Audience, pull out the commonalities and differences discovered. Share the different emerging
technologies that have been used in this space and identified through the 4 case studies shared.
        Grading
            •   Week 6
Final Group Project | 20% | 300 Pts
This course is the first in a series of courses to specialize in the field of Immersive. Throughout this semester, you
will be broken into 4 Thematic Groups exploring 4 Types of Spaces related to how an audience engages with these
spaces and their association to utilizing emerging technologies. You will be with this same group of 12 throughout
the semester.
The Thematic groups are:
   • Retail
            • Local Boutique
            • Pop-Up
            • Supermarket
            • Department Store
   • Workplace
            • Office
            • Café
            • Co-Working Environment
            • On-Location
   • Public Space
            • Park
            • Public Transportation (Airport / Train Station / Bus Stop)
            • Library
            • Street / Plaza
   • Home
            • Bedroom
            • Living Room
            • Kitchen
            • Bathroom
Each Thematic Space has 12 students working on applied research to develop a deeper understanding of an
audience in a particular space with an eye towards how technology is impacting that space. Under each Thematic
Space are 4 types of spaces to understand audience’s intention, expectation, interaction and relationship to the
                                                                  6


space. Your goal is to work together (all 12 of you) to synthesize and combine your information starting Week 10 in
development of the Final Project.
Your Group’s Deliverable will include
    1. White Paper that addresses the formula: Audience + Space + Emerging Technology (100 Pts)
         What is a white paper? A white paper is a persuasive essay that uses facts and logic to promote a
         certain product, service, or viewpoint. With this particular white paper, your group’s goal is to
         persuade me on the importance of creating immersive experiences for a particular audience in the
         particular space assigned. Always keep this formula in mind in developing this white paper =
         Audience + Space + Emerging Technologies.
    2. Complementary Multimedia Website (100 Pts)
What should my group include in the website?
   • The website will have links to any of the case studies written throughout the semester by students in your
        group. This could include the 4 case studies from Project X, or any of the case studies from Project
        Y. Someone on your team should review and edit them for consistency of voice, and another team member
        should take the information and have them designed in the same format so they are made to look like a
        collection.
   • Your website should include multimedia. It must be visually appealing and complementary to the TXI
        branding (include having UT Moody / TXI logos on footer)
   • There should be a highlighted section that offers a Future Forecast of Audience + Space + Emerging
        Technologies by mapping the space, offering recommendations based on the examples provided in the
        Midterm project white papers.
            • Describe this space
            • Offer an overview of Audience’s intention, expectations, interactions and relationship to space
            • Explain how emerging technologies are currently being used in this space
            • What are near-term opportunities to engage an audience with this space with particular types of
                 emerging technologies?
            • Based on the data you’ve collected, offer a future forecast by considering the following
                     • The date you’ve collected
                     • Quotes from Expert Opinion
                     • Patterns from your data in the audience’s use thus far
                     • Causal - What could be a turning point in the demand of using X technology for audience in
                         this space?
            • Offer an “On Spec” example that highlights your group’s recommendations
Roles for the Final Project (100 PTS)
The Final Project will have us define roles again. Each of you have had a chance to try on different roles during the
Midterm Project. Now, choose the role you’d like to do to complete the Final Project. This is a bigger project, so
new roles have been added. If more than one person wants to do the same job, they must interview with the
Producer and Director who will make the decision.
Each team of 12 will need the following:
(note: if you have less than 12 students, the roles that have more than 1 will be reduced)
   • Producer (1) -- plan and coordinate various aspects of your group’s production, such as finalizing the
        content; coordinating writing, directing, and editing; and arranging financing. You and the Creative Director
        should be joined at the hip and have a shared vision as to what the end product will look like.
   • Creative Director (1) -- oversee the creative process and give guidance to the creative people that work
        under them.
   • Researchers (2) -- responsible for collecting, organizing, and analyzing qualitative data to identify audience,
        explore issues, and predict trends.
                                                               7


    •     Writers (4) – produce content based on activities in class and qualitative research conducted.
    •     Designers (2) -- Illustrates concept by designing layout of art and copy regarding arrangement, size, type
          size and style, and related aesthetic concepts. Develop visualizations and offer sketches as needed.
    •     Developer (1) – build website using basic coding practices such as HTML / CSS.
    •     Multimedia Artist (1) – create videos, models as needed to shape the story of your group.
You will peer review your entire group as part of your grade.
All Due Week 15
    • White Paper (100 Pts)
    • Multimedia Website (100 Pts)
    • Self-Assessment / Peer Review (100 Pts)
Grading for this Course
The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to
which you have done so.
 Assignments                                                         Points possible            Percent of Total Grade
  1. R e a d i n g s / Q u i z z e s                                  100 Pts Each for 400 Pts            10 %
  2. P a r t i c i p a t i o n i n C l a s s / A c t i v i t i e s     10 Pts Each for 150 Pts            10 %
  3. Type of Space Team Project | Understanding Roles                 100 Pts Each for 300 Pts            15 %
  4. Understanding Intention of Audience Profile                               100 Pts                    10 %
  5. Understanding Intention of Space                                          300 Pts                    20 %
  6. Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Study                        100 Pts                    15 %
  7. Final Group Project                                                        300 Pts                    20 %
 ** Grad Students ONLY | Thematic Group Report **                              100 Pts
                                                                     1650 (Grad Students 1750)           100%
Course Schedule: A Weekly Breakdown
      All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
      https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
      Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
      note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
      much advanced notice as possible).
Bringing to an Experience – Intention (Weeks 1-4)
Reasons why a user embarks on an experience
Week 1 | Jan 21, 2020
    • Review Course: Audience Engagement (45 Minutes)
    •     Technologies of Change Presentation (30 Minutes)
    •     Activity: 7 P’s & Affinity Mapping (60 minutes)
                                                                   8


          o  Goal of this activity is to have students get to know each other by learning the importance of
             generating multiple data points and learn the quality of sorting to help with identifying insights
             through relationship finding.
  •  Homework
          o Read Engaging Cities White Paper and take QUIZ by 9 AM on Jan 28th
          o  Begin your 1 st Team Project: Understanding Intention of Audience Profile
          o  Begin Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 1)
Week 2 | Jan 28, 2020
  • DUE: Read White Paper, Post Photos of your Type of Space observation in your shared Team Folder.
     Bring props to class!
  •  Audience Intention Presentation (45 minutes)
  •  Activity: Bodystorming (90 minutes)
          o Goal of this activity is to have students step out of the typical sitting at a tabl e mode of
             thinking and learn “Bodystorming,” an improv technique used to understand audience.
  •  Homework: CONTINUE WORKING ON 1 st Team Project: Understanding Intention of Audience Profile
          o Individual assignments this week:
                  ▪ Researcher: Using examples shared in class as a model for qualitative research, create
                     your interview template to use in the field. Submit this by EOD Saturday, February 1 st
                     for Professor Reilly to edit and offer feedback for final.
                  ▪  Writer: Considering the Type of Space your team is exploring and its relation to
                     emerging technologies – identify and share with your team 1 Case Study that offers a
                     deep understanding through multiple data sources to explain, explore, or describe the
                     type of space. Write 1 page summary of Case Study found synthesizing your
                     discoveries. Include:
                         • In what ways is the audiences intentions being addressed in this case study?
                              (reference wants, needs, emotions, motivations from Week 2’s Presentation)
                         • Which Experience Mode does this case study represent? (reference Gensler’s
                              Experience Modes from Week 1’s Presentation)
                         • Is this emerging technology common, welcoming, novel, not right for this space?
                              Why or why not?
                  ▪  Designer: With your team’s on-location observation photos from the team,
                     bodystorming recorded video, thematic group’s discussion from today’s activity and the
                     case study your writer is working on …develop a DRAFT Empathy Map as a way to
                     begin to develop a user profile.
          o  As a team this week:
                  ▪ Share your work as you complete it with others on your team. Poke holes at each
                     other’s work so that each team member can edit their work and the team is ensured
                     that it is quality.
          o  Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 2)
                                                          9


Week 3 | Feb 4, 2020
  • DUE: Interview template, Summary of Case Study, DRAFT Empathy Map
  •  Context Matters Presentation (45 minutes)
  •  Guest Speaker: Chiara Adin, N/A Collective (Share Jaybird Case Study) (60 minutes)
  •  Released early to go work on your project OR Individual Check-ins as Needed
          o Make an Appt w Professor or TA
  •  Homework: CONTINUE WORKING ON 1 st Team Project: Understanding Intention of Audience Profile
          o As a team this week:
                 ▪ Each of you should Interview 2 people for a total of 6 people in the Type of Space
                     you’re studying.
                 ▪ Get together and share the data. Compare notes and develop a coding system.
                     In qualitative research, coding is “how you define what the data you are analyzing are
                     about” (Gibbs, 2007). Coding is a process of identifying a passage in the text or other data
                     items (photograph, image), searching and identifying concepts and finding relations
                     between them. One image or text can have multiple codes. You can do this manually with
                     highlighters, post-its, pen and paper.
          o  Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 3)
Week 4 | Feb 11, 2020
  o DUE: 6 Interviews, Coding System for your team
  o  Guest Speaker: Felipe Velosa,Director of Digital Platforms for Resideo
  o  Production! Work within your Team to refine and complete your 1 st Team Project: Understanding
     Intention of Audience Profile
          o  SWITCH Individual assignments:
                 ▪ Researcher: Take the agreed upon coding system from your team and code the 6
                     interviews. The goal with this coding is to identify within your data the audience’s
                     intention outlining the reasons why a user embarks on an experience.
                 ▪   Writer: In collaboration with the Researcher, summarize the findings into a 1-2 page
                     report.
                 ▪   Designer: Finalize the look and feel of your Team’s Case Study, and return to your
                     team’s Empathy Map to finalize the user profile based on new information from the
                     interviews.
  •  Homework: FINALIZE 1 st Team Project: Understanding Intention of Audience Profile
          o Deliverable is due next week! Final PDF should include a cover sheet with your team, an
             Empathy map, 3-page report defining your audience’s intentions in the space in relation to a
             particular emerging technology, referencing your case study as necessary. Appendices should
             include location photos and the 6 coded interviews.
          o  Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 4)
                                                            10


Bringing to an Experience -- Expectation (Weeks 5 & 6)
What the user brings to the experience / How the experience will be perceived
Week 5 | Feb 18, 2020
   • DUE: Type of Space Team Homework Understanding Intention of Audience Profile PDF
   •   Audience Expectation Presentation (45 minutes)
   •   Activity: Affinity Map (60 minutes)
           o Goal of this activity is to get together with your Thematic Groups, share the knowledge each of
               you know individually to collectively gain a better sense of the big picture and respond
               proactively to the overall landscape of their space and how it interacts with audience and
               technology.
   •   Review Individual Project: Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Study (15 minutes)
           o Goal is for each student to play with a game, interactive story or immersive experience. You need to
               keep coming back to it over the 3 weeks identifying what the user brings to the experience, how
               the experience will be perceived and the quality of the interactions and how it greatly impacts
               the user’s experience.
   •   Homework
           o Grad Students | Thematic Group Progress Report
                   ▪ Having participating in the Affinity Mapping activity in class, return to the 7 Ps Activity
                        from week 1 and offer an overall progress report for your Thematic Group.
           o   Begin working on Individual Project: Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Study
                   ▪ Visit the Imagine Lab (CMA 6.154), look at resources such as Lab Demos …choose your
                        experience and begin playing.
           o   Read Chapter 6 of The Strategic Digital Media Entrepreneur (Abernathy & Sciarrino, 2019)
           o   Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 5)
Week 6 | Feb 25, 2020
   • DUE:
           o Grad Students Progress Report
           o Everyone -- Write chosen experience with link in SHARED EXCEL SHEET:
               https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1NPsvaDp6b1qv_QZ-
               8NIm5qvMRGBV9UTdCxfCmc1XcFs/edit?usp=sharing
   •   The Importance of Value Presentation (45 minutes)
   •   Watch Video: Bernie Su’s keynote from D3 2019 (45 minutes)
   •   Activity: Map Digital Media Value Offering for ArtificialNext (60 minutes)
           o Goal of this activity is to have students learn how to develop a value proposition that is
               connected to the audience’s wants, needs, emotions and motivations and is warra nted by the
               space (product, service, experience) at hand.
   •   Homework:
           o Individual Project: Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Study
                                                           11


                    ▪   Play with your experience
                    ▪   Using the model shared in class, map the Digital Media Value Offering for your
                        experience
           o   Read Chapter 3: Interactivity and its Effects (Digital Storytelling, 4 th Edition by Carolyn
               Handler Miller 2020)
           o   Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 6)
During an Experience -- Interaction (Week 7)
Quality of the interactions greatly impacts the users experience
Week 7 | March 3, 2020
  • DUE: Digital Media Value Offering map of experience
  •    Field Trip: The Amazing Capital Quest by AR Adventures
       (Explores tourists / citizens + public space + augmented reality)
           o Details
                    o Meet at 10am
                    o Experience costs $19.99 (Venmo today to Professor Reilly)
                    o We will be done by 12 pm to make it to your next class.
           o Discussion at end of Field Trip
  •    Homework
           o Complete Individual Project: Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Study.
           o   Read Chapter 7: Your Audience (Digital Storytelling, 4 th Edition by Carolyn Handler Miller
               2020)
           o   Take QUIZ by 9 AM on March 10th on Chapter 3 and 7 of Digital Storytelling, 4 th Edition
           o   Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 7)
During an Experience -- Intention of Space (Weeks 8-10)
Quality of the space greatly impacts the user from functional issues to higher -order items
Week 8 | March 10, 2020
  • DUE: Individual Project: Understanding Expectation & Interaction Case Study
  •    Functionality Matters Presentation (45 minutes)
  •    Activity: Design the BOX (90 minutes)
           o Goal of this activity is to have teams create a physical “box” that enhances the proposed
               experience but considers the importance of functionality issues outlined in the presentation.
  •    Homework: Enjoy Spring Break!
           o Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 8 through 10)
                                                             12


Week 9 | March 24, 2020
  • DUE: Bring your boxes back to class!!!
  •  Understanding Change in Markets Presentation (45 minutes)
  •  Activity 1: Force Field Analysis (60 minutes)
         o Goal is to evaluate the forces that affect change in your particular Thematic Space which can
             ultimately affect the idea you propose. Make a deliberate effort to see the system surrounding
             change to help your team steer the change in the direction you pro pose in your Box idea.
  •  Creating Higher-Order Value Presentation (45 minutes)
  •  Activity 2: Enhance the BOX (60 minutes)
         o Goal of this in-class activity is to return to “The Box” and define it’s higher-order value by
             reflecting on the cultural shifts of 2020 (ie: change) and taking the last activity’s findings into
             account in the redesign. By achieving this goal, your team will walk into the Final Project as
             experts of your particular type of space.
  •  Homework:
         o Deliverable is due next week! As a team this week: Complete your Type of Space Box and
             prepare presentation. This is your last time to SWITCH Individual assignments and had an
             opportunity to try one each role. You are all responsible for the presentation and
             complementary binder of your team’s work to date but this is the breakdown of role
             responsibilities:
                  ▪ DESIGNER: Final BOX
                  ▪ RESEARCHER: Binder that combines your team’s Field Notes and Data for the semester.
                  ▪ WRITER: Presentation that offers an Executive Summary of your Type of Space’s (work
                      to date) to support the culminating BOX experience pitch.
         o   Keep Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Chapter 11)
Week 10 | March 31, 2020
  • DUE: Type of Space Team Presentations!
  •  Box Presentations from the Type of Space Teams (75 minutes)
         o 16 Student Teams will have 4 minutes to present.
  •  Final Project Review (45 minutes)
     Throughout this semester, you have been in 4 Thematic Groups exploring 4 Types of Spaces related to how
     an audience engages with these spaces and their association to utilizing emerging technologies. Each
     Thematic Space has 12 students working on applied research to develop a deeper understanding of an
     audience in a particular space with an eye towards how technology is impacting that space. Under each
     Thematic Space are 4 types of spaces to understand audience’s intention, expectation, interaction and
     relationship to the space. Your goal is to work together (all 12 of you) for the rest of the semester to
     synthesize and combine your information in a Final Project.
  •  Activity: 7 P’s (30 minutes)
         o Goal of this activity is to learn the importance of generating multiple data points and learn the
             quality of sorting to help with identifying insights through relationship finding.
                                                           13


  •    Homework:
           o Complete Reading Required Text: The Art of Immersion (Ch 12 and 13)
                   ▪ Develop 3 questions for Frank Rose
Audience + Space + Technology Final Project (Weeks 11-15)
Quality of the space greatly impacts the user from functional issues to higher-order items
Week 11 | Apr 7, 2020
  • DUE: Submit 3 questions for Frank Rose conversation
  •    Choose 2 students randomly to lead the interview with Frank Rose
  •    Final Project Production
           o Producer / Creative Director do check-ins with each team.
           o Teams should be working on their parts.
Week 12 | Apr 14, 2020
  • Guest Speaker: Frank Rose (Author of The Art of Immersion) (60 minutes)
  •    Final Project Production (90 minutes)
           o Producer / Creative Director do check-ins with each team. Teams should be working on their
               parts.
Week 13 | Apr 21, 2020
  • Final Project Production
           o Producer / Creative Director do check-ins with each team. Teams should be working on their
               parts.
Week 14 | Apr 28, 2020
  • Final Project Production
           o Producer / Creative Director do check-ins with each team. Teams should be working on their
               parts.
Week 15 | May 5, 2020
  • 4 Thematic Groups present their Final Projects (30 minutes each)
                                                         14


                                                     Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also
encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I
am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Attendance and Professionalism
Attendance at all classes and meetings is required. It is also assumed that students will be active participants in
class. Simply being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be engaged and involved scholars.
Participation – not just attendance – is integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to you earning a high grade.
Active participation means contributing to the discussion, listening to what your colleagues have to say and
engaging with the readings and in-class activities. It means showing up on time, not checking Facebook or email on
your computer, not texting on your phone. NOTE that if you do not participate in class discussions, you will not earn
full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
Peer Evaluations
You will be asked to provide an assessment of your and your teammates' contributions to the different group
projects. They will be taken into account in assignment of grades.
Grading System:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s provost office
(http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/). Advertising and PR majors are required to have a
minimum grade of C in all communication courses and in all required and elective courses in order to continue in
the program.
NOTES on Grading:
    • Late work is not accepted.
    • I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6% that translates into a B+ and
        will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
    • Any questions or comments about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7) days after the grade
        is announced or posted.
    • When I grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the work and the
        accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100 points and then lose them
        based on mistakes you make. Your final points represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the
        number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
Absences
The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating circumstances due
to an emergency. You will be given attendance/participation credit for any session that you miss that is
documented to the teaching team in writing by a medical doctor’s statement, or an official statement from a UT
faculty member about an ensemble or other organization’s off-campus commitment. NO OTHER ABSENCES WILL BE
EXCUSED.
                                                               15


Student Rights & Responsibilities
    •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    •    You have a right to respect.
    •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
    •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
         excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching
         team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
    • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your
         experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
         energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
    • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
         standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
     Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
     differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities.
     Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to
     address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please
     advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
     The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
     academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that
     are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you
     will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
     You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the             University Honor Code
     which can be found at the following web address:
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
     deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q
     drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
     Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently.
     If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
     possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There
                                                                  16


      are also a range of resources on campus:
  Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
      that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to
      share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me
      know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you
      discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions.
      If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
      (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
      Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
      getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
      available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
      support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
      If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
      depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
      http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
      Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
      year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
      classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for
      more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
      visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Beha
vior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-
5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual ass
ault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT
Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. W
hen sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
          • Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
          • Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
               become involved in a Title IX investigation.
          • Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
                                                                17


Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporter
s,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Respon
sible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-
onone.
Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whe
ther they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without mak
ing an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reportin
g options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to report such
misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex,
pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and
gender expression can be reported to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
     •   Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
         The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual misconduct
         and discrimination.
             o     File a report of discrimination via online form
             o     Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
     •   Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
         The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing federal civil
         rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive federal financial assistance
         from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination covered under Title IX. Call the Office
         for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
     •   Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
         The Equal Emplloyment Opportunityy Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal laws that
         make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a protected class, including
         discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
                                                                  18
