Culture & Communication, Spring 2019
ANT 31560, 31565, 31570, 31575, 31580, 31585
LIN 40035, 40040, 40045, 40050, 40055, 40060
Lecture: Tuesday & Thursday 9:30-10:30am, ECJ 1.202
Instructor: Prof. Courtney Handman
Office: SAC 4.124
Email: chandman@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Wednesdays 1:30-3:00pm or by appointment
Discussion Section: W 8-9am, SAC 4.118 (ANT 31560/LIN 40035)
TA: Raul Martinez/Quichi Patlan
Office: SAC 5.114
Email: quichi@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Thursdays 1:30-2:30pm or by appointment
Discussion Section: M 9-10am, SAC 4.118 (ANT 31565/LIN 40040)
TA: Jordan Bowers
Office: SAC 4.166
Email: jdbowers@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Mondays 10-11am or by appointment
Discussion Section: T 3-4pm, SAC 4.118 (ANT 31570/LIN 40045)
TA: Krissy Juergensmeyer
Office: SAC 5.114
Email: kgjuerg@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesdays 11am-12pm or by appointment
Discussion Section: TH 3-4pm, SAC 4.118 (ANT 31575/LIN 40050)
TA: Jordan Bowers
Office: SAC 4.166
Email: jdbowers@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Mondays 10-11am or by appointment
Discussion Section: T 4-5pm, SAC 4.118 (ANT 31580/LIN 40055)
TA: Krissy Juergensmeyer
Office: SAC 5.114
Email: kgjuerg@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesdays 11am-12pm or by appointment
Discussion Section: TH 4-5pm, SAC 4.118 (ANT 31585/LIN 40060)
TA: Raul Martinez/Quichi Patlan
Office: SAC 5.114
Email: quichi@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Thursdays 1:30-2:30pm or by appointment
University Course Description
An introduction to the study of culture through communication and the theory of signs. May be
counted toward the cultural diversity flag requirement. Meets core curriculum requirement for
Social & Behavioral Science (I).
                                                  1


Detailed Course Description
Language is not only one of the quintessential attributes of “the human,” it plays a role in virtually
everything we do. Yet we typically do not pay much attention to what it is that language does and
how it does what it does. And when we do, language and its use in communication often appear
lacking: it is disparaged as little more than an (imperfect) reflection of reality, as a medium
incapable of adequately conveying thoughts, emotions, and experiences, or as a hollow activity
devoid of significance (“all talk and no action”).
In this course, we look at language not as an inadequate version of some more fundamental
reality, but as a medium that constitutes and mediates reality for us as cultural beings living and
acting in a social environment. Here we concentrate on two broad areas of concern: 1) language
as a medium of social action, through which humans create & transform themselves and the
world around them and 2) language as a medium of conceptualization, which provides a
privileged lens on (or even constitutes a part of) mind. Attempts to understand language as a
reflection of cognition divorced from sociocultural life and attempts to understand social life as
composed of non-conceptual, biological drives are equally limited from this perspective. The
perspective on language developed here locates language squarely in culture and society and at
the same time locates sociocultural life “in” language and communication.
Course schedule (subject to revision)
With the exception of the two book we will read, all readings and reading questions will be
available on Canvas: https://utexas.instructure.com/
Introduction: From the Picture Theory of Meaning to Performativity
Jan 22 – Language: Sound & Meaning
Jan 24 – Meaning & Social Meaning: From Constatives to Performatives
     • Kiesling: Dude
Jan 29 – Meaning & Social Meaning: How to tell a joke in Cibecue, New Mexico
     • BOOK: Basso – Portraits of The Whiteman: Linguistic Play and Cultural Symbols among
          the Western Apache. Chapters 1, 2.
Jan 31 – Meaning & Social Meaning: How to tell a joke in Cibecue, New Mexico
     • BOOK: Basso – Portraits of The Whiteman: Linguistic Play and Cultural Symbols among
          the Western Apache. Chapters 3, 4, 5.
Feb 5
     o    DOCUMENTARY: Âs Nutayuneân/We Still Live Here
2. The Social Meaning of Sounds
Feb 7 – Phonetics: The Sounds of Language
     • Ladefoged: Chapter 1 + the section “Consonant & Vowel Charts” (pp. 34-36) (from A
          Course in Phonetics)
Feb 12 – Jocks & Burnouts: Language & Identity
     • Eckert: Adolescent Social Structure & The Spread of Linguistic Change (p. 186
          “Adolescent Social Structure” through p. 207)
                                                    2


Feb 14 – Social Structure & Social Meaning: Standard Language Regimes
    • Labov: The Social Stratification of (r) in New York City Department Stores (pp. 43-57)
    • Labov: The Reflection of Social Processes in Linguistic Structures (all)
3. Language Ideologies & the Social Meaning of Linguistic Variants
Feb 19 – The Culture of Standard: Language Ideologies
    • Cameron: Dr Syntax and Mrs Grundy: the great grammar crusade
Feb 21 – Monolingualism and Its Ideologies in the US
    • BOOK: Hill: The Everyday Language of White Racism (chapters 3 & 4)
Feb 26 – Monolingualism and Its Ideologies in the US
    • BOOK: Hill: The Everyday Language of White Racism (chapters 5 & 6)
Feb 28 – The Social Meaning of Different Languages & the Concept of Registers
    • Urciuoli: The Political Topography of Bilingualism & Good English as Symbolic Capital
        (Chapters 3 & 4 in Exposing Prejudice: Puerto Rican Experiences of Language, Race,
        and Class)
Mar 5 –Language Ideologies and the invention of languages
    • Gilmore: Herodotus Revisited: Language Origins, Forbidden Experiments, New
        Languages, and Pidgins (Chapter 2 in Kisisi, Our Language: The Story of Colin and
        Sadiki)
Mar 7 – Language Shift & Language Ideologies in Papua New Guinea
    • Kulick: Anger, Gender, Language Shift
Mar 12
    o Midterm review
Mar 14
    Ø Midterm Exam
SPRING BREAK
4. The Social Life of Cultural Concepts
Mar 26 – Linguistic Categories and Thought
    • Evans – A Galapagos of Tongues
    • Whorf – Science and Linguistics
Mar 28 – Cultural Concepts, Linguistic Meaning & Institutional Authority
    • Hacking: Making Up People
    • Mehan: The Construction of an LD student: A Case Study in the Politics of
        Representation
                                                 3


5. Linguistic Action, Social Meaning, and Cultural Concepts
Apr 2 – The Structure of Texts
     • Halliday & Hasan: Introduction (from Cohesion in English)
     • Jakobson: Closing Statement - Linguistics and Poetics (pp. 350-58);
Apr 4 – The Structure of Ritual & the Performativity of Language
     • Sebeok: The Structure and Content of Cheremis Charms (Parts 1-3 and part 5; focus in
        particular on Part 3 ‘Sample Analysis’ and Part 5 ‘The Texture of a Cheremis Incantation’)
Apr 9 – The Structure of Ritual & the Performativity of Language
     • Caton: “Salaam tahiya” - Greetings from the highlands of Yemen
Apr 11 – Emergent Structure in Everyday Interaction
     • Goffman: Replies & Responses
Apr 16 – The Ritualistic Quality of Impromptu Interaction
     • Bucholtz: Word up - Social meanings of slang in California youth culture
6. Cultural concepts in circulation: intertextuality
Apr 18 – Intertextuality, the Circulation of Speech & Infinite Semiosis
     • Goodwin & Goodwin: Participation
     • Matoesian: Intertextual authority in reported speech - Production media in the Kennedy
        Smith rape trial
Apr 23 – The Intertextual “Life” of the Nation: From Jerusalem to Gettysburg to Fiji
     • Silverstein: Talking Politics (pp. 26-67)
     • Warner: Memorial Day
7. Coda: New Media and Linguistic Globalization
Apr 25 – Media, Ideologies, and Language
     • Standage: Love over the Wires
     • Gershon: Breaking up Is Hard to Do: Media Switching and Media Ideologies
Apr 30 – Globalization and Language
     • Standage: War & Peace in the Global Village
     • Cameron: Communication and Commodification: Global Economic Change in
        Sociolinguistic Perspective
May 2
     o DOCUMENTARY: Diverted to Delhi
May 7
     o Review for final
May 9
     o Review for final
May 15 – 9am-12pm
     Ø Final Exam
                                                     4


Course requirements and general policies
Required Materials — There are two books you can either purchase at the bookstore or rent as e-
copies through the university library:
Basso, Keith. 1979. Portraits of “The Whiteman:” Linguistic Play and Cultural Symbols among the
Western Apache. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hill, Jane. 2008. The Everyday Language of White Racism. London: Wiley-Blackwell.
    [Note that there is a 2009 edition and a 2008 edition in the library – either is fine. If one e-book
    is unavailable check the other.]
All other readings are available electronically through Canvas at: https://utexas.instructure.com/
Preparation, Participation & Readings — To assist your reading for each class, questions for
each reading will be posted on the Canvas website. You should use these questions to guide
your reading; they point out the particular issues and data that you need ultimately to take away
from the reading. I recommend that you do your best to answer these questions as you do the
reading before class. You are welcome to work with classmates to develop your answers to these
questions. Then, bring your answers along with the reading to the next class and to your
discussion section, where the reading will be discussed further. After the lecture and the
discussion section, you should be comfortable answering the questions on the reading.
         Most weeks at the end of your discussion section, you will have a quiz that consists of
one of the questions on the two most recent readings/lectures, including the material discussed
on quiz days. At this point, if you have done the reading, attended class, worked with classmates
to develop answers to the questions, and raised any residual questions during discussion
sections, then it should prove relatively easy to answer any of the questions from the previous
week’s readings. Some of the reading questions will also appear on midterms and finals, so you
are encouraged to retain your answers to these questions to review for these exams.
Student Evaluation — Your grade consists of four components:
          One question quizzes        30%
          Midterm                     25%
          Final                       35%
          Discussion participation 10%
          and attendance
One question quizzes: Over the course of the semester you will be quizzed on the readings to
help ensure that you are keeping up with and comprehending the material. These quizzes will
happen in your discussion sections. These quizzes will consist of one reading question selected
from the questions given out with the readings. Quizzes are closed book. You are allowed—
encouraged, in fact—to discuss the questions ahead of time with classmates and discussion
leader. Quizzes will be graded with either a check, check plus, check minus, or zero. A check is
given for responses that offer a satisfactory but not particularly developed response to the
question. A check plus is reserved for responses that are particularly thoughtful: they draw
connections to other readings or larger themes discussed in the class; they insightfully discuss
data and its relationship to the question; they outline key parts of the argument made in the
                                                   5


reading that are relevant to answering the question. A check minus is given for answers that are
not, for the most part, satisfactory but show some familiarity with the reading. A zero is given for
missed quizzes and answers that show no familiarity with the reading.
Check Plus         - A (95%)
Check              - B+ (88%)
Check Minus        - C (75%)
Zero               - F (0%)
There will be 11 quizzes over the course of the semester and your lowest quiz grade will be
dropped before calculating your final grade. Your 10 best quiz grades compose 30% of your final
grade. Each quiz will cover material from the previous two lectures (so note that people who have
their discussion section on a Monday will be quizzed on a slightly different set of material than
people who have their discussion section on a Tuesday). Please see the handout for more on
how the quiz schedule varies by discussion section.
Discussion participation and attendance: You are expected to attend all discussion sessions with
your TA. Arrive expecting to discuss the readings and the lecture. You will be evaluated based on
your ability to – minimally – show up regularly and – more importantly – participate in discussion
with thoughtful and on-point comments. Quizzes will take place in your discussion sections.
Midterm & Final Exams: There will be midterm and final exams. The midterm will be given in
class and the final will be given during the assigned final slot for our class. You should not book
tickets or make travel plans before finding out when our final exam will be held (see
http://registrar.utexas.edu/students/exams). The midterm and final will consist of multiple choice,
short answer, and analysis questions. The reading questions will form the basis for some
questions as will the material covered in lectures. We will have review classes for both exams
that will go over material from lectures that you should be prepared to answer questions on. The
best preparation for exams is to: 1) work through the reading questions in the way described
above; 2) attend lectures and take notes, paying attention not only to answering the reading
questions, but to other materials introduced in lectures that are not in the readings; 3) review your
lecture notes and discuss them with classmates; 4) raise any questions you have about lectures
during the following lecture; 5) if questions remain, raise your questions in office hours with me or
the TAs; and 6) attend the review sessions for the exams. The midterm composes 30% and the
final 30% of your final grade.
Grading scale (there is no rounding up):
92.6-100           A                                    72.6-77.4         C
90-92.5            A-                                   70-72.5           C-
87.5-89.9          B+                                   67.5-69.9         D+
82.6-87.4          B                                    62.6-67.4         D
80-82.5            B-                                   60-62.5           D-
77.5-79.9          C+                                   0-59.9            F
Make-ups & Excused Absences — The only absences that will be considered excused are for
religious holidays and for extenuating circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss
class due to observance of a religious holiday, you must notify the instructor at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of the religious holiday. You will be given an opportunity to
complete missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Inside & Outside the Classroom — Readings for the day’s class should always be brought to
class. I recommend that you print out readings available electronically on Canvas so that you are
                                                   6


not dependent on electronic devices to do class readings. Computers, phones, and other
electronic devices are allowed in class so long as they are not disruptive to others. If these
devices become disruptive, I will ask that they not be brought into class. As long as these devices
are not disruptive to others, you are solely responsible for how you use these devices in class.
The TAs and I are not responsible for rehashing material that you miss because you are
distracted in class or because you are absent (unless you have a note from a doctor, nurse, or
university official). If you miss a class, you should speak with your classmates to catch up on
course announcements and notes. If you attend class, ask question there, and still feel uncertain
about class materials, please see me or one of the TAs during office hours. It is your
responsibility to ensure that you are keeping up with all that is being done in class. Do not
hesitate to ask questions in class or during office hours.
Names and Personal Pronoun Preference – I will gladly honor your request to address you by a
name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use.
University Policies
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of
a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline, which
typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in
college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
        •    Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
        •    Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
        •    Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
        “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
        uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless it is assigned as group
work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether collaboration is encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you
must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including
failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the following web
address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning, use these to help
you succeed in your classes
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15
different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES
A332).
The University Writing Center
                                                                7


The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT student, by appointment or on
a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance we provide is
intended to foster students’ resourcefulness and self-reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric, consultation, and prevention
services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and enhance their personal growth and well-being.
http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials
Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when an alarm or
alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an
official representative.
        •     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
              nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
        •     Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
        •     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
              unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
              Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
        •     Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
              found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Guns
Pursuant to SB11 (http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/84R/billtext/pdf/SB00011F.pdf) and UT- Austin Campus Carry
Policy (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/; https://www.policies.utexas.edu/ policies/campus-concealed-carry), persons with
a current legally valid Concealed Carry License may carry a concealed legal handgun on or about their person in this
class. Please take note of several provisions:
1. All legal provisions associated with concealed carry on campus must be followed without fail at all times. In addition to
SB11 and UT-Austin Campus Carry policy, please review at least the 84 pages of applicable law curated by TX DPS
(http://www.txdps.state.tx.us/InternetForms/Forms/CHL-16.pdf).
Please take special note of two of the many legal provisions:
          a. Holstering requirements: “A license holder who carries a handgun on campus must carry it in a holster that
          completely covers the trigger and entire trigger guard area. The holster must have sufficient tension or grip on the
          handgun to retain it in the holster even when subjected to unexpected jostling” (UT-Austin HOP 8-1060, VII-A-2).
          b. “On or about your person means a person licensed to carry a handgun must carry a handgun in a manner that
          the handgun is close enough to the license holder that he or she can reach it without materially changing position”
          at all times (UT-Austin HOP 8-1060, IV).
2. A license holder may not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway,
street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area. (SB11, Section 4 and Texas Penal Code,
Section 46.035(a-1)). Violation is a Class A misdemeanor or a third degree felony.
If any legal requirement is violated at any moment, the person who witnesses the violation should leave the classroom
and call 911 immediately without waiting to ask me for permission. Police will respond. This will disrupt the class and may
create a dangerous situation for all of us. Violations may result in criminal penalties and sanction by the university.
                                                                  8
