                    INTEGRATED COMMUNICATION CAMPAIGNS
                               ADV F 373 (72425) / PR F 377K (72610)
                               FIRST SUMMER SESSION, 2020
                                 Course Instructor: James Dalthorp, Jr
                              E-mail: James.Dalthorp@austin.utexas.edu
COURSE DESCRIPTION
In this class, students are given the opportunity to work the same way an advertising agency
would pitch their ideas to create a campaign to win a prestigious new business account.
In this case, you will be creating a campaign to introduce the thrilling new Tesla Model 3.
You will work independently in teams with specific individual responsibilities to create the
experience of developing an actual campaign. This is a tremendously challenging assignment and
it will require you to apply all the thinking and learning you have learned in the program so far.
This will be your chance to implement all your instincts and ideas into one unified campaign.
Through weekly check-ins, via Canvas, we will work on how to match various variables and
marketing concepts such as the product, the consumer, media profiles, research, planning and
the actual execution of a campaign, into one macro-level understanding of how to position and
build awareness and desire for the Tesla Model 3 electric vehicle.
OVERARCHING GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
1) The ability to be independent and creative with your work.
2) The ability to work together and come together as a team.
3) The ability to understand the consumer and communicate an advertising idea effectively
while applying all your communication knowledge and skills to demonstrate how your idea will
work across all communication platforms including traditional, digital, and all emerging media.
4) The ability to create an integrated campaign with a singular point of view.
5) Practice and master your total strategic thinking, execute brand communication against that
strategy, and polish it off brilliantly using all your visual design skills and learning.
TEACHING METHOD
It is important to note that this class gives you, the students, a great deal of independence and
responsibility. This is especially true since it is conducted in a virtual environment, during a
short-summer session.
However, I will be available online during the week for live check-ins and any discussions or
updates to mentor students via Zoom and the existing Canvas program. It is crucial, that
students check Canvas on a daily basis.
STRUCTURE
At the beginning of every week, each team or team representative will meet with the instructor
for consultation, via Zoom. At the end of each week, every team should demonstrate progress
and share that progress through a Zoom recording or by sending the presentation to Canvas,
under the appropriate assignment deck! Overall, anticipate 5 consultations and 5 presentations.


COURSE MATERIALS
Recommended Reading:
Rothenberg, Randall WHERE THE SUCKERS MOON: The Life and Death of an Advertising
Campaign (1995). Available at Amazon.com
https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0679740422?tag=randohouseinc7986-20
Gaston Legorburu & Darren McColl, STORYSCAPING: Stop Creating Ads, Start Creating
Worlds (2014). Available at Amazon.com
http://www.amazon.com/Storyscaping-Stop-Creating-Start-Worlds/dp/1118823281
Students will be held accountable for anything posted and discussed on Canvas.
It is the students’ responsibility to check Canvas every day during the current summer session.
ASSIGNMENTS
The following section provides a brief summary of the course assignments:
1) Campaign Presentation 1 (Team Project): teams will present their perception of the
client and the brand: what is the soul of the brand? What is the purpose and the why of the
brand? What is the problem? Who is the target audience? SWOT? (see phase 1 in the
instructions)
2) Campaign Presentation 2 (Team Project): teams will continue working on phase 1 plus
phase 2, which is the creation of an organizing idea. The organizing idea is a short phrase which
is the base for the entire communication plan.
3) Campaign Presentation 3 (Team Project): teams will present the third phase of their
campaign: the execution phase. Emanating directly from the first and second phases of the
campaign, teams will actually showcase their communication work, plan and design (this is your
chance to present ads, events, viral movies, social media, new and creative communication
ideas, etc’; all in direct conjunction with your client and its target audience).
4) Campaign Presentation 4 (Team Project): continued and improved work on phase 3.
5) The Final presentation + PDF Book (Team Project): the final presentation and book are the
products of all previous presentations. This is the time to refine your work and to create an
integrated output. Each team will pitch to the client and a winning team will be selected! (The
project is comprised of a book plan + a presentation)
EVALUATION
The following percentage breakdown will constitute your final grade. Final grades will be made
using plus/minus grades.


GRADE DISTRIBUTION:
Point total / Grade
94-100          A
90-93.99        A-
87-89.99        B+
84-86.99        B
80-83.99        B-
77-79.99        C+
74-76.99        C
70-73.99        C-
60-69.99        D
Below 60        F
COURSE OUTLINE
Students are expected to be prepared according to the following schedule. In case changes do
occur to the class’ schedule, it will be notified via Canvas.


COPYRIGHT NOTICE
Materials presented in this class are copyrighted by The University of Texas at Austin. No
materials may be directly or indirectly published, posted to the Internet and intranet
distribution channels, broadcast, rewritten for broadcast or publication or redistribution in any
medium. Neither these materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer except
for personal and noncommercial use.
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a
student from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is
excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to
take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a
reasonable time after the absence. A student who misses classes or other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor
as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an
assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03-04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning
process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading
information to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment,
and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior
permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and
must adhere to them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on scholastic dishonesty,
please visit the Student Judicial Services Web site at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
RECOMMENDATIONS REGARDING EMERGENCY EVACUATION FROM
THE OFFICE OF CAMPUS SAFETY AND SECURITY: 512-471-5767
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/:
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.


Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the
first week of class.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you have any concerns about the behavior of an individual, please contact the behavior
concerns advice line (BCAL) at 512-232-5050 Are
