                                     ACC 362
                AUDITING AND OTHER ASSURANCE SERVICES
                               COURSE SYLLABUS
                                    Fall 2019
Time and Location
Monday/Wednesday: 9:30 – 11:00 am; UTC 1.144 (Unique #02590)
Instructor
Jeffrey L. Johanns, CPA, CGMA
     Assurance Partner, PwC (1995 – 2011)
     PwC National Office Partner (2003 – 2011)
     PwC Assurance Risk Management Leader (2008 – 2011)
Office: GSB 5.126G; Phone: 512-750-0565 (cell)
Email: jeffrey.johanns@mccombs.utexas.edu
Twitter: @JohannsAudit
Office Hours: Monday, 1:00 – 2:30 pm; or by appointment
Teaching Assistants
Lauren Almstedt
lalmstedt@utexas.edu
Reese Eller
Reese_eller@utexas.edu
 (Office hours will be posted on Canvas)
                                                             1


Canvas
We will use Canvas extensively in this course for posting class materials and
announcements. You should check Canvas daily. Also, make sure that you have
your settings made to receive email notifications of all course announcements
published on Canvas.
Required Course Materials
     1. Textbook: Auditing: A Risk – Based Approach 11th Edition. (Johnstone,
        Gramling and Rittenberg), Cengage Learning, Inc. 2019, 2016.
        ISBN: 978-1-337-61945-5
     2. Course files: PowerPoint slides, supplemental non-textbook readings,
        study aids and cases will be posted to Canvas, or a link provided.
     3. Twitter: My postings @JohannsAudit represent course materials.
     4. Websites (as specified): e.g. www.thecaq.org
                                                                              2
ACC 362
Fall 2019


Course Objectives
At the end of the semester, you will have a better understanding of the following:
  1. The importance of auditing and other assurance services to the global economy.
  2. The crucial role of auditing in effective corporate governance.
  3. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board and
      auditing standards applicable to public and private company audits.
  4. Auditor independence and ethical responsibilities.
  5. Professional liability considerations.
  6. The risk-based approach to auditing and the many types of risk relevant to auditors,
     including fraud risk.
  7. Internal controls and the integrated audit.
  8. The need to gather sufficient, competent audit evidence.
  9. The basics of audit sampling.
10. The basic framework for auditing a company's revenue and purchasing cycles.
11. Issues in auditing complex areas – e.g. management estimates
12. End-of-audit issues and procedures.
13. Reporting audit findings. Various types of audit reports.
14. Other services provided by auditors.
15. The use of Data Analytics in the audit process.
 16. Issues arising in accounting and auditing scandals.
                                                                                          3
ACC 362
Fall 2019


Grading
Course grades will be based on the following:
                                                                               % of grade
 Exam 1                                                                   24%
 Exam 2                                                                   21%
 Exam 3                                                                   20%
 Cases                                                                    15%
 Group project                                                            10%
 Participation                                                            10%
 Total                                                                    100%
      I do not have any fixed point or percentage cut-offs in mind regarding letter
      grades, nor do I have a fixed curve requiring that certain percentages of students
      will get A’s, A-‘s, B+’s, B’s, etc. I will make grade determinations at the end of the
      semester based on both absolute and relative performance considerations. Please
      note that the University uses a plus/minus grading system for courses and the
      Department of Accounting GPA guideline for this course is 3.2 – 3.4.
      As students are naturally curious about where they stand during the semester, I will
      endeavor to give the class an interim assessment of performance after the first two
      exams have been completed. However, any mid-semester indications of course
      performance are merely to assist you in evaluating your performance to date and
      achieving your goals in this course. They are not guarantees or suggestions that you
      will receive any particular final grade in this course.
                                                                                             4
ACC 362
Fall 2019


      Each grade component is discussed below:
Examinations
        Examinations will emphasize concepts and issues discussed in class, although any
material from assigned readings is "fair game" for testing. Exams will contain a mixture of
objective (multiple choice), short-answer and/or essay questions. I will provide additional
exam-related information approximately three class periods prior to each exam.
        The second examination will test material covered following the first examination. The
third examination will emphasize material covered after the second exam. Of course, as the
material in this course builds on previous concepts, each examination will be "cumulative" in
the broad sense of that term. Exams will be held during regularly-scheduled class periods, so
no make-up exams will be scheduled.
Cases
        To refine your ability to analyze more realistic and less structured problems in
auditing, there will be (at least) one graded case exercise based on real-world examples that
have been adapted for teaching purposes. Cases will be posted on Canvas under
“Assignments”.
        All cases will be graded for breadth and depth of analysis, quality of writing and
professional impression. Certain questions will involve subjective issues for which there may
be no “right answer” and multiple views can be defended. It is important to be both
complete and concise in your case analyses and to justify your positions and conclusions.
Do not repeat or summarize the case facts, except as needed to support a position. Cases
must be submitted through both the “Assignments” section on Canvas and turned in in hard
copy.
In the formative stage of a case assignment, you are welcome to discuss the case with fellow
students in the class (but not with persons not in the class). However, copying from another
student's prepared solution is scholastic dishonesty, and will be penalized severely. See
                                                                                              5
ACC 362
Fall 2019


"Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty" later in this syllabus for clarification. My intention is not
that students will jointly prepare cases, but rather have the ability to clarify case issues before
preparing their solutions independently.
Group Project – “Pick a Scandal”
         The capstone project at the end of the semester will be a group project. Each group will
choose an accounting / auditing scandal and investigate (1) the underlying accounting issue(s) or
nature of any accounting fraud, (2) why the audit failed to uncover the problem and what might
have been done differently, and (3) the consequences for management and the auditors.
Groups will present the results from these investigations in presentations at the end of the
semester (see “Course Schedule,” below). Further details on this project and a list of suggested
scandals will be provided later in the semester.
Participation and Attendance
         Your active participation will make this course substantially more enjoyable (for you and
me) and significantly enhance the clarity of points discussed in class. Moreover, the ability to
provide meaningful input in a professional setting is a critical element of career success. Thus, to
give you an incentive to attend and participate, 10% of your course grade will be based on your
cumulative participation in this class.
         To earn points for participation:
      • Ask and answer questions and offer insights in class. Attending class only will not earn the
      highest participation grade.
      • Post questions and insights to the class discussion board.
      • Answer others' posts on the discussion board.
      • Show interest in other groups' presentations at the end of the semester by asking
      questions.
      • Following me on Twitter @JohannsAudit will help you participate.
         Some of you will participate more effectively in class, and others will participate more
effectively on the discussion board. Both kinds of participation are helpful, although I weight
classroom participation more heavily. To earn all of the participation points available,
meaningful classroom participation is necessary. In reviewing student performance from
                                                                                                   6
ACC 362
Fall 2019


past semesters, I have observed a strong positive correlation between students’ final
grades and their participation scores.
         I do not "micromanage" participation or expect that you will contribute in every class.
Your levels of interest and preparation will frequently dictate your participation in a given class.
Assessing participation at the conclusion of the course requires my subjective judgment, but you
can trust me to do my best to form a fair assessment over the semester of your participation and
contribution to the course.
          I expect that you will attend class regularly. Although I will not take attendance each
class, I will have a sense of those students who are and are not regularly attending class.
Repeated absences may result in a reduction of your Participation score. In addition, I may
take attendance from time to time, which may or may not be announced in advance.
Attendance will be required for all group presentations. Attendance on days when
attendance is taken will also be considered in determining Participation scores.
         If you have a concern about this (or any other) aspect of your grade, please come by
during office hours or make other arrangements to see me. I will be happy to provide
suggestions on how you might improve your performance in the course.
Professional Conduct
The MPA program at Texas is one of the most highly regarded accounting
programs in the country. In order to preserve our reputation, our students must
maintain a high standard of professionalism at all times. Professional conduct, as
it relates to this class, involves:
     1.   Arriving to class on time
     2.   Attending only the sections for which you are registered
     3.   Preparing for class in advance
     4.   Turning off all cell phones and laptops closed
     5.   Keeping personal breaks during class to an absolute minimum
     6.   Attending class to learn, not merely to take a quiz and leave abruptly
     7.   Refraining from side conversations or other disruptive behavior
     8.   Being respectful toward your fellow peers and the McCombs Faculty
I expect you to behave professionally. In return, you can expect that my TA’s and
I will strive to provide you with the best accounting education possible.
                                                                                                     7
ACC 362
Fall 2019


Discussion Board
         Along with other features of Canvas, I strongly encourage you to take advantage of the
discussion board for this course. Postings can relate to class discussions, case issues, exam-
related matters, current events, careers or any other topics/issues that are relevant to this
course. I monitor the discussion board on a regular basis, and will reward participation as
noted above.
Ground rules for discussion board:
1. For questions or comments of general interest to the class, please use the discussion
      board, not e-mail! Although I may respond to a personal e-mail regarding a matter of
      general interest to the class, I do not consider e-mails in determining participation grades.
      More importantly, your classmates will not receive the benefit of your questions and
      insights or any responses thereto.
2. Be professional and courteous. Discussion boards of this type are used throughout the
      business world. You do not need to be overly formal, but forums such as this offer a
      good opportunity to practice professional business communication.
3. Do not be a free rider. If you benefit from reading other's postings, consider adding your
      own insights. Also reply to inquiries from your fellow students. Student replies are
      usually very helpful and often are posted before I have a chance to respond
      (particularly if they are made late in the evening).
4. Even if you have nothing to post, please get in the habit of accessing the discussion board
      regularly. I will often use Canvas to communicate important announcements and
      clarifications.
5. I may establish special forums within the discussion board for exams and cases. To
      maximize the usefulness of your posting, please use the most appropriate forum. For
      example, if you have a question concerning a suggested homework problem in the days
      leading up to an exam, post that question in the forum for that exam.
                                                                                                    8
ACC 362
Fall 2019


Homework
         Each chapter in the text is followed by true/false and multiple choice and other
problems that you can complete for practice. Some of these problems reinforce
concepts discussed in class, others address matters not discussed in class. As
homework, I suggest that you complete the true/false and multiple choice problems at
the end of each full chapter we cover. Solutions will be posted in Canvas. We will discuss
some of these questions in class so you should be prepared to answer these questions if
called upon to do so.
         Homework is voluntary and will not be collected. Hence, homework does not
technically count as part of your course grade. However, I will consider the assigned
multiple choice problems when I prepare each examination, i.e., some exam questions
may be very similar or identical to homework problems. I expect that students who put
diligent effort into the homework will do better on the examinations.
Policy on Missed Examinations and Assignments
     In general, medical emergencies, family emergencies and university-sponsored conflicts
     are the only valid reasons for missing an examination or the due date of a case. If you
     miss an exam due to an illness or other emergency, you should notify me
     before the exam, if possible, and also provide notification and proof of
     emergency to Student Emergency Services
     (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of
     emergency and will provide me official acknowledgement of the emergency.
     However, I have final authority to determine if your absence is excused. At that
     point I will decide the best make-up alternative on a case-by-case basis, which could
     mean a make-up exam or recalculating the semester grade to omit the missed
     component, depending on the circumstances. In the case of a conflict due to a
     university-sponsored event, you must notify me as soon as you are aware of the conflict
     and before the examination date or assignment due date. An interview or office visit is
     not a valid reason to miss an examination or an assignment due date.
                                                                                             9
ACC 362
Fall 2019


                                       Important Notifications
                                     Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                          Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
                                 Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, I have
agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document.
By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its
assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students
who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of
our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should
refer to the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to
access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as
further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
                                            Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office
of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
                                                                                                  10
ACC 362
Fall 2019


        requires exiting and assembling outside.
       Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
        Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
        building.
       Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing
        during the first week of class.
       In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
       Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
        Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
        Services office.
       Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
       Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can
        be found at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
        All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and
regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that
certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily,
but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for
updating your email address are available at:
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Electronic Class Roster and Student Privacy
        The University has requested that students be notified of their privacy rights in regard to
electronic class rosters:
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at the
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information
that may be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail,
engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail
rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included
in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of
the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory
information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi06-
07/app/appc09.html.
                                                                                                    11
ACC 362
Fall 2019


Policy on Working Together on Course Assignments (applies only to this course)
        For this class, you may discuss issues related to assignments with other students in this
class. You may work with others in the formative stages of an assignment to clarify issues
and exchange ideas. However, I expect the final product of each collected assignment to
reflect individual composition. You may not copy or paraphrase from others' solutions.
Examples intended to clarify this policy follow. When in doubt, ask me!
Examples of acceptable collaborative efforts (applies only to this course):
• A student is confused about an ambiguous aspect of an assignment, and asks another
      student what s/he thinks.
• Students ask questions and share helpful insights in class or on a discussion board.
Examples of collaborative efforts that are unacceptable:
• Student A completes the homework before student B. B asks A for A's solution. B
      bases his/her solution on A's solution, changing a few words here and there to make it
      look original. Both A and B are guilty of scholastic dishonesty.
• A student finds a source relevant to a case and copies extensively from it, without using
      quotation marks, indentation or other references to acknowledge the source. This
      example constitutes plagiarism, which is a clear case of scholastic dishonesty.
• Any collaboration, breach of security or other cheating on a course examination.
                                                                                               12
ACC 362
Fall 2019


Tentative Course Schedule follows (subject to change at any time):
                           Course Schedule
                               ACC 362
                               Fall 2019
       DATE                     TOPIC                              ASSIGNMENT**
 Aug. 28 - W      Course introduction/Overview           Syllabus/Chapter 1 (p. 1 – 15)
                  of the profession
 Sept. 02 - M     Holiday
 Sept. 04 – W     Course introduction/Overview           Chapter 1/CAQ Guide to Public
                  of the Profession                      Co. Auditing; pp 1-5
 Sept. 09 – M     Overview of the audit                  Chapter 5
                  process/Audit standards
 Sept. 11 – W     Internal Control over financial        Chapter 3/CAQ guide to ICFR
                  reporting
 Sept. 16 – M     Internal Control over financial        Chapter 3/CAQ guide to ICFR
                  reporting
 Sept. 18 – W     Risk of Fraud/Corporate                Chapter 2/CAQ deterring and
                  governance                             detecting fraud – Exec. Summary
                                                         and Prologue
 Sept. 23 – M     Professional liability/Auditor         Chapter 4/Chapter 1 (p. 15 – 27)
                  judgment/Ethical decisions
 Sept. 25 – W     Exam 1 – In Class
 Sept. 30 – M     Planning the audit                     Chapter 7/CAQ Guide to Public
                                                         Co. Auditing; pp 6-9
 Oct. 02 – W      Planning the audit                     Chapter 7
 Oct. 07- M       Audit evidence                         Chapter 6
 Oct. 09 - W      Auditing the Revenue Cycle             Chapter 9
 Oct. 14 - M      Auditing the Revenue
                  Cycle/Data Analytics -
                  Introduction
                                                                                     13
ACC 362
Fall 2019


                   TechWear Parts I and II
 Oct. 16 - W       Sampling                         Chapter 8
 Oct. 21 - M       TechWear Part III/Parts I and II TechWear Parts I and II due
                   review
 Oct. 23 - W       Auditing the Acquisition and     Chapter 11
                   Payment Cycle
 Oct. 28 - M       TechWear Part III review          TechWear Part III due
 Oct. 30 - W       TechWear Parts IV and V
 Nov. 04 - M       Exam 2 – In Class
 Nov. 06 - W       Completing a quality audit       Chapter 14
 Nov. 11 - M       Completing a quality audit       Chapter 14
 Nov. 13 - W       Audit reports                    Chapter 15
 Nov. 18 - M       Audit reports                    Chapter 15
 Nov. 20 - W       Other auditor services           Canvas module
 Nov. 25 - M       Group presentations
 Nov. 27 - W       Holiday
 Dec. 02 - M       Group presentations
 Dec. 04 - W       Group presentations
 Dec. 09 - M       Exam 3 – In Class
**This is a tentative summary only, subject to change. Assigned readings include
all materials posted in individual Canvas modules.
                                                                                14
ACC 362
Fall 2019
