ANT 320L/ GER 369/ LIN 373
Spring 2020
TuTh 2-3:30, BUR 232
                             The German Language: Historical Perspectives
Course description:
This class provides an overview of language change, language evolution, and sociolinguistics,
within the context of the history of German. The goal is to enlarge participants’ understanding
and appreciation of German and its historical development. The course will begin with a
discussion of German’s Indo-European origins, and progress through Germanic, West Germanic,
Old, Middle, and Early New High German to the modern language. The class will also examine
examples from a broad range of Germanic languages, dialects, and pidgins and creoles, with an
eye to developing a better understanding of the characteristics, origins and development of
language and communication systems. No prior training in linguistics is required. The course
will be conducted in English.1
Instructor:                 Marc Pierce
Office:                     BUR 358
Office hours:               TuTh 11-12 and by appointment. Please feel free to stop by at any time –
                            if I am too busy to see you I will say so.
E-mail:                     mpierc@austin.utexas.edu (NB: I do not have e-mail at home. Please
                            plan accordingly.)
Phone:                      232-6360 (office), 471-4123 (Germanic Department)
Texts/Readings:
-J.C. Salmons, The History of German: What the Past Reveals about Today's Language [2d
edition only; available at the University Co-Op; http://www.historyofgerman.net/]
-Additional texts will be distributed as necessary and/or made available on Canvas.
You are encouraged to print out the readings and bring them with you to class for discussion.
Grading/Requirements:
Essays:            30%
Term paper: 40%
Quizzes:           15%
Participation: 15%
Grading:           A+: 98+           A: 93-97          A-: 90-92
                   B+: 88-89         B: 83-87          B-: 80-82
                   C+: 78-79         C: 73-77          C-: 70-72
                   D+: 68-69         D: 63-67          D-: 60-62
                   F: 59 or less
1
  This class normally carries Writing and Global Cultures flags. Due to an administrative error, the course does not
carry these flags this semester. Students who would like flag credit for this class can petition for it through the
Center for Skills & Experience office (https://ugs.utexas.edu/flags/students/petitions). Please check with me if you
have any questions.


                                                                                                      2
Essays:
You will write three essays (3-5 pages each) over the course of the semester. Topics will be
distributed approximately two weeks before the due date. The essays may be written in either
English or German, and will be graded according to both content and form. If you choose to
write in a language that is not your first, I will still expect a well-written, (largely) grammatically
correct essay. (I will also give some consideration to your choice to write in a foreign language.)
Term paper:
You will write a 10-15 page term paper. You will also give a brief (5-10 minutes) in-class
presentation on your term paper topic. Details to follow.
Quizzes:
Four quizzes will be given in class over the course of the semester. They will invite your
comments on readings and discussions, and may be written in either English or German (see
above about the decision to write in a foreign language). Quizzes will be given at the beginning
of class; your lowest quiz grade will be dropped. The instructor also reserves the right to give
short quizzes, both announced and unannounced, about the material we have read and
discussed.
Participation:
Participation includes attendance, asking questions, answering my questions, and taking part in
class discussions. Attendance is crucial. Unexcused absences will result in poor grades for
participation! Absences will be unexcused except in cases of documented emergency
(normally medical or family). You will need to sign in at the beginning of each class. Please
notify me as soon as possible by e-mail or phone if it is necessary for you to be absent from
class. In accordance with University of Texas policy, you may be excused from class to
participate in religious observances and official obligations like club or varsity sports. In such
cases, written documentation must be presented to the instructor at least one week before the
absence takes place.
Participation grade profiles:
A:      volunteers frequently and is well-prepared
B:      volunteers several times and is well-prepared
C:      does not usually volunteer but is usually well-prepared
D:      does not volunteer and is generally poorly prepared
F:      consistently unprepared
Makeup and late work:
Work that is submitted late will be subject to penalties at my discretion, normally three points
per day late (e.g. a 100 will become a 97 if it is one day late). No makeup quizzes/ extensions
will be given, except in cases of documented emergency.


                                                                                                      3
How to succeed in this course:
A good rule of thumb at UT is that you should spend two hours outside of class doing homework
and preparing for the next class session for every hour of instructional time. You may find that
you need more or less than two hours. However much time you need, please prepare well so that
class time can be used with maximum efficiency.
Classroom etiquette:
No food. Cell phones must be turned off in class; computers may be used only for note-
taking or to read/search course-related materials. Students who use electronic devices for
non-class related activities and create a disturbance will be asked to leave for the remainder of
that class. We must all do our best to make class a pleasant and valuable experience for
everyone. Please conduct yourselves accordingly.
Study groups:
If possible, find one or two other students in the class who are willing to get together to go over
things and help each other. This can be very valuable, as your classmates may understand some
material better than you do, and vice versa.
Students with disabilities:
The University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations for students
with disabilities upon request. Students with a documented disability who require academic
accommodations should request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations from
Services for Students with Disabilities as soon as possible. These letters must be given to the
instructor at the beginning of the semester. Details are available at:
<http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/index.php>.
Academic assistance:
Academic Assistance is provided by the UT Learning Center, in Jester Center, Room A332A. It
offers help with college-level writing, reading, and learning strategies. It is free to all currently
enrolled students.
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements:
Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the professor and TAs for this course are required to report for
further investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault,
dating violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and
university policy also requires reporting incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and
sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title IX incidents). This means we cannot keep
confidential information about any such incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with
someone who can maintain confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-
4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-
471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these services for any needed support and that you
report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX office.


                                                                                                4
The University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
A final note:
The instructor takes issues of academic honesty very seriously. All work in this course must be
your own. Academic dishonesty will not be tolerated and will be dealt with according to
standard university procedures. Discussion of assignments between students in the course is
always acceptable, but all students must write out their own work unless a specific group
assignment, to which all members have clearly contributed, is made. Please consult the
instructor if you have concerns or questions.


                                                                    5
                       Regular Semesterplan for German 369
                                 (subject to revision)
Tu, 1/21 Introduction to the course
Th, 1/23 Introduction to historical linguistics; Salmons, chapter 1
Tu, 1/28 Sihler 2000 [Canvas]; diagnostic essay due
Th, 1/30 Salmons, chapter 2
Tu, 2/4  Salmons, chapter 2
Th, 2/6  Salmons, chapter 3
Tu, 2/11 Salmons, chapter 3; quiz 1
Th, 2/13 Salmons, chapter 3
Tu, 2/18 writing practice; peer review
Th, 2/20 Salmons, chapter 4; essay 1 due
Tu, 2/25 Salmons, chapter 4
Th, 2/27 Salmons, chapter 5
Tu, 3/3  Salmons, chapter 5
Th, 3/5  Salmons, chapter 6
Tu, 3/10 Salmons, chapter 6; quiz 2
Th. 3/12 Salmons, chapter 7; writing practice
Tu, 3/17 No class; spring break
Th, 3/19 No class; spring break
Tu, 3/24 Salmons, chapters 7 and 8; peer review
Th, 3/26 German dialectology; essay 2 due
Tu, 3/31 German in North America
Th, 4/2  German in North America
Tu, 4/7  German in Africa; quiz 3
Th, 4/9  New forms of German
Tu, 4/14 Language change in German today
Th, 4/16 Writing practice and peer review
Tu, 4/21 Prescriptivism; essay 3 due
Th, 4/23 Yiddish


                                                             6
Tu, 4/28 German based-pidgins and creoles
Th, 4/30 Presentations; quiz 4
Tu, 5/5  Presentations
Th, 5/7  Presentations; peer review; evaluations; loose ends
