                 THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
            DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
          FIRST YEAR SPANISH II– SUMMER 2019- Session 2
                                     SPN 610D - 84240
    ● This document contains important information and represents an agreement between the
        Department of Spanish and Portuguese and its students.
    ● You are responsible for knowing all of the information contained in this document.
    ● You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
1. OBJECTIVES OF THE LANGUAGE PROGRAM
The objectives of the Spanish & Portuguese Language Program address the basic tenet of a liberal
arts education: the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language
in society. This objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic
internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.
The Language Program promotes the development of multilingual literacies through the analysis
and use of Spanish & Portuguese as a second or third language. The program focuses on three
major types of competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):
1) linguistic competence: phonetics/phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon, discourse, etc.
2) communicative / interactional competence: sociocultural uses of language, pragmatics,
cultural backgrounds, perspectives, etc.
3) metalinguistic competence: language as a conceptual, symbolic system
2. COURSE DESCRIPTION AND GOALS
SPN 610D is the second course in The University of Texas lower-division Spanish program. The
course focuses on further developing speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills in Spanish
while building vocabulary, learning basic rules and terminology of Spanish grammar, and
gaining a better understanding of Hispanic cultures in order to communicate in an accurate,
effective, and informed manner within a variety of sociocultural situations.
By the end of the semester, you should be able to do the following in Spanish:
        (a)     express opinions, reactions and recommendations
        (b)     discuss possible, probable and certain future events and situations;
        (c)     narrate past events and react subjectively to them;


        (d)      speak hypothetically about various events and situations;
        (e)      analyze moderately complex language and draw meta-linguistic conclusions
        (f)      recognize dialectal, social and contextual variation;
        (g)      understand the main ideas of moderately complex written texts and oral discourse
        (i)      maintain conversations of a substantial length
        (j)      produce written work of a substantial length
3. PLACEMENT / PREREQUISITES /EXPECTATIONS
PREREQUISITE for 610D: SPN 601D, 604, 507, or 508K (or equivalent transfer course), with
a grade of at least C, or an appropriate score on the University of Texas Placement Test. If you
have any questions regarding placement, please speak with Liz Hastings, the Liberal Arts
Advisor for Spanish & Portuguese, either in person (BEN 2.108) or via email
(eyhastings@austin.utexas.edu).
EXPECTATIONS OF STUDENTS ENTERING SPN 610D
Students are expected to enter this course with a working knowledge of:
· basic word order (placement of adjectives, etc.)
· adjectives (demonstrative, possessive, etc.)
· pronouns (direct object, indirect object and reflexive)
·       special verbs (ser and estar, gustar, etc.)
· conjugations of regular, irregular and stem-changing verbs (present, present
    progressive, preterit and imperfect, periphrastic future)
·       syntactic constructions (comparison formulas, “tener que” “acabar de,” etc.)
· reading strategies (skimming, recognizing cognates, making inferences, etc.)
· listening strategies (tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)
· speaking strategies (circumlocution, fluency, etc.)
· writing strategies (process writing, discourse connectors, paragraph organization,
    paraphrasing, etc.)
· metalinguistic skills (recognizing parts of speech, recognizing dialectal variation,
    identifying functional uses of grammar, etc.)
If you feel you have weaknesses in any of these areas, it is your responsibility to review your
beginning Spanish materials (corresponding to chapters 1-9 in Conectándonos) as soon as possible
and consider working with a tutor if necessary.
4. CONTACT INFORMATION
Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any questions or problems you may have relating
to the class. If you have a concern that you wish to discuss with someone other than your
instructor, contact the Course Supervisor. If you feel that the issue has not been satisfactorily


addressed by the Course Supervisor, you may refer the matter to the Director of the Language
Program.
  Course Instructor
  Name: Rafael J. Jimenez-Baralt
  Office: BEN 5th floor Desk H28
  Office Hours: MTWTHF 1:00PM - 2:00PM
  Email: rjabaralt@gmail.com
  Course Supervisor
  Name: Celina Nevárez
  Office: MEZ 4.134
  Office hours: by appointment
  Email: Celina@austin.utexas.edu
  Program Director
  Name: Dr. Melissa Murphy
  Office: BEN 4.136
  Office hours: By appointment
  Email: mmurphy@mail.utexas.edu
5. COURSE TEXTBOOK AND RESOURCES
Textbook:             Acercándome (Murphy, Ogando-Lavín and Méndez-Montesinos). 3rd
edition. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt, 2014. [at the Co-op or online at www.kendallhunt.com]
TalkAbroad:           You must purchase TWO “conversations” ($15 each) at Talkabroad.com.


Canvas:                This course uses Canvas as its course management system. You are
responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for important documents, assignments,
grades, etc.
Help Center:           A Help Center is available free of charge to students who need help with
grammar, speaking practice, etc. It is located in the hallway connecting the 4th floors of BEN and
MEZ and begins on the second week of the semester. Your instructor will inform you of the
schedule.
6. ATTENDANCE POLICY
Attendance is required at all classes and is checked daily. You must attend class the first two
meetings. Because of high demand to add Spanish & Portuguese classes, the Department will drop
from these courses any students who are absent the first two class meetings of the semester.
All absences count. Your instructor will take attendance at the beginning of each 50-minute
session. Up to six 50-minute session absences are permitted with no absence penalty. However,
each missed session beyond six, regardless of the reason for the absence, will result in a 1
percentage point deduction from your final grade. For example, if you have a 90% average, but
have missed seven 50-minute sessions, your average will be lowered to an 89% and you will
receive a B+. The only “excused” absences are for religious holidays, documented jury duty,
documented military duty, and university-sponsored activities. Note: Arriving more than 25
minutes late or leaving more than 25 minutes early counts as an absence. 3 tardies (arriving to
class at least 5 minutes late or leaving more than 5 minutes early) equal one absence.
7. POLICY ON MISSED WORK
Please familiarize yourself with the following procedures:
            Reason for        Procedures
            absence


             Religious                 · Notify your instructor via email as soon as you are aware of the
             holiday                     conflict (first week of class for religious holidays).
                                       · For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will
             Jury duty                   receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
                                         instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.
             Military duty             · For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade
                                         averaging”.
             University-               · At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned
             sponsored                   in upon return.
             activity
             Documented                · Notify your instructor immediately via email.
             illness or                · No make-ups are permitted.
             emergency                 · Fill out and submit to your instructor a “Request for Grade
                                         Averaging Form” (posted on Canvas), along with the
                                         appropriate documentation within one week of the absence. A
                                         Supervisory Committee will determine whether or not you may
                                         receive grade averaging for your missed assessment(s).
Grade averaging = The average from your other scores in the same category will be used as your score on the
missed assessment. Note: No grade averaging is available for labs or quizzes, since the lowest score is already
dropped in these categories.
8. FINAL EXAM
DO NOT MAKE PLANS TO LEAVE TOWN UNTIL AFTER THE FINAL EXAM. IF
YOU MISS THE FINAL EXAM, YOU WILL RECEIVE A ZERO.
The listening comprehension section of the final exam will be given on the last day of classes.
There are no make-ups.
The written section of the final exam will follow the schedule established by the Office of the
Registrar. It can be found here: https://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/179/finals.
You will also be able to access your                                 individual        exam       schedule      at:
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/registrar/exam_schedule.WBX


9. GRADING SCALE
There is no curve or extra credit available in this course. If your final average is 89.9, your
course grade will be a B+. Do not expect to receive a passing grade simply because you complete
all requirements. To receive an “A”, all or most of your work must be excellent. A “B” indicates
that your work is very good. A “C” means that your work is adequate and you may continue with
the next course. Please keep in mind that a grade of C or higher in this course is required in
order to continue in Spanish. A grade of C- or Pass is not sufficient to go to the next level.
Final letter grades are assigned according to the following scale:
                 93-100 A              83-86.9 B              73-76.9 C              63-66.9 D
                90-92.9 A-             80-82.9 B-             70-72.9 C-             60-62.9 D-
                87-89.9 B+             77-79.9 C+             67-69.9 D+              0-59.9 F
10. GRADE DISTRIBUTION AND COURSE ASSESSMENTS
The grade distribution in SPN 610D is as follows:
             Exams (3)                                                           25%
             In-Class Work (Quizzes, participation, etc.)                        10%
             Final Chapter Tasks (4)                                             15%
             Talk Abroad (2)                                                     5%
             Homework                                                            5%
             Noticias & Sociedad (4)                                             10%
             ¡A Hablar! (4)                                                      10%


            Final Exam                                                             20%
            TOTAL                                                                  100%
EXAMS: There will be three comprehensive exams throughout the semester (after Chapters 1, 2,
and 3). The focus of each exam is the material from the most recent chapter. However, since
learning a second language is a cumulative process, you should also expect to encounter previous
material on exams. Exam dates are listed on your course calendar.
IN-CLASS WORK: You will be assessed on a variety of in-class assignments during the semester.
These may take the form of quizzes, group activities, in-class activities, participation assessments,
etc. Your lowest score in this grading category will be dropped.
FINAL CHAPTER TASKS: At the end of each chapter, there is a Final Chapter Task (la tarea
final) in which you will need to demonstrate your mastery of the chapter content, in terms of
vocabulary, grammar and pragmatics. Each task has a unique objective and stresses a different
communicative skill. The dates are listed on your course calendar.
TALK ABROAD: Twice during the semester, you will have a 30-minute conversation online with
a native speaker from a Spanish-speaking country. This assessment will consist of a pre-activity
(which will help you prepare), the conversation itself, and an in-depth follow-up activity, in which
you will comment on the content of your conversation, as well as observations you have made
about your language skills.
HOMEWORK: Your Instructor will assign homework on a daily basis. Your instructor will
periodically collect these assignments and/or give a pop-quiz over their content. See important
notes about the use of translation devices in the section on Academic Integrity on page 8. Your
lowest homework grade will be dropped.
READING ACTIVITIES: Towards the end of each chapter, you will complete a reading
assignment (called Noticias y sociedad). You will do the activities           at home and have
them completed by the dates indicated in your calendar. On these dates, you will be given a brief,
open-book quiz over the material that will count as your grade for each of these activities. These
are in-depth activities that require you to think about both familiar and unfamiliar vocabulary and
grammatical structures as well as the content and organization of each text. Plan to set aside several
hours in order to complete each one, as this process will help you develop stronger reading and
linguistic skills.


¡A HABLAR!: This is one of the oral components of the course. Once per chapter, you will spend
25-30 minutes speaking in small groups. These discussions will be              unrehearsed, and will
relate directly to the chapter themes. Your grade will be based on your ability to express yourself,
maintain a conversation and interact effectively with others. The dates are listed on your course
calendar.
FINAL EXAM: The final exam is comprehensive and will assess your knowledge of vocabulary,
grammar and pragmatic / sociolinguistic material covered throughout the semester. It will also
assess the fundamental skills developed in the course (e.g. listening comprehension, reading,
writing, and data analysis). Please remember that (1) the listening section will be given the last
day of class and (2) the written section will be on the standard date/time released by the registrar.
There are no make-ups. Please see additional information in Section 8 of this syllabus.
11. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT ASSESSMENTS
Throughout the semester, you will be acquiring knowledge (e.g. vocabulary, grammar) and you
will be developing skills (e.g. reading strategies, data analysis). Therefore, course assessments are
designed to reflect your progress in both of these areas. Assessments can include material not
explicitly studied, but that is closely related to the course content and tests a student’s ability to
apply acquired information and abilities to unfamiliar situations and contexts.
KNOWLEDGE
Vocabulary: You are responsible for all words and phrases on the vocabulary lists. You should
know the meaning, gender and spelling of these items. Furthermore, you will be expected to use
these words within a context. Therefore, make sure you know not only the English translations
for the words, but also understand how they would be used in Spanish discourse.
Grammar: You are expected to know all grammar structures included in the course syllabus.
Make sure you fully understand all formulas and rules. For verb conjugations, you will be expected
to know how to conjugate not only regular verbs, but also irregular verbs and verbs with spelling
and stem changes.
Terminology: In order to talk effectively about language, you will be expected to know the
appropriate terminology. You should be prepared to answer questions involving technical
linguistic terminology and/or identify these elements both in class and on exams or other
assessments.
Sociocultural: Your instructor will expose you to different interactional contexts and a variety of
dialects and their principal characteristics throughout the semester. You must familiarize yourself


with this material and will be expected to recognize these features on exams and other graded
assignments.
SKILLS
Reading: Of the four skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking), the ability to read is typically
retained for the longest period of time. With this natural tendency in mind, one of the main goals
of our program is to develop strong reading skills that will stay with you for years to come. In this
course, you will be given many opportunities to develop these skills, both in groups and
individually, both at home and in-class. You will develop skills such as skimming, recognizing
cognates, making inferences, etc. It is in your best interest to work pro-actively on developing
these reading skills at home, since you will be tested on your ability to read and comprehend
unfamiliar texts containing unfamiliar vocabulary and to do so with relative speed.
Data analysis: Our department implements a guided inductive approach to language learning.
This means that you will be exposed to language data (written or oral) and will be encouraged to
formulate your own rules and test your own hypotheses regarding language forms and structures.
Since a substantial part of the course will involve this type of data analysis, you should expect to
be tested on this skill via graded assignments and exams. In other words, you will not only be
expected to reproduce language practiced in the classroom, but will also be given new data, about
which you will be asked to draw conclusions.
12. STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
In order to be successful in this course, students must fulfill several responsibilities both in class
and at home and must also be able to demonstrate their progress in course assessments.
Homework: Your instructor will assign homework regularly. Many of these assignments are
given in order to prepare you for the following class day. Therefore, it is imperative that you
complete this work in order to be able to participate in class. Homework is also given to provide
you with ample opportunities to practice the course material and identify potential areas of
weakness. As a result, you will experience an increase in self-awareness, which will enable you
to take a pro-active stance in your progress, thus becoming a more effective learner overall.
Studying: You should not limit your work at home only to homework assignments collected by
your instructor for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis,
since attempts to memorize large amounts of material quickly before an exam are not normally
successful. You should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of
any items you may not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions
and resolve issues before a quiz or exam.


Practice: Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as re-reading or staring
at tables and lists of words / rules. This type of traditional studying is not sufficient in a language
course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t develop the
automaticity necessary to successfully complete exams and compositions within a limited time
frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to:
     ● practice conjugating verbs
     ● practice writing sentences, letters, essays, etc.
     ● practice reading newspaper articles, ads, etc.
     ● practice speaking with friends and/or classmates
     ● practice listening via news broadcasts, television or online videos
Interaction: Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and
rely heavily on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will
be pair work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the
facilitator. All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.
Focus: The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class. Smart
phones, tablets, laptops and outside reading materials are NOT allowed in class, as they limit your
participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.
Spanish: In order to improve your oral communication skills, you must practice both listening to
and speaking Spanish! Therefore, your instructor will speak almost exclusively in Spanish, which
will not only help you learn new vocabulary and grammar structures, but will also increase your
comfort level over the course of the semester. In turn, you are expected to speak in Spanish during
all activities and for basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom,
asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.). Don’t be shy! You won’t be graded on the
accuracy of your speech in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.
13. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students
with disabilities. Any students with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who require
academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students, 471-6259, as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. Before course accommodations can be made, the letter from SSD
must be presented to the instructor. Approved accommodations will not change the basic elements
of the course.
14. ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
The University’s honor Code states: “the core values of the University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member


of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.” Please note that all graded work                    (e.g. essays,
homework) done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing that appears to be the
work of someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or print source) or that
appears to have been written in English and then translated by an online translation program will
not be accepted, and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on the particular assignment.
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the university, policies on
academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, visit the Student Judicial
Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
15. STUDENT CONDUCT
Any student who, acting singly or in concert with others, obstructs, disrupts, or interferes with any
teaching, educational, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, or other activity or
public performance authorized to be held or conducted on campus or on property or in a building
or facility owned or controlled by the U.T. System or institution is subject to discipline. For more
information, visit http://www.utsystem.edu/bor/rules/50000Series/50101.pdf.
16. EMERGENCY EVACUATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police department, or Fire Prevention Services
office. Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                              SPN 610D: CALENDARIO
                                     Summer 2 2019


               Capítulo 1: El ritmo de la vida
1 July 15       · Syllabus / Presentaciones /Prueba diagnóstica
                · ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema (p. 1-4)
                · Entrando en materia: La vida universitaria (p. 5-12)
2 July 16       · ¡Gramaticando! Los mandatos informales (p. 13-21)
                · Entrando en materia: El dinero y el consumismo (p. 22-
                26)
3 July 17       ·¡Gramaticando! Los mandatos formales y plurales (p. 27-
                33)
                · Entrando en materia: La tecnología y el estrés (p. 34-41)
                · Due today at latest: Pre-Activity for Talk Abroad #1
4 July 18       · El lenguaje vivo: Lenguaje chat (p. 64)
                · ¡Gramaticando! El presente del subjuntivo: Deseos y
                recomendaciones (p. 42-54)
5 July 19       · ¡A Hablar! #1
                · Prueba de “Noticias y sociedad” #1 (p. 57-63)
                · Mejorando el discurso: La fuerza ilocucionaria y el
                registro (p. 66-67)
                · Repaso para el examen 1
6 July 22       · Tarea Final #1: Un email (p. 69)
                · Examen 1
              Capítulo 2: Abriendo fronteras
7 July 23 · Due Today at Latest: Talk Abroad #1 Post-Activity
          ·  ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema (p. 75-77)
          ·  Entrando en materia: El bienestar social (p. 78-83)
          ·  ¡Gramaticando! Verbos como “gustar” (p. 84-92)
8 July 24     · Continue: ¡Gramaticando! Verbos como “gustar” (p. 84-92)
              · Entrando en materia: La inmigración (p. p93-99)


9  July 25   · ¡Gramaticando! El presente del subjuntivo con emociones y
            reacciones (p. 100-106)
            · Entrando en materia: La tolerancia (p. 107-110)
10 July 26  ¡Gramaticando! El presente del subjuntivo para dudar y negar
            (p. 111-119)
11 July 29  ·    Prueba“Noticias y sociedad” #2 (p. 122-126)
            ·  Mejorando el discurso: Actos de habla (p. 130-132)
            ·   ¡A Hablar! #2
            ·    Repaso para el examen #2
            ·    Preparación para el debate.
12 July 30  · “Tarea Final” #2: Un debate (p. 134)
            · Examen 2
           Capítulo 3: Ni el cielo es el límite
13 July 31     · ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema (p. 139-142)
               · Entrando en materia: Descubrimientos y avances (p. 143-
               148)
               · Due Today at Latest: Talk Abroad #2 Pre-Activity
14 Aug 1     · ¡Gramaticando! El futuro (including tiempo verbal v.
            referencia temporal) (p. 149-157)
15 Aug 2       · Entrando en materia: Exploración (p. 158-161)
               · ¡Gramaticando! El subjuntivo después de conjunciones
               (SPACE) (p. 162-177)
16 Aug 5     · ¡Gramaticando! El subjuntivo después de conjunciones
            (HEAD CT) (p. 162-177)
              · Entrando en materia: La ingeniería genética (p. 178-183)


17 Aug 6          · ¡Gramaticando! El subjuntivo con antecedentes
                  inexistentes e indefinidos (p. 184-190)
                 · ¡A Hablar! #3
18 Aug 7   · Prueba “Noticias y sociedad” #3 (p. 193-199)
           · Mejorando el discurso: Conectar la escritura (p. 203-204)
           · Preparación para la TF #3
           · Repaso para el examen #3
19 Aug 8    ·Tarea Final #3: Un ensayo argumentativo (pág. 206-207)
           · EXAMEN #3
            Capítulo 4: El poder de la imagen
21 Aug 9       · Due Today at Latest: Talk Abroad #2 Post-Activity
                · Explanation of Tarea Final & Mejorando el discurso:
          Formular
                    preguntas (p. 285-286)
              · ¡Déjate volar! & Abriendo el tema (p. 213-216)
              · Entrando en materia: Brecha generacional (p. 217-223)
22 Aug 12     · ¡Gramaticando! Los tiempos pasados (p. 224-239)
              · El lenguaje vivo: Variación lingüística (p. 281-283)
23 Aug 13      · Entrando en materia: Identidad cultural (p. 240-244)
               · ¡Gramaticando! El pasado del subjuntivo (p. 245-256)
24 Aug 14      · Prueba“Noticias y sociedad” #4 (pág. 276-280)
               · ¡A Hablar! #4
                · Entrando en materia: Las artes (p. 257-263)
25 Aug 15 · ¡Gramaticando! Las hipótesis (p. 264-273)
          · Preparación para la tarea final
          · Preparación para el examen final


26 Aug 16 Tarea Final #4
          Final Audio Exam
-  Aug 17 Examen Final Escrito
   Aug 19
   TBA
