                                                ARC 520G / INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO IV: SPECULATION
                                                Spring 2019
                                                Judith Birdsong
                                                GOL 2.210
                                                Office hours: Monday, 11-12
                                                jcbirdsong@utexas.edu
Prerequisites
ARC 320D, ARC/ARI 221K, and ARC 415K with a grade of at least C in each.
Curriculum Flag
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to engage students in the process
of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing a student with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question,
problem, or project related to the student’s major. At least one-third of the grade will be based on independent investigation
and presentation of one’s own work.
                                                Plate XIII, “The Well,” or “Carceri with Several Straight, Broad Central Staircases” (1761)
                                                DARK MATTER
During his lifetime, Giovanni Battista Piranesi (1720-1778) was best known for his “vedute” (views) of Rome that
he sold to tourists as souvenir images from his workshop at the foot of the Spanish Stairs. It is, however, his
“Carceri d’Invenzione” (“Imaginary Prison”) series, a fictive evocation of a dark, improbable, and labyrinthian
world of psychological and physical torment, that has inspired the work of poets, filmmakers, novelists, artists,
and critics in the many years since. The caraceri are sites of both ruin and construction -- pulleys, hoists, and
half-completed timber assemblages juxtapose with collapsed structure and the architectural detritus of antiquity
– inhabited by shadowy figures and men in contorted agony. They are speculative propositions, the products,
some have suggested of fever-induced delirium or hallucinations brought on by opium use; regardless, they are
evidence of a wildly inventive imagination. Piranesi’s determination to convey atmospheric affect superseded
other such mundane considerations as clients, function, and, indeed, structure -- despite the dominant presence
of characteristically massive masonry arches and piers -- and was, at the time, wholly revolutionary
We will be drawing, quite literally, on Piranesi’s speculation. Each student will begin by manually reconstructing
(or “restituting”) the plan(s) of one of Piranesi’s 16 Carceri plates using a process of reverse perspective
construction. You will then be asked to extrapolate, or “complete,” the physical situation of your image by
discerning both the logic revealed in your analysis and constructing a narrative suggested by the plate’s title and
imagery. These “reimagined” districts will then serve as our individual and collective sites for the following


projects, a tower, and observatory. Rather than three distinct projects, they should be thought of as one work
that will continually evolve over the course of the semester.
                                               Field Trip (required): We will be touring the McDonald
Observatory in Ft Davis and Marfa during the month of February
INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO SEQUENCE
Students pursuing the Bachelor of Architecture must complete four Intermediate Design Studios during their
second and third years. Building on the Foundation Design Studios taken during the first year, the goal of the
Intermediate Studios is to prepare students for Advanced Design Studios in their fourth and fifth years.
Each Intermediate Studio will be structured around one of four broad themes of inquiry (Operational,
Environmental, Integration, and Speculation) and will offer a critical framework and vocabularies for design and
development into key issues emphasized in the theme. Intermediate Studios will also serve as a platform to
prepare students for the range of offerings of the Advanced Studios (e.g. Comprehensive, Urban Design,
Landscape Architecture, etc.). Intermediate Studios will follow a similar structure, but each instructor will
individually determine the scope and design problem for each studio.
THEME: SPECULATION
This studio emphasizes architecture as an intellectual or theoretical exploration: emphasis on theory, raison-de-
être, program, architecture and other disciplines (art, film, psychology, etc.).
STUDIO STRUCTURE
Assignment 1: Research and Analysis (three weeks);
Assignment 2 (four weeks)
Assignment 3 (eight weeks)
65% of final grade
Students will work individually
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will be exposed to a series of learning goals several times and from different angles over the four
Intermediate Studio sequence. The goal is that similar issues are repeated from studio to studio but from
different angles, allowing students to find, within the diversity of the topics, a “common thread” as they go
through the sequence of the four studios. The level of expectation will grow as students go from being
introduced to an issue, to becoming competent at it. Some issues would be only mentioned in passing in one
studio but will be studied in more depth in another.
     •    Design Composition Skills: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and space, both
          exterior and interior; building envelope
     •    Design Integration Skills: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality,
          structures, construction, and environmental system
     •    Site Analysis and Design: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant contextual;
          environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project
     •    Critical Thinking: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents; research skills
     •    Graphic Skills: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and
          level of skill displayed
     •    Basic grasp of accessibility and egress
     •    Collaborative and Leadership Skills: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all activities of the
          studio
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning encourages
dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio offers an environment where
students can come together to ask questions and make proposals, which are developed and discussed among


classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one
instruction from faculty members, and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical
thinking skills and spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education,
where project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and commitment to
the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity, professionalism, exploration and activism — all
in service of architecture's fundamental mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the design conversations
taken place in studios (lecture series, Goldsmith talks, exhibitions, etc). Students are encouraged to participate
and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen
Lectures (three per semester by lead practitioners from around the world). The lectures and the group
discussions in studio that follow are important for the holistic education of intellectually engaged students and
participation will have an impact on students’ grades (see below).
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of each grade is
derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades are subject to
deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal weight:
     Pursuit: the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
          • The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant method of
              inquiry
          • The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software, sketch drawing
              and models, etc.) in the development of the design
          • Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go beyond what is
              asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of the design?
     Grasp: the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge introduced in
     companion courses.
          • A strong and clearly stated design objective
          • Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of programmatic
              elements – and sectional development
          • Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as demonstrated through
              creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and construction, structural and
              environmental system integration, building materials and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in
              support of the design objective
          • Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness, floor plates, and
              assembly
     Resolution: of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse in the
     final design presentation.
          • Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy and level of
              skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design process; technical
              documentation
     Engagement: the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group discussions and
     reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a degree in the School
of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C- will not satisfy degree requirements.


GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-             Excellent
                 Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
                 conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
                 above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-          Above Average
                 Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
                 pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
                 Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C             Average
                 Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
                 dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor
                 Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are not
                 level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge base.
F                Fail
                 Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that
                 this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.
X                Excused Incomplete
                 Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing
                 work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
                 consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion
                 date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student
                 is enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3) unexcused absences, the
student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full
letter grade for each unexcused absence thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused
with written documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for completing
work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1) unexcused
absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is known in advance. Students
must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences; Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not
acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A student whose absence is excused under
this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
requires students to notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that
arrangements can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the
date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY


Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced.
Refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on
academic integrity: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php. University Code of
Conduct: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety,
racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for help:
     • In-house CARE counselor (see below)
     • For immediate support
               o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                    M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5th floor | 512-471-3515 | cmhc.utexas.edu
               o CMHC Crisis Line:
                    24/7 | 512-471-2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
     • Free services at CMHC:
               o Brief assessments and referral services: cmhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
               o Mental health & wellness articles: cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
               o MindBody Lab: cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
               o Classes, workshops, and groups: cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals within the
colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health support for students who are
struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty and staff may refer
students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her. Please leave a message if she is
unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the
disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259
voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the
instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at
that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention
to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other substance should be done in the shop.
Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7
days a week. Do not leave your studio without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold
yourself and your studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and reuse to reduce
material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue bins or any other containers with
white bags. The Material Exchange, a give-and-take system for students to donate materials and take what they
need for studio and fabrication coursework, is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the
UTSOA Technology Lab. All unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in
the Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
BCAL


Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or Professors can be
reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls can be made anonymously. If
something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
         outside.
     • Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and building they may
         occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week
         of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     • Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department,
         The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency.
[List_of_required_&_recommended_materials]
[semester_schedule]
