                                      JPN 601D Japanese I (#78906)
                                      Course Syllabus – Summer 2020
                                    June 4th - July 9th @10:00am-1:00pm
Instructor: Kaori Duffey        kaorid@utexas.edu
Campus Office: WCH5.136
Zoom Office Hours: 4:30-5:30pm or by appointment
Phone: 471-1843
(Please DO NOT leave voicemail messages. The phone is shared with another faculty.)
I. Course Objectives
1) To Acquire four skills in the Japanese language:
    • Listening: Ability to understand simple every day conversations.
    • Speaking: Ability to handle some survival situations through circumlocutions and repetitions.
    • Reading: Ability to read simple, short reading material including semi-authentic material.
    • Writing: Ability to write simple sentences learned in class using the appropriate hiragana,
        katakana, and kanji.
2) To acquire a fundamental knowledge of Japanese grammatical structures.
3) To acquire some knowledge of the Japanese culture.
II. Course Materials
1) Textbook: Yookoso! An invitation to Contemporary Japanese by Yasu-Hiko Tohsaku, 3rd edition
2) Workbook: Laboratory Manual for Yookoso! An Invitation to Contemporary Japanese, 3rd edition
    • The textbook and the workbook are on reserve on the 1st floor of the PCL.
3) Audio files to accompany the Yookoso workbook, used for homework assignments
        http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/japan/Yookoso3Bridge/
4) Handouts from Canvas, including course schedule and homework assignments.
        http://canvas.utexas.edu/      EID and password are required.
5) JOSHU study help site for class instruction, homework assignments, etc.
         http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese/joshu/
6) About Computer and Printer
    • Check your email daily since important announcements will be sent.
    • You need to print out assignments, handouts, format sheets, etc. from Canvas.
    • You need to Japanize your computer to be able to type in Japanese.
        http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese/joshu/japanizing/jpn-ur_comp.html
    • “My computer/printer broke down yesterday.” is not an acceptable excuse for not making the
        due date.
7) Headset and audio tools
    • A screen that is large enough to see powerpoint presentations and documents is recommended. A
        phone may be too small. Get a good headset that works with your device(s). We will want to
        interact and talk with each other so it is important that your chosen microphone works well.
                                                        1


III. Course Structure
    • Prepare for the class according to the course schedule.
1) Lecture
    • Please attend class prepared. Read appropriate textbook assignments and do the grammar
        exercises and activities before class.
    • Brief grammar explanations and grammar exercises will be given during the class.
    • Reading as well as some writing practice, including kana and kanji, will be given.
    • Japanese culture related to the topic will be discussed.
    • Administrative announcements will be given.
2) Activity
    • Students will be engaged in a variety of communicative activities mainly in the textbook and
        workbook.
IV. Grading Policy
Your final course grade is determined in the following way.
                                                     %
 1) Attendance & Class Participation                 0
 2) Homework                                         10
 3) Vocabulary Quizzes (15-2=13)                     10
 4) Kana/Kanji Quizzes (10-2=8)                      10
 5) Compositions (2)                                 10
 6) Video Presentation (2)                           5
 7) Oral Exams (2)                                   20
 8) Chapter Tests (3)                                15
 9) Listening Exam                                   5
 10) Final Exam                                      15
 Total                                               100
Your grade will be determined by the plus/minus system. There will be NO grading on a curve.
 A          =92~100%                (Below “C,” you may not advance to the next level)
 A-         =89-91.99               C-      =69-71.99
 B+         =86-88.99               D+      =66-68.99
 B          =82-85.99               D       =62-65.99
 B-         =79-81.99               D-      =59-61.99
 C+         =76-78.99               F       =58.99 or less
 C          =72-75.99
    •   All students who wish to advance to the next level must take this course with a letter grade,
        and finish with a grade of at least C.
    •   Those taking this course with CR/NC will not be eligible to take 610D in the future.
                                                       2


V. Course Requirements
1) Attendance & Class Participation
    • Because of the cumulative nature of language learning, it is essential that students attend all
        classes and keep up with course work on a daily basis. Absence will not excuse a student in any
        way from responsibility for learning the course material. However, you will not be penalized for
        your absences.
    • Your active participation in class activities will greatly enhance your progress in Japanese.
        Please do not afraid of making mistakes in class: you learn from mistakes.
    • Absence due to religious reasons: By UT Austin policy, you must notify your instructor of
        your pending absence prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. Please notify as
        far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
    Classroom policy:
    •   No gum, please.
    •   No photo taking, video or audio recording without permission during class. Classes will be
        recorded and stored in Cloud, so no need to record on your own.
    •   Please refrain from engaging in behaviors that can be distracting to your instructor and
        classmates. Distracting behaviors include, but are not limited to, arriving late or leaving
        early, leaving or re-entering the classroom during class, studying other subjects, using
        electronic devices and talking or whispering between students.
    •   Please respect each other and show consideration towards your instructor and classmates.
2) Homework -- No late/ incomplete homework will count toward your grade.
    • Download Adobe Scan on your device. Whenever you see [P] in the schedule, you need
        to turn in scanned work and upload.
    • See course schedule / canvas assignment page for HW due dates and instructions. You
        will be given homework assignments almost every day. Do your homework promptly and
        carefully.
    • All assignments are due at the beginning of each class unless otherwise specified. Turn
        them in before the class starts (online homework too). If you turn in your assignments at the
        end of the class, it will be considered late submission (no credit). Do not send homework via
        email or leave homework at your instructor’s office or mailbox without getting permission to
        do so in advance.
   • Write your name on each homework sheet. If there are more than 2 pages, staple them in
       the upper left corner. Your instructor is not responsible for missing pages when pages do not
       have names or are not stapled together.
   • If you need to turn in your homework early, you must provide a written note (stating which
       homework of what date you are turning in early) attached to your homework.
   • Write neatly. Use only pencil (and erase carefully) for homework assignments.
   • The homework will be graded based on accuracy, handwriting, use of kanji learned in this
       class, and correct spelling. Late, incomplete, or sloppily done homework may be corrected
       but will not be counted for credit.
   There are 5 main types of HW assignments.
    1. Kana (hiragana/ katakana) HW: Print out practice sheets from Canvas.
    2. Kanji HW: Kanji list and kanji practice sheets are provided in Canvas. For each chapter, there are
        words/phrases to practice.
    3. Workbook HW: Complete exercises on your workbook, tear off the page and submit it.
                                                      3


    4. Canvas HW: Use the link on Canvas to complete assignments.
    5. JOSHU HW: Use the link on Canvas to complete assignments (online submission).
   •    You must do your homework on your own. Unauthorized collaboration on homework and/or
        copying someone's homework and turning it in as your own will be considered cheating and will
        result in a severe penalty. Allowing other students to use your homework is also considered
        scholastic dishonesty. Please read section VI. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty below.
    •   There will be extra credit HW assignments (total 10 points). Use these to cover missed HW
        assignments due to emergency absences, sickness, and so on.
3) Vocabulary Quizzes (VQ) -- NO make–up / early quiz, and
4) Kana/Kanji Quizzes (KQ) -- NO make–up / early quiz
    • All quizzes will be given at the beginning of the class, so come to class on time.
    • You will have 15 VQs and 10 KQs. See Canvas assignment page for the content of each quiz.
    • 2 lowest VQ scores and 2 lowest KQ scores will be dropped at the end of the semester. Use
        these to cover emergency absences and tardiness such as family emergencies, sickness,
        and so on.
5) Compositions
    • You are going to write two compositions.
    • You will receive feedback on the draft, and then you are expected to turn in the final version
        based on the feedback. Please attach the first draft when turning in the final version in order
        to receive full credit. Without writing the draft, you won’t receive any credit even if you turn
        in the final version by the deadline.
    • The maximum score for each composition is 20pts. You will lose 1pt. per day for late
        submission. Short or sloppily written composition may be accepted but will not be counted
        for full credit.
    • In each composition, you should try to use new vocabulary, grammar items and kanji that
        have been introduced in this class.
    • Do not consult Japanese speakers (friends, relatives, etc), classmates or use computer
        translation; write and revise by yourself.
6) Video Project -- NO make-up/ early presentation
    • This assignment is linked to the compositions. You will create 2 videos based on your
        composition assignments. See the course schedule for submission deadlines. More details
        will be explained in class.
7) Oral Exams -- NO make-up/ early exam
    • At the end of chapter 1 and chapter 2, there will be an oral exam based upon the material
        that you have been practicing. They will be graded on the basis of communicative skills as
        well as accuracy, structure, vocabulary, pronunciation, and fluency. The oral exam
        guidelines will be posted on Canvas.
    • You need to sign-up for a 5-minute slot in advance using Canvas Scheduler. Without signing
        up, you cannot take the exams. There will be no make up if you missed your scheduled time
        slot. Oral Exams will be recorded for grading purpose.
8) Chapter Tests -- NO make-up/ early test
                                                      4


    •    You will have three chapter tests to test your understanding of the material in the chapters.
         Each test will include everything that has been covered in that chapter.
    •    Listening sections will be conducted in the beginning of the test day. If you come in late,
         you will not be able to make up missed listening sections. You will not receive any points for
         the missed listening sections even if you guess the answers and write them down.
9) Listening Exam -- NO make-up/ early exam
    • On the last class day, there will be a listening exam which is based upon all the materials
         covered in this course.
    • Be sure to come to the class on time. Listening sections will be conducted in the beginning
         of the test period. You will not receive any points for the missed listening sections even if
         you guess the answers and write them down.
10) Final Exam -- NO make-up/ early exam
    • All students are expected to take the comprehensive final written exam on the officially
         scheduled day and time.
    • Final exam will test your abilities in language skills such as reading, writing, and grammar
         within the context of what has been done in this course. The final exam will not involve a
         listening section since there will be a listening exam on the last class day.
Notes on Oral Exams, Chapter Tests, Listening Exam and Final Exam
    • Test and exam scores will be posted on Canvas.
    • If you would like to see and discuss your oral exam score sheet, chapter tests, listening exam
         and/or final exam, please visit your instructor’s office. Students cannot keep any of the
         tests and exams.
VI. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
Please know the Honor Code of the University of Texas at Austin.
        The Honor Code states:
        The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
        leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
        expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
        peers and community.
Students who violate University’s rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonest will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Judicial Services web
site at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ The Student Judicial Services Office is located at SSB4.104
(471-2841)
The following are some examples of behaviors regarded as "scholastic dishonesty".
            1. Copying other students’ homework/ exam answers.
            2. Showing your homework/ exam answers to other students.
            3. Copying other people’s work or phrases without citing.
            4. Having someone else write a paper/composition for you or correct it for you.
            5. Seeking and receiving help from a speaker of Japanese for assignments.
                                                       5


Students are not allowed to distribute course materials online or elsewhere. Course materials include
PPT slides, handouts, assignments, quizzes, tests and exams.
Please also read UT’s policies on students’ scholastic dishonesty:
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/student-affairs/policies-and-procedures/academic-dishonesty.php
VII. Student Accommodations
    • Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic
       accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
       Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
       http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
VIII. Canvas Usage
    • This course uses Canvas, a password-protected Web-based course management system.
       Canvas is used to provide instructions, distribute course materials, to communicate online,
       to post grades, and to submit assignments.
    • Students are responsible for checking the Canvas course site daily for class work and
       announcements. As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as
       well as unanticipated disruptions. Notification of these disruptions will be posted on the
       Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if there is
       an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, and if it occurs close to the due
       date, your instructor will make an adjustment.
    • Canvas is available http://canvas.utexas.edu/. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-
       9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 5 pm.
IX. Studying Japanese
    • In learning a foreign language, it is important to study every day. You are expected to spend
       plenty of hours outside of your classes. You should not expect to learn the language simply
       by attending the class activities.
    • Come prepared. Please read appropriate textbook pages before class to facilitate your
       understanding of the lectures and participation in class activities.
    • Actively participate in class. Use Japanese whenever possible, and don’t be afraid of making
       mistakes.
    • Spend as much time as possible listening to the Japanese language, including the Yookoso
       Textbook Audio Program. Even if you do not understand, listening to Japanese will help you
       to get familiar with the sounds, intonation, and vocabulary.
    • Develop a systematic way of organizing the increasingly large amounts of materials for which you
       will be responsible. Language learning requires constant review of previously-learned
       material. You may want to make vocabulary cards or lists according to word groups. Find
       your own learning and organizational style, and continue reviewing on a daily basis. Read
       the “Study Hints” in the textbook pages 3, 13, 51, 83, 115-6, 122-3, and 134-5 for
       suggestions.
    • Try to join Japanese related clubs at UT, such as Japanese Conversation Table and UT
       Student organization: Japanese Association.
                                                     6


X. Websites for Learners of Japanese at UT
1) UT Japanese Language Program: http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese
2) UT Study help site (JOSHU): http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese/joshu
    • This web site includes various activities and quizzes (for self-paced learning), grammar
        notes, and kanji review exercise, and lots more. You can also read stories written by students
        in the previous semesters.
3) UT Japanese Program FB page: https://www.facebook.com/UTAustinJapaneseProgram
4) UT Department of Asian Studies: http://liberalarts.utexas.edu/asianstudies/
XI. Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL
(the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
Recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
     • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
         buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
         and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
         week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter
         a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of
         Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
         procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                       7
