                      THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                      STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number: SW n360K 3 / n393 R23                Laura Swann MEd., LCDC, EMDR, CDWF
Unique Number 88700 / 88780                         laurajswann@utexas.edu
Semester: Summer 2019                               Office: 3.104A
Meeting Time: Monday & Wednesday                    512-775-4210
                 1:30-4:00                          Office Hours: Monday & Wednesday
                 Meeting Place: SSW 2.116           Before/after class and by appointment
                TREATMENT OF SUBSTANCE USE DISORDERS
I. Standardized Course Description
The course is designed to provide a basic understanding of contemporary treatment methods
used in work with a diverse range of clients recovering from alcohol and/or drug addiction.
Emphasis will be placed on integrating the use of Mindfulness-Based Therapy, Rational Emotive
Therapy, and Behavior Therapy with the 12 Step Program of Recovery/ Minnesota Model, Faith-
based, Pharmacological, the Therapeutic Community Model and the Drug Court Model.
Pre and/or Co-Requisites
Students who plan to specialize in chemical dependence and wish to obtain state licensing as a
chemical dependence counselor (LCDC), should take a minimum of three (3) courses in this
area. It is suggested that the sequence include: “Dynamics of Substance Use Disorders,”
“Treatment of Substance Use Disorders” and one or more from “Coexisting Psychiatric and
Substance Use Disorders,” “Relapse and Recovery” or “Women and Substance Use Disorders.”
II. Standardized Course Objectives
By the end of the semester;
 1. The student should be able to work with a broad range of clients with understanding,
     affirmation, and respect for the positive value of diversity.
 2. The student should be familiar with basic theoretical concepts and treatment techniques of
     selected contemporary counseling theories, adjunctive methods and medically supervised
     programs for treatment of clients with substance use disorders.
 3. The student should be able to describe the concepts, procedures and preliminary outcome
     data related to six major models for treatment of substance use disorders:
     Pharmacological, 12 Step, Minnesota, Faith-based, Therapeutic Community and Drug
     Court.
                                                                                              1


 4. The student should be able to describe basic concepts, propositions, treatment techniques,
     and procedures derived from major psychosocial theories including: Mindfulness, Rational
     Emotive, and Behavioral.
 5. The student should be able to integrate counseling techniques derived from psychosocial
     theories covered in the course with the Pharmacological, 12 Step, Minnesota, the Faith-
     based, Therapeutic Community, and Drug Court models.
III. Teaching Methods
Teaching methods will include lecture, group discussion, audio-visual materials and guest
lecturers.
IV. Required Text and Materials
Miller, G. (2015). Learning the language of addiction counseling (4th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: John
Wiley and Sons Publishing.
Corcoran and Roberts. Social Workers’ Desk Reference, 3rd Ed.
Recommended Texts and Reading Materials
Alcoholics Anonymous World Services. (2001). The big book of alcoholics anonymous, 4th ed.).
New York City, NY: The A. A. Grapevine, Inc.
Levine, N. (2014). Refuge Recovery: Buddhist Path to Recovery from Addiction.
Small, J. (2005) The Sacred Purpose of Being Human: A Journey Through the 12 Principles of
Wholeness, Health Communications Inc.: Deerfield Beach, FL.
APA Resources - Learning Resource Center (LRC) Reference Book APA Style Guide
Living Sober: Some methods A.A. Members have used for not drinking. Alcoholics Anonymous.
(2005). Living sober. (3 ed.). New York, NY: Alcoholics Anonymous World
Evidence-Based Addiction Treatment. Edited by: Peter M. Miller. Academic Press (2009).
V. Course Requirements -both Undergraduate and Graduate Students will
complete requirements #1-4. Graduate students only - will complete
requirements #5 & 6.
1. Family of Origin (FOO) Movie Review paper
Goal – the goal of this assignment has two main purposes; to help you understand how SUD
affects the family, and how SUD in the family can have long lasting effects. Outside of class,
before June 19th you will watch the movie Saving Mr. Banks. Watch through your therapeutic
lens. Using the plethora of clinical indications in the movie, record and discuss what stands out
                                                                                                2


for you. Here are some questions that will help guide the process.
     • How does someone’s family of origin (specifically SUD) affect their ability to adjust in
         adult life? Consider;
             o Relationships
             o The color red
             o Pears
             o Fun
             o Kids
     • When working with alcoholics and addicts how much do you think someone’s FOO
         might be something that you will work with?
     • Why did Pamela need to push everyone away? Was Ralph an exception, why?
     • What are some of the cultural aspects of this movie? How do they influence addiction?
     • What did the progression of Travers Goff’s addiction look like?
     • Identify the various potential for trauma in this family.
When you have finished the movie, complete a 3-5-page paper discussing your thoughts. You
may use some of the above questions as writing points, but you are not limited to them. Also,
make sure to include at the end of your paper, the impact of this assignment on your self-
awareness. What did you learn about yourself and your FOO from watching the movie? What
areas might you need to monitor so that your experiences do not get in the way of what your
client’s and/or families need? Be reflective!
The paper must adhere to APA guidelines (with the exception of the self-reflection portion).
It should also be carefully edited for organization, spelling, grammar, punctuation, and clarity of
thought. Due June 19th.
Please Note: Reflecting on your family of origin can sometimes be difficult. Issues may arise
that cause thoughtfulness, pain or questioning. Please remember that all families ebb and flow
between unhealthy and healthy periods. This is central to our human condition. One of the
goals of this assignment is to help provide insight into your own family dynamics and emotional
system so you can better use and monitor your experiences in your work/practice. The
information contained in this paper will be kept confidential -no one will read this paper except
for me. Feel free to contact me if you have any trepidation about the assignment.
2.                          Exam I – July 1st                  Exam II – July 29th
Two exams will be given during the semester. Exam #1 will cover material from June 10th through June
26th. Exam #2 will cover material from July 3rd through July 24th .
Exam questions may include multiple-choice, T/F, reflective questions and short answer essay
questions.
3.
Class participation grade will include attendance, punctuality, preparedness for class, informed
class discussion, brief assignments that may be given, and the extent to which students take
part in the question and discussion class time. Each student will be given a class participation
                                                                                                    3


form the first day of class for review (located at the end of the syllabus). Students will fill this
out and turn it in on the last day of class. If you fail to turn in the form you will receive 0 points
in this area. Due: July 29th.
4.
Students will attend 3 (different locations) 12-step and/or recovery meetings outside of class.
You may attend AA, Refuge Recovery, Celebrate Recovery, ALANON, NA, ACOA, EDA or other
12-step or recovery-oriented meeting. Students may use 1 on-line meeting to fulfill the
requirements. If possible, make one of the meetings The City-Wide Group, that meets every 3rd
Saturday at Riverbend Church. Very Specific details will be discussed the first day of class
regarding this assignment – this is very important, so that you may practice healthy meeting
etiquette.
After attending all three meetings you will write a 2-3-page paper. Do not use any names of
individuals, it is absolutely necessary for you to maintain the anonymity of persons you see at
the meeting, to behave with respect for all present, and that you not deceive the group about
your reasons for being there. Describe the groups in general terms (not individual members).
Use the following format for writing your paper;
     1. Open your paper with the following information;
            a. Names of the groups, locations, type of meeting (open, speaker, closed, Big Book
                  study, Celebrate Recovery, Eating Disorders, on-line, etc., …) topic for this
                  specific meeting and times attended.
            b. Was this your first 12-Step or recovery meeting?
            c. Are you familiar with 12-Step programs or other recovery meetings?
            d. What does anonymity mean in regard to recovery meetings?
     2. Do you feel that 12-step/recovery meetings are successful in supporting recovery?
            a. Discuss your reasons
            b. Is this something that you will include in your resources for clients?
     3. Share anything that you learned about each 12 Step or recovery program?
     4. Did any of the meetings prompt any feelings for you?
APA format is not required. As such, it is permissible to write from a first-person perspective and
no references are required.
It should also be carefully edited for organization, spelling, grammar, punctuation, and clarity of
thought. Due: July 22nd.
Graduate students will complete requirements 5 & 6, in addition to 1-4.
5. Research Paper for Graduate Students ONLY
Graduate students will select a specific topic that relates to the treatment of Substance Use
Dependence, this will be the focus of the research and writing. Please discuss the topic with me
prior to. The content of the paper should follow general guidelines of graduate level writing.
The paper and reference page must adhere to APA guidelines. It should also be carefully
edited for organization, spelling, grammar, punctuation, and clarity of thought. Total length of
                                                                                                     4


paper should be roughly 8-10 pages, not to exceed 12 pages. You must include at least 10
references (no more than 3 of them should be web-based) to support your content. Due: No
later than July 29th.
6.
During the semester students will find learning experiences as discussed and approved in
graduate group discussion on the first day of class. After each experience students will write a
1-2-page reflective paper using APA guidelines. The paper should discuss the experience and
the students learning of that experience. In addition to the paper students will have the
opportunity to discuss their experience in small graduate groups that will occur on the due
date.
First Reflection due date – June 26th - Second Reflection due date July 10th.
   COURSE GRADING CRITERIA                       Undergraduate          Graduate
Family of Origin Movie Paper                         20 %                 10%
In-class exam I                                      25%                  15%
In-class exam II                                     25%                  15%
Class Participation                                  15%                  10%
12-Step Meeting Paper                                15%                  10%
Research Paper (Graduate Students)                                        25%
Reflection Learning Papers (Graduate Students)                            15%
TOTAL                                                100%                100%
VI. Grading Scale:
       94. 0 & Above      A
       90.0 to 93.999     A-
       87.0 to 89.999     B+
       84.0 to 86.999     B
       80.0 to 83.999     B-
       to 79.999         C+
       74.0 to 76.999     C
       70.0 to 73.999     C-
       67.0 to 69.999     D+
       64.0 to 66.999     D
       60.0 to 63.999     D-
       Below 60.0         F
                                                                                                 5


VII. Class Policies
ATTENDENCE AND CLASS PARTICIPATION. In all courses, regular attendance is required in
order to receive a passing grade. If students are going to be absent it is important to contact
the instructor via email or phone as soon as possible. Students who have excessive absences in
the course will not pass the class. Exceptions may be made, with respect to individual students,
subject to the approval of the Academic Dean. Class participation grade will include
attendance, punctuality, preparedness for class, participation in class and group discussions,
informed class discussion, brief assignments that may be given, and the extent to which
students take part in the question and discussion class time. Each student will be given a class
participation form the first day of class for review (located at the end of the syllabus). Students
will fill this out and turn it in on the last day of class. If you fail to turn in the form you will
receive 0 points in this area.
TURNING IN ASSIGNMENTS AND LATE ASSIGNMENTS. Assignments are due on the date
indicated on the syllabus. Assignments are to be turned in on hard copy, please no front and
back printing. Assignments via email and/or Canvas will not be accepted without approval from
the instructor. Late assignments will not be taken without penalty. Five points will be
deducted each day the assignment is late.
RUBRICS. Students will receive rubrics the first day of class, they will also be posted on Canvas.
Use your rubrics as guides to the content and format of the assignment. It is a requirement
that the correct rubric be attached as the cover page with each assignment turned in.
VIII. University Policies
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects students
to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared
to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course
brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are
influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and
political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn
from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work also
deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and
uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did
not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment,
we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the
ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one
another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
                                                                                                  6


UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions
to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to
inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’
participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are
not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that
privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to
participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective
careers.
Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of
electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any
language that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and
are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information
that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by
the School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW
Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the
classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students,
and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For
further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services,
Office of the Dean of Students (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/).
                                                                                                    7


USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to
exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations
must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or
471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter to
the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing
accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more information, visit
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the
student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the
University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, instructors, staff, and/or teaching
assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual violence, or sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents
will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX
Coordinator and/or the Title IX Deputy for the SSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and
staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to obtain information. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
http://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-sexualharassment.pdf.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed fire arms may be found here:
https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
                                                                                                 8


the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as an
official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading
their email for university and course-related information and announcements. Students are
responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address. Students
should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to
stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-sensitive.
Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to
agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety
concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone who is
acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their
concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership
between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC),
the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
     •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •   If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
     •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
     •   Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                                                                 9


IX. Course Schedule
      Date                Description                           Text/Readings
 June 10       Overview & Introduction            Syllabus & rubrics
               Etiology of Substance Use Disorder Chapter 1 - Introduction
                                                  Readings: Bib: Genetics – New
                                                  insights…
                                                  Canvas: Stigma and social support……...
                                                  Watch bfc-12th:
                                                  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S_yA
                                                  fgwWZBM&t=2568s
 June 12       Discussion – language of SUD
               Pharmacology and                   Readings: Bib: Commonly Abused
               Pharmacotherapy                    Drugs - Pharmacotherapy for alcohol
                                                  related disorders…….
 June 17       Assessment of SUD                  Chapter 3
                   •  DSM V
                   •  Various assessment
                      methods
                                                  Complete bfc-7/24
               Treatment in SUD (start)           12-step group assignment
 June 19       Evidenced based treatment in SUD   Chapter 2
               (continue)
                                                  FOO Paper Due!!!
                                                  Readings: Canvas: A systematic
                                                  Review…….
                                                  Group check in
                                                                                    10


June 24 12 – Steps and variations           Chapter 8 & 12
        Group discussion                    Readings: Bib: 1. Buddhist Philosophy –
                                            Buddhist and addictions… 2. Spirituality
        Refuge Recovery - Buddhist Path     – Relation of spirituality…
        Spirituality and SUD                Canvas: 1. Counseling Latinos with
                                            Substance….2. Chapter 3 from the Power
        Discussion of The Power of Habit    of Habit - The Golden Rule of Habit
                                            Change
June 26 Drug Court and Therapeutic          Chapter 6 pages 180-194
        Communities                         Link:
            • DC video                      http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK
        Harm Reduction                      64342/
                                            Readings: Bib: Mixed Model &
        Grad students Learning Experience   Therapeutic Communities – The story of
        Reflection #1 - discussion          CURA…Canvas: The Impact of
                                            Acculturation…….
                                            #1-RLE paper due for Grad students
July 1  Test I                               Test I
July 3  Discussion of FOO paper             Chapter 5 p. 123-137
        Family and SUD                      Readings: Bib: Family Systems – 1.
                                            Family roles in homes with…… 2. Partner
                                            enabling of substance….. 3. A critique of
        Review Test                         the codependency…..
July 8  Field trip – Phoenix House 1:30-    400 West Live Oak, Austin
        3:00
July 10 Pleasure Unwoven Video
        Grad students Learning Experience   #2 -RLE paper due for Grad students
        Reflection #2 - discussion
July 15 Open date
July 17 School Alternatives and Recovery    Guest Lecturers – Sierra Castedo-
        Support for adolescents and college Rodgers; Director-UT Center for Students
        students                            in Recovery and Julie McElrath;
                                            Executive Director-University High
                                            School
                                                                                 11


 July 22              Meeting discussion                        Meeting Paper Due
                      Co-occurring Disorders and SUD            Chapter 4
 July 24              Shame                                     Readings: Canvas: 1. Cultural
                                                                differences and shame…. 2. Christian
                      Operation Naloxone
                                                                faith and recovery from shame….
                                                                Guest Lecturer: OperationNaloxone.org
                                                                Maddie Burgess – Dr. of Pharm candidate
                                                                2021
 July 29              Wrapping up & Evaluations                 Test II
                      Test II                                   Participation Form due
                                                                Graduate research papers due
X. Bibliography
Commonly Abused Drugs - Pharmacotherapy
Parran, T.V., Adelman, C.A., Merkin, B., Pagano, M.E., Defranco, R., Ionescu, R.A., & Mace, A.G.
(2010). Long-term outcomes of office-based buprenorphine / naloxone maintenance therapy.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 106. 56-60.
Roman, et al., Using medication-assisted treatment for substance use disorders: Evidence of
barriers and facilitators of implementation. Addictive Behaviors, 36, 584-589.
Anton, R. F., O'Malley, S. S., Ciraulo, D. A., Cisler, R. A., Couper, D., Donovan, D. M., Gastfriend,
D. R., Hosking, J. D., Johnson, B. A., LoCastro, J. S., Longabaugh, R., Mason, B. J., Mattson, M. E.,
Miller, W. R., Pettinati, H. M., Randall, C. L., Swift, R., Weiss, R. D., Williams, L. D., & Zweben, A.
(2006). Combined pharmacotherapies and behavioral interventions for alcohol dependence:
The COMBINE study. JAMA, 295(17), 2003-2017.
Mariani, J., & Levin, F. (2004). Pharmacotherapy for Alcohol-Related Disorders: What Clinicians
Should Know. Harvard Review Of Psychiatry, 12(6), 351-366. doi:10.1080/10673220490905697
Alpert, H. R., Connolly, G. N., & Biener, L. C. (2013). A prospective cohort study challenging the
effectiveness of population-based medical intervention for smoking cessation. Tobacco Control,
22(1), 32-37. doi: 10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050129
                                                                                                      12


Diagnosis and Paths to Treatment
ASAM, New Definition of addiction. The NSDUH Report, Alcohol treatment: Need, utilization,
and barriers. p.1-10.
Ludwig, A. (1985). Cognitive processes associated with “spontaneous” recovery from
alcoholism. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 46, 53-58.
Whitten, L. (2006). Court-mandated treatment works as well as voluntary. NIDA Notes, 20(6),
1&6.
Field, C. A., Baird, J., Saitz, R., Caetano, R., & Monti, P. M. (2010). The mixed evidence for brief
intervention in emergency departments, trauma care centers and inpatient hospital settings:
what should we do? Alcoholism: Clinical and experimental research, 34(12), 2004-2010.
12-Step & Mutual Support Recovery Groups
Alcoholics Anonymous. (1996). Alcoholics Anonymous. New York: World Service, In.
Krentzman, A. R. (2007). The evidence base for the effectiveness of Alcoholics Anonymous:
Implications for social work practice. Journal of Social Work Practice in the Addictions, 7(4), 27-
48.
Miller, W., & Wilbourne, P. Mesa Grande: a methodological analysis of clinical trials of
treatment for alcohol use disorders. Addiction, 3, 256-277. Retrieved July 9, 2014, from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11964100
Shorkey, C. & Uebel, M. (Sage, 2008). Secular Organizations for Sobriety (SOS). Encyclopedia of
Substance Abuse Prevention, Treatment, and Recovery, 815-816.
Shorkey, C. & Uebel, M. (Sage, 2008). Women for Sobriety, Encyclopedia of Substance Abuse
Prevention, Treatment, and Recovery, 1007-1008. Reardon, C. (2013, November/December).
Alternatives to 12-step addiction recovery. Social Work Today, 13(6), 12-15.
Family Systems
Johnson, VE. (1986). Intervention: How to help someone who does not want help. San
Francisco: Harper & Row. 61-87.
Liepman, Nirenberg & Begin (1989). Evaluation of a program designed to help family and
significant others to motivate resistant alcoholics into recovery. American Journal of Drug and
Alcohol Abuse, 15(2), 209-221.
Loneck, Garrett & Banks (1996). A Comparison of Johnson intervention with four other methods
of referral to outpatient treatment. American Journal of Drug and Alcohol Abuse, 22(2), 233-
246.
                                                                                                     13


Wegscheider, S. (1976). The family trap.. no one escapes from a chemically dependent family.
(1st ed.). [Brochure]. USA: The Johnson Institute.
Miller, W.R., Meyers, R. J., & Tonigan, J. S. (1999). Engaging the unmotivated in treatment for
alcohol problems: A comparison of three strategies for intervention through family members.
Journal of consulting and clinical psychology, 67(5), 688-697.
Vernig, Peter M., (2011). Family roles in homes with alcohol-dependent parents: An evidence-
based review. Journal of Substance Use & Misuse. Retrieved August 24, 2010, from
http://dx.doi.org/10.3109/10826084.2010.501676
Rotunda, Rob & Kathy Doman (2001). Partner enabling of substance use disorders: clinical
review and future directions. American Journal of Family Therapy 29:257-270.
Calderwood, Kimberly A., & Ann Rajesparam. (2014). A critique of codependency concepts
considering the best interest of the child. Journal of Contemporary Social Services 95(3), 171-
178.
Mixed Model & Therapeutic Community
DeLeon, G. (1988). The therapeutic community and behavior science. In B.A. Ray Learning
factors in substance abuse. Rockville, MD: Alcohol, Drug Abuse and Mental Health
Administration.
Guydish, J., Werdegar, D., Sorensen, J. L., Clark, W., & Acampora, A. (1995). A day treatment
program in a therapeutic community setting: Six month outcomes - The Walden House day
treatment program. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 12(6), 441-447.
Waters, J. A., Fazio, S. L., Hernandez, L., & Segarra, J. (2002). The story of CURA, a
Hispanic/Latino drug therapeutic community. Journal of Ethnicity in Substance Abuse, 1(1), 113-
134.
Laing, D., Golick, J., & Sowle, S. (2016). Using experiential approaches to increase engagement
in adolescents. The Counselor, April, pp. 40-45.
Therapeutic Communities
Brown, R. (2011). Drug court effectiveness: A matched cohort study in the Dane County drug
treatment court . Journal of Offender Rehabilitation , 50(4), 2011. doi:
10.1080/10509674.2011.571347
Knight, K., Simpson, D. D., & Hiller, M. L. (1999). Three year reincarceration outcomes for in
prison therapeutic community treatment in Texas. The Prison Journal, 79(3), 337-351.
Shorkey, C. T. & Windsor, L. C. (2010). Inventory of spirituality in alcohol/other drug research:
Psychometric dimensions. Alcoholism Treatment Quarterly, 28, 17-37.
                                                                                                  14


Winters, K. C., Stinchfield, R., Latimer, W. W., & Lee, S. (2007). Long-term outcome of
substance-dependent youth following 12-step treatment. Journal of Substance Abuse
Treatment, 33, 61-69.
Faith-Based Programs
Shorkey, C. & Uebel, M. & Windsor, L. (2008). Measuring dimensions of spirituality in chemical
dependence treatment and recovery. International Journal of Mental Health & Addictions, 6,
286-305.
 Neff, Shorkey, & Windsor, Contrasting faith-based and traditional substance abuse treatment
programs, p. 4961.
Wolf-Branigin, M. (2009). The emergence of formalized salvation army addictions treatment.
Journal of Religion & Spirituality in Social Work, 28(3), 328-338. doi:
10.1080/15426430903070251.
Drug Court
Finn, P. & Newlyn, A. K. (June 1993). Miami’s “Drug court”: A different approach, Dade County
diverts drug defendants to court- run rehabilitation program. Program Focus. Miami: National
Institute of Justice, 1-15.
Patra, J. et. al. (2010). Factors associated with treatment compliance and its effects on
retention among participants in a court-mandated treatment program. Contemporary Drug
Problems, 37, 289-313.
Kerl, D. J. & Parsons, K. (Under Supervision of Clayton Shorkey), (2009). Rearrest and retention
in the Travis County Drug Court. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin.
Experiential Therapy
Dingle, G.A., Gleadhill, L., & Baker, F.A.. (2008). Can music therapy engage patients in group
cognitive behavior therapy for substance abuse treatment? Drug and Alcohol Review, 27, p.
190-196.
Shorkey, C. (n.d.). Summary of research using music to facilitate recovery from chemical
dependence. Unpublished manuscript, School of Social Work, University of Texas, Austin, Tx.
Rhinewine, J.P. & Williams, O.J. (2007). Holotropic Breathwork: The Potential Role of a
Prolonged, Voluntary Hyperventilation Procedure as an Adjunct to Psychotherapy. The Journal
of Alternative and Complementary Medicine, 13(7), 771-776.
Marcus, M. T., Fine, M., & Kouzekanai, K. (2001). Mindfulness-based meditation in a
therapeutic community. Journal of Substance Abuse, 5(4), 305-311.
                                                                                               15


Recovery Systems
Flores, P. J. (2004). Addiction as an attachment disorder. Lanham, MD: Jason Aronson. p. 1-67.
SAMSHA’s working definition of recovery from mental disorders and substance abuse.
Walsh, R. (2011, January 17). Life style & Mental Health. American Psychologist. Advance
online publication. doi: 10.1037/a0021769
Shorkey, C., Windsor, L.C., & Spence, R. (2008). Assessing Culturally Competent Chemical
Dependence Treatment Services for Mexican Americans. Journal of Behavioral Health Services
& Research, 36(1), 61-74.
Shorkey, C., Windsor, L.C., & Spence, R. (2009). Systematic Assessment of Culturally Competent
Chemical Dependence Treatment Services for African Americans. Journal of Ethnicity in
Substance Abuse, 8, 113128.
Emmons, R. A., & McCullough , M. E. (2003). Counting blessings versus burdens: An
experimental investigation of gratitude and subjective well-being in daily life. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology , 84(2), 377-389. doi: 10.1037/0022-3514.84.2.377
Laudet, A., Harris, K., Kimball, T., Winters, K. C., & Mobert, D. P. (2014). Collegiate Recovery
Communities Programs: What do we know and what do we need to know? Journal of Social
Work Practice in the Addictions, 14 (1), 84-100.
Buddhist Philosophy/Psychology and Mindful Meditation
Bowen, S., Witkiewitz, K., Dillworth, T.M., Chawla, N., Simpson, T.L., Ostafin, B.D., & Larimer,
M.E. (2006). Mindfulness Meditation and Substance Use in an Incarcerated Population.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 20(3), 343-347.
Groves, P. & Farmer, R. (1994). Buddhism and addictions. Addiction Research, 2(2), 183-194.
Levine, N. (2014). Refuge Recovery: Buddhist Path to Recovery from Addiction.
Kabat-Zinn, Jon (2003). Mindfulness-based interventions in context: past, present, and future.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 10(2), 144-156.
Rational Emotive & Cognitive Behavioral Therapies
SAMHSA. (2007). Reducing wait time improves treatment access, retention. SAMHSA News, 15.
Retrieved from
http://www.samhsa.gov/SAMHSA_News/VolumeXV_5/September_October_2007.pdf
Sindelar, J.L. & Ball, S.A. Cost Evaluation of Evidence-Based Treatments. Addiction Science &
Clinical Practice, 5(2), 44-51.
                                                                                                 16


O’Farrell, T. J. & Fals-Stewart, W. (2000). Behavioral couples therapy for alcoholism and drug
abuse. The Behavior Therapist, 23(3), 49-58.
Powers, M. B., Vedel, E. & Emmelkamp, P. M. C. (2008). Behavioral couples therapy (BCT) for
alcohol and drug use disorders: A meta-analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 952-962.
Higgins, S. T., Wong, C. J., Ogden, D. E., & Dantona, R. L. (2001). Contingent reinforcement
increases cocaine abstinence during outpatient treatment and one year follow-up. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68(1), 64-72.
Rawson, R. A. et. al. (2006). A comparison of contingency management and cognitive-
behavioral approach for stimulant-dependent individuals. Addictive, 101, 267-274.
Ellis, A., McInerney, J. F., DiGiuseppe, R., & Yeager, R. J. (1988). Rational-Emotive therapy with
alcoholics and substance abusers. New York: Pergamon Press, 22-37.
McHugh, R. K., Hearon, B. A. & Oho, M. W. (2010). Cognitive behavioral therapy for substance
use disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 33, 511-525.
Witkiewitz, K., Bowen, S., & Donovan, D. M. (2011). Moderating effects of a craving
intervention on the relation between negative mood and heavy drinking following treatment
for alcohol dependence.
Spirituality
Drobin, Fredrick. (2014). Recovery, Spirituality and Psychotherapy. Journal of Religious Health,
(53):789-795.
Walton-Moss, Benita, Ray, Ellen, Woodruff, Kathleen. (2013). Relation of spirituality or religion
to recovery from substance abuse. Journal of Addictions Nursing, Vol 24, No, 4. 217-226.
Galanter, Marc, Dermatis, Helen, Post, Stephen & Sampson Cristal. (2013). Spirituality-based
recovery from drug addiction in the 12-step fellowship of Narcotics Anonymous. American
Society of Addiction Medicine, Vol 7, No. 3-May/June, p. 189-195.
Genetics
Li, Ming & Burmeister, Margit. (2009). New insights into the genetics of addiction. Nature
Reviews/Genetics, Vol 10, April, p. 225-230.
                                                                                                   17


                           Class Participation and Evaluation Rubric
NAME                                                                              FINAL SCORE
Assign yourself the number of points that best describes each section of your attendance and participation this
semester. Calculate participation score at the bottom of the page, then place your final points in the space provided
at the top.
Attendance – see last line to evaluate tardiness and leaving early                            Score
100 - Made every class come rain or shine, cheerful enough to be two people, and always on time
95 - Made all but one, came ready to learn, stayed home that once to protect class from my germs
80 - Made all but two, had something really important to do
70 - Hustling to keep up (missed 3 classes), but pleasant and ready to go when present
65 - Over-extended a little (missed 4 classes) that bus keeps changing the departure time!!!
50 - Yikes!! I've missed more than 5, too much to do; I've got some serious explaining to do
*Tardy/leaving early: Subtract 0 pts for 1, 5 pts for 2 and 10 pts for 3. For consistent problems being
present subtract 25 pts.
Content Preparation                                                                            Score
100 – Prepared as requested. Read all the material, checked my syllabus, reviewed notes before class on
a regular basis, worked hard, was a team player in group discussion, volunteered for class experiential,
and other activities.
95 – Prepared most of the time. Read almost all material every time, reviewed thought and reflected some
of the time, volunteered once.
80 - Read almost all the material, almost every time, did not volunteer much in class, class assignments
were not as much of a priority as it should have been.
65 – Was not prepared as much as I should have been. Read some of the material each time, or all of the
material some of the time.
60 - Wow, this was a thick book and tons of articles to read, I did my conditioning hauling it around and read
when I could………
40 - Thought about the topic, but the cat ate my book and the class notes - Didn't read any of the material,
did not participate in much at all.
Shared my views in appropriate ways                                                          Score           100 -
Volunteered contributions on regular basis in both small groups and class, listened carefully, showed
leadership in groups, helped others keep focused on the topic, participated and shared my views in
detail. Was focused throughout class, volunteered when needed.
92 - Volunteered significant contributions in class and small groups.
90- Made good contributions when I was there…just missed a couple classes.
85 - Somewhat contributed, actively listened and thought about the topic, responded thoughtfully when
called on in class, volunteered occasionally.
75 - Contributed in discussion, listened some, daydreamed often, responded appropriately when called on.
70 - Daydreamed often (what am I gonna name my new dog?), huh? What was the question?
60 - Was often not prepared for small group, listened but didn't say anything, When called on gave one
word contribution, distracted group discussions.
                                                                                                                     18


50 - Was a bump on a log…….Got a good sleep zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzz
**Add the three numbers           and divide by 3. Place final grade in top right-hand corner. Final
grade will be evaluated by the professor, if major adjustments are needed you will be contacted.
                                                                                                     19
