                              The University of Texas at Austin
                              Department of Curriculum & Instruction
                              UTeach Urban Teachers Program
                    EDC 339E: Adolescent Literacy – Summer 2019
Instructors
         Kira LeeKeenan                                                          Brady Nash
         Email: kleekeenan@utexas.edu                                            Email: bnash@utexas.edu
         Phone: (617)599-0998
                              Office Hours: Monday through Friday, by appointment in SZB
Field Supervisor & Instructional Coach
         Lori Van Dike                                            Cathryn Stewart
         Email: lvandike@utexas.edu                               Email: cathrynstewart14@gmail.com
Introduction and Rationale
Welcome to Adolescent Literacy! We approach this course with the understanding that teachers are most effective
when they have knowledge of theory to inform their daily classroom decisions—the big picture that draws together
the smaller pieces. In a study of eight successful urban teachers, Gloria Ladson-Billings (1995) found that the
teachers’ success went “beyond the surface features of teaching ‘strategies’” to the “philosophical and ideological
underpinnings of their practice” (p.162). Therefore, this class is more than a collection of methods and strategies;
together, we will investigate how we think about students, literacy, and learning and how others do as well. As we
examine definitions of literacy, we will discuss literacy teaching and learning as processes – processes that have
academic, social, personal, political, and moral dimensions. We will consider how to draw on and merge students’
various literacy practices to strengthen their academic, social, private, and civic lives.
Reading and writing traditional texts are the primary literacy practices through which schools require students to
engage in academic learning. However, students communicate and learn through many other meaning-making
tools (modalities including things like texting, social networking sites, drawing, and even fashion), and they are
often quite adept at demonstrating their knowledge and abilities through these modalities. Much of our discussion
will focus on the multitude of strengths students bring to our classes, and how we can build on these strengths in
our curriculum. Some of this discussion will challenge the ways we think about a traditional English classroom. How
could we “do” English differently? (Because this class is meant to support your teaching in Breakthrough and fit
within a larger design of learning across the UT Urban Teacher’s program, we will focus more on writing than
reading instruction this summer. In your Fall 2018 methods course, you will delve deeply into reading pedagogies
and have opportunities to design curriculum and instruction to support adolescent readers.)
The class serves as a collaborative community to strengthen your immediate teaching in your field placement with
Breakthrough while also being a piece of our larger mission together in preparing you for work in urban schools,
including the development of knowledge, skills, and dispositions for recognizing the resources that culturally and
linguistically diverse students bring to the classroom; of critical awareness of injustices common in urban schools
and communities; and of agentive strategies for working toward hope and social justice in the often restricted or
even hostile work environments of urban schools.
Course Goals:
● broaden our understanding of literacy
● explore students’ out-of-school literate lives
● recognize students’ literacy practices as legitimate and skillful
● examine ways we can draw on students’ out-of-school literacies in our classrooms
● consider how this understanding of literacy shapes the teaching of English
● collaborate with other teachers to construct meaning and build on ideas
● gain practical knowledge and strategies for teaching and planning reading and writing


●    learn how to teach students to understand and apply strategies and tools to help them compose texts, to grow
     as writers
●    develop a vision for teaching (one that will continually undergo revision)
This program, nor any other preparation program, cannot teach you every method or strategy there is to know
about teaching; in fact, we are always in a process of becoming, always evolving into the teachers we will be
tomorrow. Thus, we will not “finish” these conversations. As teachers, we return to these themes again and again.
This course was also designed around the belief that learning is social, collaborative, and recursive. Throughout the
semester, you will be asked to be an involved participant in your own learning, engaging in class discussions,
actively questioning and seeking out more information about ideas, working with and providing feedback to your
peers on your work, and reflecting on and growing from your experiences. We also anticipate that you will
contribute to our course by thoughtfully considering the activities and ideas we explore and sharing suggestions
about how our class works. As we grow as a community of learners, it is my hope that we can be a supportive
network for each other the summer and going forward in our teaching careers.
Required Course Readings
All students will need a copy of Building Adolescent Literacy in Today’s English Classrooms by Dr. Randy Bomer.
We will read several chapters from this text this summer, and it will also be an important text in your English
Methods course in the fall.
Other readings include articles and book chapters, all of which can be found on Canvas.
Course Requirements and Assignments
Reading, Blogging, and Participating in Class (20 points)
Each of you will keep a blog, which will serve as a space for you to reflect on weekly readings and to prepare your
thoughts for our class discussions. Although the requirement is one posting per class, it is my hope that the blog
becomes a space for continual reflection and meaningful interactive discussions.
Your blog posts should integrate ideas across the readings, raise thoughtful questions or critiques about issues in
the readings, make connections among the readings and what you have seen or experienced in classrooms or
other contexts in which youth participate, and consider what the ideas in the readings mean for your teaching now
and in the future. It’s more than okay to show your struggles or tensions with these readings. I hope you will share
your thinking, grapple with issues, and push yourself to consider other perspectives.
Criteria for the blog posts will include the following: depth of understanding regarding the readings, thoughtfulness
concerning the issues we are tackling together, connections made regarding the craft of teaching. The timeliness of
your posting is important, as Brady and I will read through your blogs before class so that we can get a sense of
what you are thinking about. All blog posts are due at 8am on the day of class (exception: 5/30 & 5/31).
During each class, you will have opportunities to read and respond to the posts of your classmates and then to
meet in pairs or small groups for further discussion. Please bring your laptops to class. If you do not own a laptop,
let me know right away. You will be able to borrow one from the Learning and Technology Center(LTC) on the 5th
floor of Sanchez or make use of a computer in the 4th floor lab.
Please consider your classmates the audience for your blog posts. Remember, you are writing to share your
thinking with others. Of course, as I mentioned, we will also be reading your posts throughout the summer, and
drawing from across your posts in our class discussions. However, we are purposefully choosing to not add our
voices to the conversations that develop in this space.
Teacher’s Notebook
You will begin your teacher’s notebook when you start working with your Breakthrough students. This summer will
be challenging, maybe even grueling at times, and it will also be very exciting and rewarding. While you will
certainly be reflecting on all of these experiences with your facilitators, with your peers, and with your instructors,


your notebook will be your most constant companion. This notebook is a tool for your thinking, so we would
imagine that you might each use it a little bit differently. You might explore questions, record and reflect on data
from class, hunt for assumptions underneath things you’re being asked to do, work out challenges in your teaching
or researching, think through patterns or trends you’re seeing in the classroom, and so on. This will also be an
important place for recording data about students (e.g. conference notes, things students say, student strengths,
etc.) that will not only inform your teaching but also help you write your letters to students at the end of the
summer.
Purpose Study: Keeping a Notebook and Moving a Piece to Publication (30 points) – Due ongoing, 6/26
Across the few weeks we have together, one goal I have for us is to experience writing workshop. During this short
time, we will launch writer’s notebooks and move a piece through a writing cycle to publication. Writing time during
these weeks will begin with a minilesson followed by work time and share time. During work time, you will be
working on your own writing, conferring with me and Brady, and/or meeting with peers to discuss your work. Some
of this writing will happen in class, but you will also be expected to be working on your writing outside of class as
needed. You should have a 12-15 notebook entries by the time we begin revising (this means daily writing for the
first three weeks of class). Beyond this participation, you will receive feedback on your published piece of writing
and reflect on the overall experience and what you are learning about teaching writing.
You will also be going through this process with your Breakthrough students, so the writing you do for our class will
double as curriculum you can use in your teaching.
Plans for Daily Teaching + Selection & Presentation of an In-depth Lesson (20 points) – Due 6/26
You’ll be teaching every day in your field placement this semester. Likewise, you’ll be developing lesson plans for
each of these lessons. Your facilitator/instructional coaches will talk to you about the expectations for these daily
lesson plans. For this class, to give us a close look at your teaching, you’ll choose one of these lessons to
highlight and reflect on from your first two weeks of teaching. For this lesson, you’ll first provide the written lesson
plan and any additional handouts or materials created for teaching this lesson. As described below, you will also
provide examples of student responses to the lesson and a reflection on your planning and teaching.
You also need to include two or three examples of student work as a result of the lesson. This could be formal or
informal writing students engage in, a project of some kind, conference notes that evidence what students were
doing, or some other kind of tangible documentation of how students responded to this lesson. For privacy
purposes, please remove or black out students’ name from their work. For each example of student work, also
include a written response to or assessment of that student’s work with a brief explanation of your thinking/rationale
behind your response/evaluation of student work. For example, if a student earned full points on an assignment,
what about that student’s work can you point to as evidence of her meeting or exceeding the assignment’s criteria?
What do you know about a student’s current developmental level, effort, or academic progress in this class and
how did that knowledge shape the responses or grade you gave to that piece of the student’s work?
For each lesson, include a statement in which you describe your thinking and decision-making as you planned the
lesson. For instance, what were you excited, nervous or unsure about in planning the lesson? What was challenging
and easy in the planning? Who/what served as resources for you in planning? What did you expect to go well and
what did you think would be challenging for you and your students during the experience of teaching and learning
this lesson? In the second half of the statement, reflect on the actual experience of teaching and learning with this
lesson. How do you think the lesson went—both successes and challenges? What surprised you in the experience
of teaching and learning? What did you learn about teaching, about yourself as a teacher, about your students?
How will you (or how did you) draw on what you learned in this lesson in lessons to come? You may draw from your
teaching journal in preparing these reflection pieces.
Letters to Students (10 points) – 8/2
As part of your work for Breakthrough, you will write a letter to each of your advisees about their academic and
personal strengths, a letter that will be sent to each student in the fall of the 2019-2020 school year. This is an
amazing assessment opportunity to provide concrete, rich feedback about what you as a teacher notice about your
students as learners, and based on our work in this course, particularly as readers and writers. We will begin


collecting data about students for these letters during this course, but your actual letters will be collected during
your last week of teaching.
Class Policies
Attendance & Punctuality
Attendance and punctuality are absolutely vital for your thinking and your peers’ thinking throughout this course.
Please notify me, along with at least one of your classmates, as soon as you know you will be late to or missing
class. After one absence, 1.5 points will be deducted from your final grade, and 3 points will be deducted from
your final grade for any subsequent absences. Missing more than three class sessions will result in failing the
course. Multiple tardies/early departures may also result in grade deductions.
*Please note that classes longer than 3 hours count as two classes for attendance (and other) purposes
Communication
Now is a good time to begin building your professional habits, so being responsive and timely are important.
Always respond to instructor, field supervisor and Instructional Coach emails within 24 hours. When you receive
emails from any of us, please read them carefully and let us know with a reply (a quick response such as, “Got it,
thank you,” will suffice. While texting can be convenient, keep text communication with me, with your instructional
coach, and with your facilitator limited to emergency situations or personal matters. When you are communicating
with any of us about anything work related, e-mail is the professional way to do so. When there is an incident in
your Breakthrough classroom that warrants reflection or action and you are unsure of who to speak to about it at
the time, write and send yourself an e-mail describing the incident in detail the same day, so that you have a time-
stamped document should you need it in the future.
Cell Phones, Laptops, and Other Digital Devices
While these are helpful tools and are necessary for our work at times, these devices should be used only as tools.
We have a lot of important work to do each time we meet. Please do not let your electronic devices distract you
from the conversations and thinking that we’re doing in class. Your class participation grade may be negatively
impacted if you are continually surfing the web, using email, texting, and the like.
Late Work
Because so much of what we do is important for our work with peers and students, it is essential for your work
to be done promptly. All assignments (including readings) are due at the beginning of our class unless
otherwise noted in the assignment description. Depending on the nature of the assignment, late work may not
be accepted. If it is accepted, it will be penalized the equivalent of one letter grade.
Writing Expectations
I expect that all work for this class will be done with thought, care, and thoroughness. This includes attention to
citing sources and editing. In addition, formal assignments will be graded according to the following criteria:
     ● the degree to which the assignment has been completed and edited according to APA’s 6 th edition
         styleguide
     ● shows insight or thoughtfulness with respect to the topic, other course readings, and to classroom and
         other relevant experiences
The following resources could be helpful as you are writing these formal assignments.
     ● UT Undergraduate Writing Center Handout: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/node/56
     ● APA sources: http://owl.english.purdue.edu/owl/resource/560/01/
In addition, the UT Undergraduate Writing Center offers one-on-one consultations about your work in progress.
More information can be found at: http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/
Grading Scale
A        93-100           B+       87-89           B-      80-82           C        73-76           D        60-69
A-       90-92            B        83-86           C+      77-79           C-       70-72           F        59-0
Scholastic Dishonesty


For our purposes Scholastic Dishonesty includes but is not limited to, cheating on a test, plagiarism, collusion, and
falsifying academic records (General Information Bulletin, The University of Texas at Austin). The disciplinary
action for any instance of scholastic dishonesty will be, at minimum, a failing grade on an assignment and
potentially a failing grade in the course. Refer to the Student Judicial Services website for more detailed
information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/adademicintegrit.html.
Students with Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-
4641 TTY.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself
with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not
be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Course Calendar
  Week 1: Broadening understandings of literacy and adolescence/-ts
  Wednesday, May 29       Thursday, May 30                                      Friday, May 31
  12PM-2PM                9AM - 5PM, Room 312                                   9AM -4PM, Room 312
  UTUT Orientation        Topics:                                               Topics:
                           ▪   What is literacy? Noticing literacy in everyday   ▪   Understanding our students as
                               life & how it connects to ELA instruction.            adolescents/in adolescence.
                           ▪   Noticing people with a variety of existing (and   ▪   Understanding our students as people
                               multimodal) literacies.                               who have a right to use their languages
                           ▪   Modes of writing in this class (writing to think  ▪   Readers and writers workshop
                               & for audience)
                                                                                Readings:
                          Readings:                                             Finders (1998); BALTEC, Ch.5&10
                          BALTEC, Ch. 1&2; NCTE Statement; ILA                  Stewart (2014) OR Belle (2016)
                          Statement


                                                                               Other Assignments:
                                                                               Blog post (Due @ 8AM)
                                                                               Writer’s notebook entries
Week 2: Reading & Writing Instruction, Multilingual learners
                           Tuesday, June 4              Wednesday, June 5      Thursday, June 6
                           2:25PM-4:45PM                1:10PM-3:50PM          12:45PM-2:45PM
                           Location: TBA                Location: TBA          Location: TBA
                           Topics:                      Topics:                Topics:
                          ▪    Teaching toward         ▪     Critical Literacy ▪    Writing for social
                               strategies, not only    ▪     Power &                action
                               content (Minilessons          schooling         ▪    Genre & purpose
                               & Conferencing)                                      studies
                          ▪    Multilingual students    Readings:              ▪    Mentor texts
                                                        Gainer (2010); Paris &
                           Readings:                    Alim (2014); Kinloch   Readings: Bomer &
                           De los Rios & Seltzer        (2007)                 Bomer (Ch. 8);
                           (2017); Daniels &                                   BALTEC, Ch. 13
                           Pacheco (2016)               Other Assignments:
                                                        Blog post              Other Assignments:
                           Other Assignments:           Writer’s notebook      Blog post
                           Blog post                    entries                Writer’s notebook
                           Writer’s notebook entries                           entries
Week 3: Writing Instruction
Monday, June 10                                         Wednesday, June 12     Thursday, June 13        Friday, June 14
1:25PM-3:25PM                                           1:55PM-4:25PM          12:35PM-3:05PM           10:45AM-12:15PM
Location: TBA                                           Location: TBA          Location: TBA            Location: TBA
Topics:                                                 Topics:                Topics:                  Topics:
Writing, languages,                                     Authentic &            Audience and text        Assessment of
and thinking critically                                 responsive instruction design                   literacy: Recognizing
about other writers                                                                                     students strengths
                                                        Readings:              Readings: BALTEC,
Readings:                                               Muhammad &             Ch. 12                   Readings: Bomer, K.
Assaf (2014)                                            Behizadeh (2015);                               (Hidden Gems, Ch. 6-
                                                        Whitney (2011)         Other Assignments:       7)
Other Assignments:                                                             Blog post
Blog post                                               Other Assignments:     Draft                    Other Assignments:
Writer’s notebook                                       Blog post                                       Blog post
entries                                                 Writer’s notebook                               Draft 2
                                                        entries
Week 4: Assessment, Responsive Teaching (All class meetings will be during department meeting time.)
                                                        Wednesday, June 19     Thursday, June 20*       Friday, June 21
                                                        ELA Dept. Meeting      ELA Dept. Meeting        ELA Dept. Meeting
                                                        Location: Garrison     Location: Garrison       Location: Garrison
                                                        workroom               workroom                 workroom
                                                        Topics:                Topics:                  Topics:
                                                        Using students’ self   Hidden gems +            Lesson Planning: Write
                                                        assessment to inform   assessing your           a WNB mini-lesson for
                                                        teaching               students                 your teaching


                                                   Other Assignments:    *Bring student work Other Assignments:
                                                   Draft 3               to department       Letters to Students
                                                                         meeting             (HALF)
Week 5: Transformative Teaching, Transformative Teachers
                                                   Wednesday, June 26
                                                   4PM-7PM
                                                   Location: TBA
                                                   Topics: Teaching for
                                                   social justice &
  Writing Workshop                                 breaking boundaries
        Kickoff!
    (with middle                                   Readings: Winn
      schoolers)                                   (2013); Giroux (1985)
                                                   Other Assignments:
                                                   Blog post
                                                   Daily Teaching
                                                   Presentation
                                                   Purpose Study
