                       Cultures of Sustainability ANT 325L Unique# 31715
                                          Dr. John Hartigan
                                WCP/SAC 4.118, TTH, 11:00 - 12:30
                     E-mail: johnhartigan@austin.utexas.edu; Tel.232-9201
                             Office Hours: by appt. (WCP/SAC 4.158)
Overview: There is a surging interest in sustainability but this concept is difficult to define. Its
scope encompasses environmental, economic, social, and philosophical criteria that are often
divergent and irreconcilable. This course surveys sustainability from a variety of cultural
perspective before turning to inquiry-based projects featuring ethnographic methods.
Learning Objectives: Through this course, students will develop the following:
    •    A comprehensive understanding of sustainability
    •    Facility with ethnographic techniques and methods
    •    Dexterity in defining and explaining cultural aspects of sustainability
    •    Capacity for discourse and cultural analysis
    •    Experience with memo writing
    •    Familiarity with research literatures on sustainability
Class dynamics: Each session will feature discussions of readings and assignments, with an
occasional mini-lecture on topics and methods. The readings present various perspectives on
sustainability and climate change, while also introducing students to research articles. The
assignments apply ideas or concepts from the course, in the form of directed writings,
annotations of found objects, and reporting on fieldwork projects. Over the course of the
semester students will develop and conduct ethnographic research on some aspect of
sustainability in Austin. Results will be presented in the classroom or another relevant forum.
Evaluations: There are 3 components to your overall evaluation in this course—class
participation, memo writing, and a research paper. Class participation (30%) involves the usual:
showing up prepared and actively participating in discussions, but also producing regular written
accounts of reflections or observations conducted in conjunction with the daily topic. These
include directed writing assignments, generating field notes, as well as annotations of objects
related to sustainability. These will only receive completion grades, though they must be turned
in on time. All assignments are due in class and will not be accepted late.
You will also be assigned four memos (30%) on topics related to the course. These memos will
be addressed to hypothetical audiences, explaining cultural analysis and its relevance to
sustainability. I will familiarize students with the most common styles and offer direction on the
challenging task of conveying critical-thinking in this highly restrictive format.
The final research project (40%) will encompass various analytical components from the course
directed toward a subject of your choosing. Elements of this project will include 1) an
ethnographic analysis of a sustainability project 2) application of concepts covered in the course,
3) marshalling and applying relevant literatures, and 4) an assessment of the ethical dimensions
of this sustainability project.
Plagiarism will not be tolerated on any writing assignment and will receive a failing grade.


Attendance: Being present for class is a requirement of this course. More than 3 unexcused
absences will result in at least a letter-grade reduction.
Books (required):
The Sixth Extinction, Elizabeth Kolbert
The Mushroom at the End of the World, Anna Tsing
Wildlife in the Anthropocene: Conservation after Nature, J. Lorimer
Emergent Ecologies, Eben Kirksey
(recommended): a subscription to the New York Times and Washington Post.
Week 1: Sustainability.
Jan. 21: Introduction. What is sustainability?
Jan. 23: Polemics.
Readings: “Against Sustainability,” Jeremy Butman, New York Times, 8/8/16; “Learning How to
Die in the Anthropocene,” Roy Scranton, New York Times, 11/10/13; “Time to Panic,” David
Wallace-Wells, New York Times, 2/16/19.
Directed writing: what do you know about climate change; how do you know; does it matter?
Week 2: What’s Happening?
Jan. 28: What is climate change about?
Readings: "It's a conspiracy theory and climate change": Of beastly encounters and cervine
disappearances in Himalayan India, Nayanika Mathur, Hau, Vol 5, No 1 (2015).
Directed writing: Identify and describe a sustainability setting in Austin.
Jan. 30: Discourse Analysis.
Readings: “Rhino poaching is out of control!”, Bram Buscher, Environment and Planning, 2016;
“Characterising	  climate	  change	  discourse	  on	  social	  media	  during	  extreme	  weather	  events,”
Global Environmental Change, 2019;
https://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2019/01/27/climate-change-politics-224295
Directed writing: find an online dialogue, debate or forum on climate change or sustainability.
Characterize the discourse (subject positions, polemics and use of language).
Week 3: Perspective & Peril.
Feb. 4: Anthropocene, part 1.
Readings: Prologue and Chaps 1-5, The Sixth Extinction.
Directed writing: Review Mathur’s critique of the Anthropocene (pgs 104-106); consider how
Kolbert uses the concept; then reflect on how we should think about the Anthropocene.
Feb 6: Anthropocene, part 2.
Readings: Chaps 6-10, The Sixth Extinction; “Recognitions and Responsibilities,” Ben Orlove et
al, Current Anthropology, 2014.
Assignment: prepare to summarize in class the components of the Orlove et al article.


Week 4: Conservation
Feb 11: Locating conservation.
Readings: “The local-­‐‑food movement and the anthropology of global systems,” Donald M.
Nonini, American Ethnologist, 2013; “Campus Sustainable Food Projects: Critique and
Engagement,” Peggy Barlet, American Anthropologist, 2011.
Directed writing: Revisit your sustainability site; what can you see additionally about it now?
Feb 13: Memo on Climate Change discussion.
Assignment: 1st Memo due.
Readings: Mushroom, Tsing, Part I (pgs 1-52)
Directed writing: recount your experience of reading Mushroom; what ideas did you find
interesting and/or challenging?
Week 5: Commodity Chains.
Feb 18: Analyzing commodity chains.
Readings: Mushroom, Tsing, Part II (pgs 57-144); The Search for Sustainable Markets: The
Promise and Failures of Fair Trade, Julia Smith, CAFE, 2011.
Assignment: generate field notes on your sustainability site.
Feb 20: Discuss annotations.
Assignment: Annotate a sustainable commodity.
Week 6: Ethnographic Perspectives
Feb 25: Ethnography in relation to anthropology.
Readings: Mushroom, Tsing, Part III (pgs 150-248); “What is land?”, Tania Murray Li,
Transactions, 2014
Directed writing: Describe the differences between the perspectives of Tsing and Li.
Feb 27:Greening cities and urban vulnerability.
Readings: http://www.nature.com/news/expand-the-frontiers-of-urban-sustainability-1.20459
and https://aesengagement.wordpress.com/thematic-series/the-nature-of-infrastructure/:
commentaries by Carse and Stoezer, plus two blog posts from each section.
Directed writings: what did you learn about ethnography from these readings?
Assignment: generate field notes on your sustainability site.
Week 7: Rethinking Wildlife.
Mar 3: Charismatic Species
Readings: Intro & Chaps 1-2, Wildlife in the Anthropocene.
Directed writing: reflect on a charismatic species and one lacking charisma.
Assignment: 2nd memo due, Ethnography of Sustainability and Conservation.
Mar 5: Biodiversity & Biopolitics.
Readings: Chaps 3-5, Wildlife in the Anthropocene.


Directed writing: Write about a “wild experiment” that you envision.
Week 8: Targeting Conservation.
Mar 10: Critiques of Conservation.
Readings: Chaps 6-8 & Conclusion, Wildlife in the Anthropocene.
Directed writing: What are your views of wildlife conservation now?
Mar 12: Report on your research site.
Assignment: research proposals due.
BREAK
Week 9: Research Literature
Mar 24: Identifying research sources.
Assignment: 3rd memo due, Concepts from ethnographies on conservation.
Directed writing: discus the literature review section of any of our previous readings; how does
this section reflect or structure the author’s thinking.
Mar 26: Visit to PCL.
Week 10 Ethnographic Research.
Mar 31: Discussion of sites and projects.
Readings: “Sustainability in the City: Ethnographic Approaches,” McDonogh et al, “Learning
from Barcelona,” City & Society, 2011.
Assignment: Turn in one set of recent field notes.
Apr 2: Discussion of sources.
Readings: Teaching collaborative environmental anthropology: A case study embedding engaged
scholarship in critical approaches to voluntourism, Brondo et al, Annals of Anthropological
Practice.
Assignment: Identify at least two sources for your project; explain how they would inform your
thinking.
Week 11: Environmental Justice
Apr 7: Environmental Justice
Readings: “Trends and Directions in Environmental Justice,” Annual Review of Anthropology;
“Whose Sustainability? An Analysis of a Community Framing Program,” CAFE, 2019
Directed writing: reflect on your own encounters with environmental injustice or inequality.
Apr 9: Annotate an object of climate change.
Readings: Chaps 11-13, The Sixth Extinction
Assignment: Discussion objects of climate change.


Week 12: Interdisciplinary Approaches
Apr 14: Biosocial methods.
Readings: “Biosocial Conservation: Integrating Biological and Ethnographic Methods,” Joanna
Setchell et at, International Journal of Primatology 2016; “Using a Biosocial Approach to
Understanding Human-Wildlife Interactions,” Catherine Hill.
Directed writing: Write about any human-wildlife interactions you may have observed.
Apr 16: Locating Conservation Expertise.
Readings: Intro & Chaps 1-4, Emergent Ecologies.
Directed writing: What kind of expertise would you like to acquire concerning conservation?
Assignment: Turn in one set of recent field notes.
Week 13: Hope!
Apr 21: Practices of Possibility.
Readings: 5-8, Emergent Ecologies.
Directed writing: Reflect on your own experiences of “multispecies families” or encounters with
wildlife.
Apr 23: Nonhuman Futures.
Readings: Chaps 9-10 & Conclusion, Emergent Ecologies.
Directed writing: What sources allow you to glimpse possible futures.
Week 14: Presentations
Apr 30: Workshop presentations.
Assignment: 4th Memo Due.
May 2: Presentations.
Week 15: Presentations
May 7: Presentations.
May 9: Presentations.
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
UT Honor Code: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/ch01/index.html) Familiarize
yourself with University statements about plagiarism and the consequences of plagiarizing:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/


Assignments:
Memo #1: Climate Change vs Sustainability.
Length: 4 pages
Memo Instructions: In responding to the following scenario/assignments, be sure to follow
closely the standard format for memo writing, as summarized in the “Memo Writing” rubric
posted on Canvas.
Scenario: You are interning at 350.org, an NGO devoted to “building a global climate
movement.” You’ve been assigned to assist Olivia Longhoff, a Global Trainings Manager. In a
meeting, you mentioned reading an article in Current Anthropology (“Recognitions and
Responsibilities”) that you thought might be relevant to the organization’s efforts. After reading
it, Longhoff agreed but thinks it’s too long to circulate among the staff. She tasks you with
summarizing it in a memo. Specifically, she wants you to sketch the history of “climate change”
and “sustainability” as concerns; also, what differentiates them. Then explain the issues of
selectivity, historicity, and consequentiality. How might members of this organization keep this
trio of concerns in mind as they are targeting new projects for organizing globally? Does it
matter that “the distribution of concern about climate change” is a “construct”?
Memo #2: Ethnography of Sustainability and Conservation.
Scenario: Based on the favorable reception of your previous memo explaining public
understandings of climate change and sustainability, Olivia Longhoff, a Global Trainings
Manager at 350.org, has asked you to write another one. Your task is to explain the role
ethnography can play in analyzing dynamics related to sustainability or conservation projects.
Convey the particular perspective that ethnographers bring to bear via fieldwork; what do they
typically look for and what counts as data in their research? Present a series of examples of
ethnographic findings from our readings to date. How would these relate to more general
anthropological findings? Offer at least one idea for how this organization might make use of
ethnography in relation to its ongoing projects
Memo #3: Concepts from ethnographies on conservation.
Scenario: Your previous memos effectively piqued interest in ethnographies dealing with
conservation and related subjects. But your co-workers found these books hard to read because
of their reliance on unfamiliar concepts. Olivia Longhoff, a Global Trainings Manager at
350.org, has now tasked you with providing explanation of central concepts in works by Tsing,
Lorimer, and Kirksey. Start with the idea of an “assemblage”—what is it and why is it a useful
analytic? Explain how these ethnographers make use of the concept of “biopolitics” in
approaching a subject like “biodiversity.” What are “affective logics,” forms of “lively capital”
and “encounter value”? How do these concepts sharpen observation of field settings, guiding
researchers to important aspects of conservation? How do they help us see the cultural
dimensions of biodiversity?


Annotate a Sustainable Commodity.
Based on what we’ve read so far, identify some commodity that may be (or is promoted as)
sustainable. What are the criteria that matter? Consider using Anna Tsing’s analysis of
commodity chains (Tuesday’s readings) as a guide or starting point—what can you trace out
about how this object gets to market? Who consumes it and why? You’re not expected to answer
these questions authoritatively; just make an effort to pose and then pursue them. Also consider
the role of science or factual claims (versus economic or moral ones) in valuing this object—
basically, how might we know whether or not this commodity is sustainable?
Elements of annotation.
Labor dimensions: Was it produced; if so, by whom and how? Who maintains these processes
of production? How is it used and how is using it seen as labor, or not? Is it used up? If not, how
is it passed on, transferred, communicated?
Professional/Epistemological dimensions: Is this an artifact of knowledge practices? What
kinds of knowledge count in talking about it? What kind of professionals are involved in making
expert decisions regarding its development, production, and dissemination?
Technological dimensions: Do technologies and machines enable it to be produced and
maintained? Who has access to these machines and technologies? What are their histories?
Context and situatedness: Where does it appear in the world? How does it appear and next to
what or in what? What activities or ways of life enable one to come across it? What kinds of
audiences is it addressed to? Who is excluded in these addresses?
Political dimensions: What kinds of local, national, and international bodies claim jurisdiction
over it? What bodies play a part in approving it (e.g., lobbyists, patents, sponsorship, etc.)?
Economic dimensions: How is it marketed, purchased, consumed? Where and by whom? How
is it involved in a world marketplace? What kinds of capital, debt, credit, and labor relations are
involved in producing, marketing, and circulating it? Who sells it? How are costs calculated?
How are risks calculated? By whom and when?
Bodily/organic dimensions: How is it composed biologically or chemically? What ways of life
are involved? What kinds of bodies and relations are involved in producing it? What kinds make
use of it? How are these bodies and relations gendered? Are there racial, classed, differently
abled, or other group identifications that help construct these bodies?
Historical dimensions: Was it invented, when and by whom? Are there different and competing
versions of its histories? Who tells these histories? How has it traveled historically? Repeat the
above dimensions for each aspect of its history. How do these help constitute it?
Educational dimensions: How does it appear in our socialization? When do we learn about it in
school? During the rest of life? What kinds of people/bodies get to learn about it? How much do
we learn about it?


Final Assignment: Sustainability Research Project.
Length: 12 pages
The purpose of this assignment is for you to imagine studying in-depth an aspect of the many
topics related to sustainability and conservation, using an ethnographic approach. This will
involve several components: 1) becoming familiar with research literature on your subject; 2)
finding an ethnographic model for your project; 3) fully imagining how you would conduct this
research; 4) think about how to apply concepts from the course in analyzing your site. Wherever
around the globe your setting lies, there should be a great deal of pertinent research pertaining to
core questions of sustainability and ecological management. Part of your task involves
identifying this literature; then pick an ethnographic model for imagining how you would go
about studying this place or set of relationships. This involves 1) identifying a setting or
problem; 2) explain what we know about it; 3) think about how fieldwork can expand or improve
our understanding of the context or situation. This paper will convey your capacity to marshal
sustainability research
How to Proceed: propose an ethnographic research project in Austin and articulate a cultural
question you will seek to answer. Describe the setting or problem you would investigate and
explain how you would pursue this subject ethnographically. What are the defining social
features or dynamics? What methods would you use and what would count as data? What types
of questions will you pose to research subjects? Using various disciplinary sources, explain what
is already known about your subject; then, explain how you would extend this body of
knowledge through fieldwork. What gaps can you identify in extant research, or what lines of
inquiry would you like to pursue further but perhaps in different settings or directions? Are there
significant historical aspects of this subject? Finally, and importantly, bring to bear concepts
from the course in analyzing the social aspects of your site.
Discuss at least six academic sources (articles or books in addition to ones we’ve already read).
Summarize your findings for a 10-15 minute in-class presentation.
Format: Include the following sections: research objectives, discussion of literature, methods
and aims. The research objectives should describe your plan of study—where, who, and when—
and convey your ethnographic models in a couple of paragraphs. Your discussion of literature
relevant to your project will form almost half of the paper. This is an opportunity for you to
summarize and reflect on materials we have discussed in class, in addition to those you have
identified through your search for relevant literature. Explain relevant concepts, detail
ethnographic strategies, and identify larger questions and concerns related to conservation,
sustainability, and biodiversity. What have you learned from these readings that can be applied in
a fieldwork setting to generate new findings? In the methods and aims section (accounting for
roughly the other half of the paper), describe the fieldwork project you would pursue. What is the
location and why is it potentially interesting; who are the people and what forms of social
structure are in place? What kinds of questions will you pose, of the project in general and of
individuals in the field? Be specific and developed in conveying these. What methods will you
use and why—what will count as data? What conclusions would you hope to reach?  
  
