                                                                                          1
 HIS 307C: Intro To The History Of India (38465) ANS 307C (32190)
            Spring 2020 Meets M-W-F, 9-10AM in MEZ B0.306
Instructor: Sumit Guha                           Email: sguha@austin.utexas.edu
Office: GAR 2.140               Office hours: Monday 11-12 AM and Wed 2-3 PM;
other weekdays by appointment                    Phone: 512-475-7236
Scope and Aims
This course provides a brief overview of five thousand years of the history of the Indian
subcontinent, starting with the emergence of the first cities and coming up to the
emergence of independent republics out of the British Empire.
Learning objectives
By the end of this course, students will:
           Understand the relationship between inequality and civilization.
           Understand the social forces behind the rise and decline of states
           Situate the Indian subcontinent in its complete global context, from ancient
            times to the mid-20th century.
           Identify important historical personalities and key phases in Indian religious,
            social and political history.
Global Cultures Flag:
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or
present.
Expectations and evaluation
This course is designed to accommodate students with no previous knowledge of the
region. It does require students to attend regularly, keep up with readings and responses
and participate constructively in discussions. The format will be a mix of lectures and
discussion meetings devoted to reviewing themes recently covered. We will draw
extensively on visual sources in addition to texts. You need therefore to be both present
and attentive in class. Readings must be done before the day/week they are listed.


                                                                                          2
Grading Policy: Students may opt to take this class on a Credit/No Credit as
permitted by the UT Registrar.
If taken for grade, numerical scores will be converted to letter grades as
follows:
94-100 = A;      90-93 = A- ;   86-89 B+; 82-85 = B; 78-81 B-; 74-77 =C+ ;
C= 70-73; C- = 66-69; D+ = 62-65; D = 58-61; D- = 57-54.
53 or lower is an F.
There will be a mid-term and final exam (20% and 30%). Exams will require short
answers that demonstrate an understanding of arguments, maps, visual images and
quotations. They will include IDs and at least one map.
I do not expect you to memorize large amounts of information but you should be able to
recognize important names and concepts and analyze what is presented to you.
Five discussion papers will count for 40% of your total grade; participation for 10%.
Discussion sessions are intended to review and reinforce material recently covered in the
class
       A list of questions will be circulated to everyone, and specific questions randomly
        allotted to specific students.
       Everyone will bring a one-page (c.150 word) answer to their question printed out
        in double-space to the class and hand it in.
       Your name should not appear on the paper; it should be clearly written on the
        back of it.
       All will be graded, but a selection of these will be shown to the class and
        discussed.
Papers brought late to class will be subject to a two-point deduction. So will improperly
formatted papers. Papers unjustifiably submitted more than 3 days late will not be
accepted. Papers turned in after the class will lose 3 points per day. Draft papers may
be sent me by email for comment until 10 AM previous working day. Some of the
questions will reappear in the exams.


                                                                                         3
Regular attendance and participation is expected of everyone. Absenteeism or
inattentiveness will affect your grade.
Absences may be made up if the reason is a documented and valid one, such as serious
illness, major examination or interview.
All students may request one extra credit assignment worth a maximum of 15%. This
will be 6-8 page analytic review of additional assigned reading, and must be requested
before April 15 and completed before April 30.
Policy on special accommodations. At the beginning of the semester, students who
need special accommodations should notify the instructor by presenting a letter
prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities (SDD) Office. To ensure that the
most appropriate accommodations can be provided, students should contact the SSD
Office at 471-6259 or 471-4641 TTY.
Read more at: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class or examination schedules. It is the
policy of UT-Austin that you must notify each of your instructors of such absences at
least fourteen days prior to the class’ scheduled date.
Academic integrity is the heart of this great university. It is part of the honor code.
http://www.utexas.edu/about-ut/mission-core-purpose-honor-code
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Plagiarism or passing off the work of others as your own is academic
dishonesty. You must properly attribute quotations and information taken from other
sources, whether written or digital. You can take an online lesson at:
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism/
If still in doubt, visit my office or email me to ask.
Laptop/other device policy.
All students have the right to learn in a supportive environment: The use of a
laptop/tablet should not distract others and is acceptable during lectures or class
discussions only for note-taking or instructor-directed web-surfing. All mobile
messaging services must be turned off during class. No devices will be permitted during


                                                                                            4
exams. Lectures and discussions must not be recorded without seeking
permission from all concerned.
Canvas: The course web site on Canvas will be used to post assignments and make
announcements relating to the course – check the site regularly for new information. It
is your responsibility to maintain a functioning email account linked to Canvas.
See university policy at: http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify/html
Safety: I hope the need will never arise, but please do visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/communication and acquaint yourself with
safety rules and procedures. This building has several exits. Please learn their llocations.
My obligations to you:
I will do my best to help you understand the history of an important part of the world.
I will grade and return papers expeditiously.
I will always (barring emergencies or previously scheduled absences) be in my office
during my office hours. No appointment is needed. You can also come at other times, by
appointment.
Book required for purchase/rent:
Thomas Trautmann India: Brief History of a Civilization Oxford University Press, 2015
pback, ISBN 978-0-19-020249-1. Second Edition only Available at the Co-op.
All other readings will be available on the course website or freely downloadable.


                                                                                          5
January
21     UT re-opens (no class meeting). Please view an introduction to the human
geography of South Asia – ‘Monsoons’
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L8E-s5QTQOg. Start reading Trautmann, Chap. 1-2
22     Introduction to the region and the course
24     Some key concepts – civilization, India, Indians; climatic, linguistic and cultural
       regions of the Indian subcontinent – early beliefs about ancient India before the
       discovery of Harappan cities. (Trautmann Chapters 1-2)
27     Harappan civilization: its geography, economy, technology and writing system
29     The slow end of Harappan civilization – possible legacies to later civilizations.
       Read Trautmann Chapter 3
31     The Indo-Aryans and the Vedic age. Oral sources and transmission.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qPcasmn0cRU
February
3      Discussion #1. Origin of the Vedic-speaking peoples? Renfrew (pdf #1)
5      Sacrifices, social complexity and the rise of kings.
7       Diverse cultures of the early Iron Age and the rise of a new cultural integration
       (pdf #2 Ancient Tamil poems)
10     Buddhist critiques and explanations of the new society. Trautmann chapter 4.
       (Agganna Sutta, pdf #3)
12     The world’s first pacifist Buddhist emperor, Ashoka
14      India and the world in Maurya times - Trautmann Chapter 5
17     The evolution of classical religious thought – Sacrifice, renunciation and devotion
       as moments in an ideal life. Trautmann Chaps. 6-7.
19     Family, gender, caste and law. Elder ‘Caste’ (pdf #4); two poems by Buddhist
       women (pdf #5)
21     Discussion session #2
24     Science, religion and the international aspects of Indian civilization. Trautmann
       Chapter 8.
26     Rise of Islamic kingdoms and a new imperial synthesis: Trautmann Chap. 9
28     Mughal empire. Culture, society and governance under the Mughal Empire.
March
 2     Reading Coryat’s anecdotes of Akbar (pdf #6)


                                                                                        6
4     Discussion # 3: Culture, religion and governance under the Mughal
      Emperors
6     Pre-exam review session
9     Mid-term exam
11    Europeans discover the sea-route to Mughal India – trade & beginnings of
      western empire; Trautmann Chap. 10
13    Rise of the British Empire in Asia
      Spring Break
23    Allies and agents – Dwarkanath & Sitaram (pdf # 7)
25    East India Company ascendancy to 1858. Trautmann Chap. 11
27    The great uprising and its aftermath
30    Victorian empire 1858-1901, economic and social modernization & the rise of
      nationalism.
April
1     The rise of racial hostility and racism. Russell pdf, #8A, Kipling pdf #8,
3     Modernization and state enterprise: railroads & irrigation
6     Modernization and economic change – the firm of J.N. Tata
8     Internal critiques of Indian society – Feminist critique Tarabai Shinde (pdf # 9)
10    Life and mission of Pandita Ramabai
13    Lower caste critique of nationalism: Phule (pdf #10)
15    Discussion Session #4 Nationalism & its Indian critics
17    World War I and the weakening of empires [Tharoor
      https://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-33317368]
20    The life and thought of Gandhi
22    The life and thought of Ambedkar
24    Jinnah, Azad and Nehru – diverse currents in nationalism and reform
27    World War II and the unraveling of the British Empire
29    Unmaking and remaking states, armies and nations – Trautmann chap. 12
May
1     Decolonization and Partition
4     The problem of British feudatory states and the Kashmir dispute
6     The end of empire Discussion Session #5
8     Exam review session
Two hour final examination as scheduled by the Registrar
