                                               Fall 2018
Course Number                                  ARC 561R, 696
Course Title / Unique Numbers:                 Advanced Architectural Design /
Instructor:                                    David Heymann
Advanced Studios                               In the Advanced Design Studios you explore pressing issues in
                                               current architectural discourse through the vehicle of the design of
                                               buildings and public spaces of substantial size. These issues have
                                               components both timeless and current, as the question of value and
                                               meaning in buildings continues its constant evolution. Consequently
                                               the Advanced Studios require that you take a thesis-based approach
                                               to arguing for the value of your concrete proposals. In the Advanced
                                               Architectural Design Studios competency in design is not the end,
                                               but the means. Your design cannot be excused on the circumstances
                                               of the brief, but must take part in a larger discourse of architectural
                                               history and theory. You must make a convincing argument for the
                                               improved structure of the world that your proposed construction
                                               would enact in order for your work to succeed.
Étienne-Louis Boullée, Cenotaph for Newton, 1784                     Rino Levi, Brasilia competition entry (superblocks), 1957
                                               A Building Makes The World
Course Description / Brief                     The amount of construction around the globe in the last twenty
                                               years staggers the imagination. Landing in Panama City you see
                                               towers stretching to the horizon — almost all of which were not
                                               there a quarter century before — and they are merely sentinels of
                                               what has happened at street level. The same is true of San Paulo,
                                               Austin, Berlin, Beijing, Melbourne. And almost everywhere else.
                                               Quito, for example. Everywhere this construction is tied to a
                                               loosening of strictures — on lending, on zoning, on planning, on


tradition and propriety, on political financing — and a triumphant
international real estate market. It’s perhaps this loosening in favor
of a desperate, blind impulse to build that makes the consequence
to you as an architect so profound. You can happily work on a
perfect door detail for a day, then walk home, eyes open to the
world happening around you, wondering if, really, a good building
by an architect makes any difference at all. Perhaps the capacity of
architecture, so long idealized, is in fact a relentless, surreal pursuit
of the irrelevant, at least as it is currently imagined. This has merit,
though it cannot be said to be public, at least in any conventional
meaning of that term.
The assignment for this advanced architectural design studio has
three simple variables. First, you must design a very large,
monumental building in Quito, to which we will travel for a week (if
you work as a group you must propose two related constructions,
on which more in a moment). Second, the building must influence
the city’s explosive growth positively, and it must clearly add to the
city’s primary identity. Third, while the building must be good now,
it must also be good 100 years from now. That’s the design problem.
This project is driven by cultural identity and theories of value, not
program. It is speculative, and meant to be part of a long history of
influential proposals, which includes the speculations of Piero della
Francesca, Boullée, Ledoux, Garnier, Melnikov, Tatlin, Speer, Taut,
Le Corbusier, Wright (the mile high skyscraper!), Archigram, Krier,
and OMA, among many, many others. You must place your project
in that history. Some of those speculations are, of course, built, so
you have to also be aware of the concrete history, which is a history
of architectural landmarks — Abu Simbel, the Colossus of Rhodes,
the Colosseum, Cologne Cathedral, step wells, the Vatican …
actually, all of them.
The studio will undertake this project in parallel with architecture
students in a studio led by Professor Maria Isabel Paz at the
University of San Francisco in Quito [USFQ]. Quito is home to the
most intact Spanish Colonial city in the Western Hemisphere. That
city is now, of course, only a small piece of a vast urban expanse —
1.6 million inhabitants — growing ever outward north and south
along a hanging valley originally settled by the Inca (traditionally
bound on the east by a mountain ridge, and on the west by the
Pichincha volcano). In terms of architecture, that expansion has
been defined roughly along a line by large and iconic constructions
(monuments or monumental buildings) or public voids. These give
the city both a rhythmic scale and a physical identity.
Chronologically the buildings and objects include, among others, the
Cotopaxi volcano and the Panicillo hill, the towers of the churches
of the old city, the statue of the Virgin on the Panicillo, the Basilica


                          of the Vota, the Quito Hotel, the original International Airport
                          Terminal; the immense new federal buildings in the north and south
                          of the city, and an as yet unbuilt-on mountain range just to the
                          north of the city.
                          The voids include the valley separating Cotopaxi from Quito (which
                          serves to sequester ash during eruptions), former lagoons, the
                          urban squares of the old city, a sequence of late-19th and early-
                          20th century urban parks that include La Carolina (essentially
                          Quito’s central park, at the heart of the post-Colonial expansion in
                          the north), the new park on the old airport runways, and the public
                          space of the Equator monument, which more or less marks the
                          furthest edge of Quito’s northern reach.
                          Though that urban order exists, the current explosive growth in
                          Quito — driven by an energy economy, a new subway line,
                          continued movement from country to city, foreign investment, etc.
                          — lacks any plan that respects it. New architecture in Quito, like
                          almost everywhere else, has lost its capacity to clarify the city in
                          favor of just more construction. The studio assignment accepts the
                          economic circumstance of current growth but not its consequence.
                          You have to propose how a large, monumental building can drive a
                          viable urban future. You have to propose the next primary object on
                          Quito’s line.
                          You’ll see when we get to Quito that there are two distinct
                          architectural opportunities in this regard: a monumental institution,
                          or a pure monument. If you work alone you must make an
                          institution. You may also work with a partner, in which case you
                          must jointly propose an institution and a monument. You will see
                          that, in the general area we are working, the city allows for this
                          possibility.
                          As noted, this design studio will be run parallel to a nearly identical
                          course in the School of Architecture at USFQ. The two studios will
                          collaborate on initial site and precedent analysis, use the same site
                          and same program, and will undertake a series of shared design and
                          cultural activities and site visits during the studio visit to Quito.
                          USFQ will be providing base drawings and CAD files for Quito site
                          information; help arrange site visits; and serve as a general host
                          both in case of emergencies, and in the normal day to day activities
                          of the studios in Quito. USFQ students will, for example, travel
                          around Quito with UT students, etc.
Crucial Note About Travel Read this section carefully. This is a travelling studio: we will visit
                          Quito for one week, departing Austin on Saturday, September 29th
                          and returning Sunday, October 7th. Quito (and most of Ecuador) is


                         Category 4, the safest of the State Department’s listings for
                         Restricted Regions. This travel will require additional cost to the
                         student beyond tuition, fees, and supplies. As of this writing the
                         approximate additional cost to students will range somewhere
                         between $850 and $1,750. A number of variables control this
                         additional cost, including airfare, which cannot be purchased until
                         after the studio lottery; hotel costs, which cannot be established
                         until the number of participants is set; and the amount of Mebane
                         funding available, which has yet to be determined. Please note that
                         the above high and low figures already include assumed Mebane
                         funding of between $600 and $800: this amount is traditional, but
                         not guaranteed.
                         You must have a valid passport to travel; it must be valid for six
                         months after the date of our return. Please check. If you are not a
                         US citizen you must verify if entry visas for Ecuador are required of
                         you. Prior to the studio lottery you must verify that you can obtain
                         those visas in a timely manner. You will need to obtain any
                         necessary visas on your own, but must wait until the studio lottery
                         result to proceed.
                         Finally, Quito is 9,500 feet above sea level. Note that high elevation
                         can have adverse physical effects, and may not be recommended
                         for certain health conditions. Verify with your doctor if there are
                         any reasons why you should not take part in this travel prior to the
                         studio lottery.
Pedagogic Subject Matter The deep subject of this studio is monumentality — generally and,
                         in particular, as it might relate to sustainability. Monumental
                         architecture appears cyclically over the course of architectural
                         history. It has more or less been out of fashion in Modern
                         architecture since it was usurped by the Nazis before World War II
                         (there you see it leap from left to right, as Poelzig and Behrens
                         produced remarkable monumental architecture associated with
                         organized labor movements), and by the Soviets thereafter. But
                         there are exceptions, notably the remarkable, ruthless, systematic
                         work of Louis Kahn. Kahn’s essential architectural argument — that
                         the purpose of the monumental was to protect certain institutions
                         within society (like the museum, or the library, or the meeting room,
                         or the laboratory) is a useful starting point for your considerations.
                         What is it that is worth protecting in society today?
                         This question is at the basis of one of the more interesting recent
                         monumental buildings: Toyo Ito’s Tama Art University Library.
                         Though this building appears to echo work by Kahn, its distinction is
                         crucial. In the ultimately irrational geometries of the Tama library


                                                  you can see an attempt to have both the monumentality that arises
                                                  from systematic geometries — which stress the importance of
                                                  public institutions — and what Ito calls subjective experience: the
                                                  clear and legible registration of an individual’s distinct perception
                                                  within that space. As important, in the work of Ito and others (Pezo
                                                  von Ellrichshausen, et. al) you can sense a return of the desire for
                                                  the monumental over the geometries of picturesque asymmetry
                                                  that have for so long defined acceptable humanistic form in after-
                                                  Modern architecture. There is strong evidence easy asymmetrical
                                                  practice is coming to an end. Why that might be is a second deep
                                                  subject of this studio. Clearly sustainability is partly responsible, as
                                                  the idea of program-driven form — that hallmark of the Modern —
                                                  slips into the past. A building like Baumschlager Eberle’s 2226
                                                  (which is designed to require no mechanical heating or cooling
                                                  system at all) gets at this point exactly.
Toyo Ito, Tama Art University Library, Tokyo, Japan, 2007            Baumschlager Eberle, 2226, Lustenau, Austria, 2013
                                                  In this studio you must utilize systematic geometries rather than
                                                  picturesque massing derived from program to resolve spatial
                                                  composition in plan and section (moreover, your work must have
                                                  symmetry as a base condition with which to struggle — I want you
                                                  to tackle the question of symmetry head on). In the history of
                                                  architecture, systematic logics originally began as construction
                                                  formats, but qualities present in the resulting spaces frequently
                                                  became the subject of the evolving design investigation,
                                                  superseding constructional logic in favor of the spatial consequence.
                                                  Examples of such evolutions include the arc of Greek temples
                                                  leading to the Parthenon, the history of Renaissance courtyard
                                                  columniation, the growth of the Modern skyscraper frame, the long
                                                  development of Roman basilica form, etc.
                                                  Of these examples, you likely know that the long-evolving Roman
                                                  basilica became the basis for early Christian churches, which went
                                                  through their own intense development and hyper-refinement from
                                                  the Medieval through the Baroque. This points to something
                                                  inherently interesting about systematic or rule oriented building


                   making. How such buildings are wed to their programs is a
                   conundrum. Kahn famously noted that form (at least conceived this
                   way) comes before program, and his work is notable for the many
                   fascinating, almost complete false starts he threw out. Each was a
                   good building, but not all fit the various programs Kahn had been
                   tasked to resolve (the Salk is the most famous example of this: Kahn
                   completely changed his mind right at the end of his first schematic
                   pass). This is a crucial subject in this studio: the slippery problem of
                   system and inhabitation, or, if you like, inflexible order and often
                   circumstantial program or purpose. Kahn was, of course, the master
                   of this, and it is a difficult and far more interesting problem than
                   merely making orders!
                   But the larger point is that program in this studio is NOT the
                   justification for form. Urban consequence is the justification for
                   form in this studio. Your building, as noted, has to be good now, and
                   100 years from now.
Format:            The studio will be broken into three parts: a four week session
                   during which we undertake various analysis and precedent
                   exercises; a week-long trip to Quito for site exploration and joint
                   work with USFQ students and faculty; and an eight week
                   development of a single or group proposal.
Required Material: What is typically required in design studio along with items
                   necessary for hand drawing and modeling (a parallel bar will be
                   required). The SANAA rule will also apply in this studio: “if you do
                   not have a model, you do not have anything to talk about.”
Review Culture:    We will have frequent pin-ups with visitors. I am a firm believer in a
                   critical review culture: I believe in that culture the basis of
                   professionalism is honesty. Honest public assessment of your own
                   work can be a difficult experience. Review dynamics have an
                   element of instability, and criticism can often seem personal. If you
                   feel criticism you have received is unwarranted and personal rather
                   than professional, either from me or any visiting critic, do not
                   hesitate to speak with me about it. Note that often reviews do not
                   discuss what you think they should. I admire the particular
                   discourse that happens in reviews (just as I admire the particular
                   discourse that happens in desk crits). It will often seem tangential to
                   your work; but one definition of architecture is that it is “the activity
                   that architects do,” and one way that architecture happens is by
                   projection in conversation.
Required Texts:    TBA


                      STUDIO COURSE GRADING POLICY
                      Grading will be based on three areas of performance:
grasp:                The ideas and understanding of the project at hand, combined with
                      an appropriate process of inquiry
process/effort:       The consistent and rigorous development and abundant testing of
                      ideas
resolution:           The demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse
                      through representation and designs that responds to a range of
                      critical positions
                      Your work will be evaluated on its rigor and evolution over the
                      semester.
Grading descriptions: A : excellent work
                      Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness,
                      appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor, craft,
                      and personal development. Student pursues concepts and
                      techniques above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is
                      more than complete on all levels.
                      B : good work
                      Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and
                      successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and suggestions
                      presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required issues.
                      Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for
                      excellence.
                      C : acceptable work
                      Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in
                      class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is incomplete
                      in one or more areas.
                      D : poor work
                      Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-
                      making skills, verbal clarity
                      or logic of presentation are not level appropriate. Student does not
                      demonstrate the
                      required design skill and knowledge base.
                      F : unacceptable work
                      Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met.
                      Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
                      assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.


                   X : (excused incomplete)
                   Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family
                   emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an adequate
                   cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
                   consultation with the Associate Dean and Program Director’s offices
                   and with an agreement as to a new completion date. Studio work
                   must be completed before the second week of the next design
                   semester in which you are enrolling, according to School of
                   Architecture policy.
                   ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE
                   WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.
ATTENDANCE         Attendance is mandatory. Participation in discussions and work in
                   studio is expected.
                   Students with three (3) unexcused absences may be dropped from
                   the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more
                   than three unexcused absences is a full letter drop in your final
                   grade for the course. Please contact me prior to class if you expect
                   to be late or miss class. A student who misses classes or other
                   required activities for the observance of a religious holy day should
                   inform me as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
                   arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a
                   reasonable time after the absence. A student who fails to complete
                   missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal
                   academic penalties.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University
                   rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
                   including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
                   from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
                   students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
                   dishonesty will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Judicial
                   Services website for official University policies and procedures on
                   scholastic dishonesty. Please refer to The Role of Faculty in
                   Confronting Scholastic Dishonesty brochure published by Student
                   Judicial Services for information on confronting students who
                   violate scholastic dishonesty policies. For further information, visit
                   the SJS website at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ or call
                   471-2841.
DISABILITIES       At the beginning of the semester, students with disabilities who
                   need special accommodations should notify me by presenting a
                   letter prepared by the Services for Students with Disabilities Office.
                   To ensure that the most appropriate accommodations can be
                   provided; students should contact the SSD Office at 471-6259 or
                   471-4641 TTY.


SECURITY, SAFETY: STUDIO The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a
                         place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the needs of the
                         individual. Please see me if there are any problems (music, visual
                         pollution) that you are unable to resolve on your own. All spraying
                         of fixative, spray paint or any other substance should be done in the
                         shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is
                         accessible 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Please keep all exterior
                         doors locked after hours.
CONTACT:                 heymann@utexas.edu, 512-232-4083
OFFICE HOURS:            By appointment
