                                                       Syllabus
                       Accounting 312: Fundamentals of Managerial Accounting
                                                    Spring 2019
Class Hours:      MW 11:30-12:30 (Unique #: 02295)               Location: UTC 4.124
                  MW 2:00-3:30 (Unique #: 02315)                           UTC 3.112
                  MW 3:30-5:00 (Unique #: 02335)                           UTC 3.112
Instructor:       John McGuire                                   Office: GSB 5.126A
   E-mail:        john.mcguire@mccombs.utexas.edu                Phone: (512) 796-3964 (but e-mail is best
                                                                 method to contact me)
   Office Hrs:    Mondays: 9:45-10:30am, and 1:00-1:30pm
                  Wednesdays: 1:00-1:30pm, and 5:00-5:45pm
TA:                                                              Office:
   E-mail:                                                       Office Hrs:
TA:                                                              Office:
   E-mail:                                                       Office Hrs:
Required Materials
         1. MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING, by Ronald W. Hilton & David E. Platt (11th edition, McGraw-Hill
             Education, ©2017)
         2. McGRAW-HILL CONNECT and COURSESMART, on-line study and homework managers
         3. ACC 312 CASE PACK, from UT Copy Center (GSB 3.136). Available in early February.
    CANVAS will be used for course management and any additional readings or study materials will be
    posted there. I also will use Canvas for communicating with the class.
    During the first week of class, you must ensure that:
          you can access the class site on Canvas and have set up your communication preferences;
          your Connect access (including LearnSmart) is functioning properly.
    This course is supported by UT’s Peer-Led Undergraduate Studying (PLUS) program. PLUS study
    groups provide an opportunity to collaboratively practice skills and knowledge you need for success in this
    course. Attending study groups regularly is a great way to ensure that you are keeping up with the material
    so you don’t fall behind; feel free to attend any study group at any point in the semester. Groups will start
    in early February and meet Sunday-Wednesday; more information on times and locations will be available
    through Canvas and announced in class. Additional information on PLUS, including an introductory video,
    may be found at http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/support/plus.
    E-mail and Canvas
    The use of email and Canvas is required for this course. I will frequently communicate with the class with
    announcements and guidance via email. I will use the email addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas.
    If you need to update your email address with the University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal
    info/all my addresses, change your email address. Before each class, I will post on Canvas our lecture
    outline notes. I will send out a class-wide e-mail notifying you when I post the lecture outline notes so you
    can print them out and bring them to class.
    Any outside-of-class announcements that I make (e.g., corrections or clarifications of items discussed in
    class, syllabus changes, assignment changes, etc.) will be sent to you via e-mail through Canvas. It is
    possible that substantial content will be posted on Canvas or sent via e-mail. It is your responsibility to
    regularly check your e-mail and the class Canvas site.
         Spring 2019                              Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 1


Learning Objectives
  If you stay engaged with the course by participating in class, reading the assigned text, completing the
  assigned work, and preparing well for cases and exams, you should obtain the results listed below:
              Expected Result                        What We’ll Do                 How We’ll Measure the Results
     Understand how accounting         ..Discuss chapter readings, cases, and   Interesting and lively class
     systems provide data useful for   current topics together in class.        discussions about cases and
     management decisions in all       ..Relate Managerial Accounting to what   application of materials, including
     business areas.                   is going on in the business world.       current business news.
     Gain experience structuring       ..Work practice problems together in     Homework, cases, and exam
     business problems and             class and discuss them.                  performance (grades).
     analyzing management              ..Prepare business cases for class
     decisions.                        discussion and develop
                                       recommendations.
  This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning Flag. QR courses are designed to equip you with skills that
  are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your
  adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
  your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
 Class Preparation and Success
  You are encouraged to ask questions in class, both to seek technical clarification of points discussed and
  to understand how a particular topic relates to your personal interest in business.
  Class attendance and doing the study questions and homework are the two keys to success in this class.
  Students who do well are generally those who attend class regularly and can participate in class
  discussions because they have prepared. Although problems may seem fairly intuitive when we do them in
  class, you will be surprised how hard it is to set them up and solve them on your own. Practice is key.
 Classroom Standards
  A 2017 study by McCombs marketing professor Adrian Ward showed that having your phone present
  (even when it’s turned off!) takes up some of your brain power. Other recent studies have shown that
  using computers or tablets in class leads to worse performance. So, although you will use your computer
  extensively for class-related work (LearnSmart pre-study and Connect homework), during class there will
  be no computer or tablet use, and your phone should be silenced and in your bag.
  Other class rules:
        Be prepared to do calculations in class. Your phone calculator is fine in class, but it will not be
           allowed on the exam so you might do better to practice with a financial calculator. We recommend
           the HP 10bII+ financial calculator because it is (1) also useful for ACC 311 and FIN 357, (2)
           relatively inexpensive (about $35), (3) non-programmable and therefore acceptable for exam use.
        No extraneous conversation or disruptive behavior.
        You should arrive on time. On the rare occasion when you don’t, please enter and set up quietly.
        If you must leave early, please notify me in advance.
  You MUST come to the class section in which you are officially registered, unless you’ve made
  arrangements with me beforehand. Class limits are set to ensure a quality experience for everyone. Also,
  during the semester we might do some activities in class, perhaps in teams, and the activities could be
  required for course credit as described below.
       Spring 2019                               Syllabus – ACC 312                                      Page 2


 Assessment
   Course grades will be determined using the following assignments and weights:
                Two (non-cumulative) Midterm Exams
                    Lower midterm grade                  15%
                    Higher midterm grade                 25%
                Final Exam (cumulative)                  30%
                Three Case Quizzes                        9%
                Three Unannounced Quizzes                  6%
                Homework (Connect):
                    LearnSmart                            5%
                    Review Problems                      10%
                                                       100%
   The BBA Program recommends a mean GPA of 3.0-3.2 for this course, but the actual grades assigned will
   be based on what you earn. All sections of ACC 312 follow the same grading policy, and you may assess
   your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-, 80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and
   below 60% = F. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing "extra credit" work either
   before or after the end of the semester. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances and
   according to university policy.
   Grade Appeals: If you believe a grading error has occurred, you must appeal within one week after the item
   is returned to the class or the grade is posted on Canvas or Connect. I only handle grade appeals in my
   office and in person. After one week has passed, no appeals will be considered.
Exams
   Exams are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. There will be two non-cumulative
   midterm exams. Midterm exams will be closed book/notes and will be held on the dates and times
   indicated in the Class Schedule. All students in all sections of ACC 312 will take the exams at the same
   time. We will try to return the graded exams one week after the exam date. Calculators that are
   programmable or can store text are NOT allowed for exams and will be confiscated.
   There will be a common, cumulative final exam given for all sections of ACC 312 at the end of the term.
   The final exam will be closed book/notes and we will advise you of the date for the final exam as soon as
   we receive it. Do not make travel arrangements until you are certain of your exam schedule! Anyone with a
   non-standard exam schedule (SSD or other approved exception) MUST make exam arrangements with me
   at least one week in advance, and before making any travel arrangements. No early exams will be given
   FOR ANY REASON, including to accommodate travel schedules.
   Alternate exams: If you have another UT class or UT exam at the same time as one of the midterm exams,
   an alternate exam will be given, generally on the day after the scheduled exam. Similarly, if you have
   another UT final exam that directly conflicts with our scheduled final exam, there is a provision for an
   alternate exam. However, in all cases permission to take an alternate exam is at my discretion and the
   request must be made at least one week in advance. Note that conflicts such as classes at other
   educational institutions and work schedules will not constitute an acceptable reason to take an alternate
   exam. If you also have a class or exam conflict with the alternate midterm exam, we can, with my prior
   approval, make arrangements for you to make up the exam. Individual makeup midterm exams must be
   taken within 72 hours of the original exam date. These exams will be given at the Testing Center located
   on the fifth floor of the McCombs School, and I will work with you to schedule it. If you do not take the
   makeup exam as scheduled, you will receive a 0 on the exam.
   If you miss an exam due to a severe illness or other emergency, you should notify me before the exam, if
   possible, and you must provide prompt notification and proof of emergency to Student Emergency Services
   (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of emergency and will provide me
        Spring 2019                             Syllabus – ACC 312                                   Page 3


   official acknowledgement of the emergency. However, I have final authority to determine if your absence is
   excused. If so, and if it is feasible for you to take the scheduled alternate exam or an individual makeup
   midterm exam (see prior paragraph), you may do so. Otherwise, students with an excused absence from a
   midterm exam will be required to add the weight of that exam (“lowest midterm” weight) to the weight of the
   final exam. Unexcused absences will result in an exam grade of 0.
Case Assignments
   We will discuss three cases during the course to provide context and additional dimensions to the concepts
   we are studying. We will spend the whole class addressing the case on the day indicated in the Course
   Schedule, so coming to class well prepared is critical. Read the case carefully and prepare answers to the
   questions in the case (you may discuss the case in groups). These answers will not be handed in. Each
   case class will begin with a 5-10 minute closed-packet quiz on the case. At the discretion of the instructor,
   your quiz grade may be adjusted up or down based on your participation in the case discussion. Students
   who leave class after the quiz and therefore don’t participate in the case discussion, will receive a zero for
   that case quiz grade.
   No make-up case quizzes will be given, however in the event of a pre-excused absence, you may avoid a
   0 by submitting a five-page paper (double spaced, 12-pt Times Roman font, 1” margins, due within one
   week) addressing a topic of my choosing.
Homework (two types, both done in Connect)
   Homework must be completed individually in Connect, however you are permitted to collaborate
   with classmates on figuring out how to structure the solution to assigned questions. Two types of
   homework are due in this class, both administered via Connect:
       During your preparation before class, you must complete the LearnSmart module for that class,
        denoted by the LS icon in the Connect assignments list. This will guide you through the textbook, and to
        earn credit you will answer comprehension questions. When you miss a question, you are presented
        additional questions, and your LearnSmart grade will be based upon the percentage of each module
        that you finish. Questions must be answered in Connect by 8:00 a.m. on the day of class.
       Each week, Review Problems covering that week’s class material will be due to be submitted in
        Connect. The Course Schedule lists these problems. The Review Problems grade is the percent of all
        points on Review Problems that are correct as submitted. Your answers to these problems must be
        submitted in Connect by 5:00 p.m. on Saturday of that week. A solution will be provided in Connect
        after the submission window ends.
   Late homework will not be accepted. Also, note that for most questions, Connect will change the numbers
   in the problem for each student, so your data will differ from the textbook and your solution will not be
   identical to your classmates’ solutions. Connect will grade these questions, provide solutions to Review
   Problems (after all sections of ACC 312 have submitted their homework), and indicate areas where you
   need to do additional study.
   If you have difficulty using Connect or LearnSmart, or encounter a problem with the technology, please
   email your question to the course TA, listed on the first page of this syllabus. Depending on the problem,
   the TA may be able to help or you might need to contact the Connect Help Desk (click Help from within
   Connect).
   If you have questions about how to solve the exercises or problems, please see the TA during his/her office
   hours, or come see me during my office hours.
        Spring 2019                               Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 4


     Please note that no homework assignments will be dropped. However, LearnSmart will offer multiple
     opportunities to demonstrate your mastery of the material, and we have configured Connect to allow you
     multiple opportunities to check your work on Review Problems prior to submission. Therefore, you have
     ample opportunity to do well on homework assignments.
Other Assignments
     Other graded work may also be assigned, depending on my assessment of class progress and
     preparation. Examples would include (but are not limited to) quizzes in Canvas, extra problem
     assignments, extra case work, in-class check questions, and chapter outlines. If I choose to make such
     assignments, their scores will be treated as part of the case and/or unannounced quiz grades.
                                               Important Notifications
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me
at any time with any concerns.
Religious Holy Days
Per the UT Austin General Information Catalog, you must notify me “as far in advance as possible” (I expect at
least 14 days advance written notice) of your pending absence due to the observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss an examination or other assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, and you notify me
appropriately, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
In the Assignments section above, you can find specific guidance regarding individual and group work for each
of the evaluation elements in this course.
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By remaining in this
class, you agree to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear to you in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, which could include failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: copying work on tests or assignments, representing
(copying) the work of another person as your own or allowing another person to represent your work as their
own, collaborating without authorization with another student during an exam or in preparing academic work,
using or having on your desk unauthorized material or aids to complete a quiz, group exercise, or exam (e.g.,
cheat sheets, solutions, programmable calculators, cell phones, etc.). You should refer to the Student Conduct
and Academic Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty and more on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Dishonesty harms other students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, so
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. All acts of academic dishonesty receive significant
penalties and are reported to Student Judicial Services and attach to your record. This record is consulted as
         Spring 2019                              Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 5


part of application processes at UT (e.g., study abroad applications) and after (e.g., law school and MBA
applications, which generally require you to provide access to this record). IT’S NOT WORTH IT!
Campus Safety
BCAL: For concerns about individual behavior, call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050.
BE SAFE: See campus safety information at http://besafe.utexas.edu/safety-tips-apps.
     Up-to-date information regarding university operation and emergency procedures can be found at:
         http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
     Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
         buildings when an official announcement is made.
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember,
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     Students requiring evacuation help should inform the instructor in writing the first week of class.
     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Privacy in Canvas
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that if I teach multiple sections of this
course I will use a merged Canvas site for all sections. This will allow students in other sections to see that you
are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your
email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please
contact the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 for help removing your name from the view of other
students.Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/accommodations-and-services/.
         Spring 2019                            Syllabus – ACC 312                                    Page 6


                  Using Your Calculator for ACC 312 Homework Assignments in Connect
                          Carefully observe the rounding instructions in Connect.
            If no specific guidance is provided, do not round to less than four decimal places.
Please make sure your calculator does not round to less than four decimal places (e.g., 0.2078 does not round
to 0.208 or shorter). Four decimal places will be adequate for any homework or exam problems.
Here are the instructions for the recommended HP 10bII+ calculator (if you have a different calculator, check
your manual or search on-line). The default on this calculator is two decimal places, which is too short for
many problems.
Instructions for HP 10bII+:
        Spring 2019                            Syllabus – ACC 312                                  Page 7
