                    SED S389 – Administration of Special Education Programs
                                      The University of Texas at Austin
                                              College of Education
                                       Department of Special Education
                            Department of Educational Leadership and Policy
Instructor: Jeanne M. Spencer, EdD
Pronouns: She//her/hers
Phone (512) 497-9980
Email: jdm646@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours/Contacts: by appointment
Course Dates and Times
                        SED 384 - Special Education Administration (Via Zoom)
           Friday                           June         5                    4:00- 7:00pm
           Friday                           June        12                    9am-12:00
           Thursday*                        June        18                    5:00pm-6:30pm
           Friday                           June        19                    9am-12:00pm
           Friday                           June        26                    9am-12:00
           Friday                           July        03                    9am-12:00
         *An attorney knowledgeable in special education law and administration can be available only at this time for a
           presentation associated with Chapter 12. His presentation will embrace both theoretical content and practical
          applications.
 Course Description
The complexities and diversity of populations associated with school systems require highly skilled
and exceptionally well-prepared leaders. There is a need to develop school leaders who
are committed to eliminating inequities associated with the education and advancement of all
students, especially with those with special needs. This course focuses on an examination of the role
of the school superintendent in public schools with a focus on Special Education Administration and
leadership. The class is exclusively taught virtually via Zoom; the instructor will serve as a facilitator
for the successful accomplishment of knowledge and skills associated with the goals and activities
for the course. The course will be taught using lecture, group discussion, presentations, and Canvas
assignments.
 Course Objectives and Learning Outcomes
    1. Critically analyzing and addressing how students with disabilities have been historically
        underserved is demanding and complex. It requires knowledge of special education policy
        and law that can only be gained through intensive reading, writing, discussion, reflection,
        and an ability to participate effectively in shared decision-making processes
    2. Identify, describe and apply the knowledge, skills and attitudes needed to successfully
        negotiate and implement district change within special education programming and
        administration.
                                                          1


    3. Develop school leaders who are committed to recognizing and reflecting upon beliefs, and
         perceptions requiring changes in leadership and management related to special education
         administration.
             • Provide responses to an interview with the Director of Special Education.
                 Identify existing challenges from the perspectives of the special education
                 director, and be prepared to select one (1) critical issue for sharing with the
                 school board for professional learning/development.
             • Please apply the four (4) frames to demonstrate reframing of one (1) of the
                 issues based on the work of Bolman and Deal.
             • Create a PowerPoint or Prezi, as if you were presenting this information in
                 your role as the superintendent, to the board of trustees. You would state the
                 identified critical area and respond to it by reframing the issue.
             • On the last page of your PowerPoint or Prezi, please provide responses to the
                 questions asked of the special education director. The questions are located on
                 page 7 of this syllabus. The format for responding, to the questions asked of
                 the special education director, is of your own choosing. For example, you
                 might construct a summary or respond to each question separately.
             • You are permitted to complete this assignment individually or as a team if you
                 work in the same school district.
             • If you are not associated with a school district and/or do not have access to a
                 special education director, you can join another graduate student for this
                 assignment.
    4. *Engage in learning activities associated with proficiency standards of Rule §242.15 of the
         Texas Administrative Code with emphases on Special Education Administration learning
         objectives.
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Values and Ethics of Leadership
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Leadership and School District Culture
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Human Resources Leadership and Management
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Policy and Governance
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Communications and Community Relations
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Organizational Leadership and Management
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Curriculum Planning and Development
                  ➢ Learner-Centered Instructional Leadership and Management
Please Note:
*When completing learning tasks, please identify the superintendent proficiency standard/s associated with
the assignments by writing the standard/s on each specific assignment to be submitted.
 Course Required Materials
Author: Mitchell Yell:
    • Title: The Law and Special Education (5th Edition) (Paperback) ISBN-10: 0135175364
Author: Beth Harry and Janette Linger
    • Title: Why Are So Many Minority Students in Special Education? Understanding Race
         and Disability in Schools, Second Edition, ISBN-10: 0807755060, ISBN-13: 978-
         0807755068 (SECOND EDITION)
 Ancillary Material
Bolman L. G. and Deal, T. E., Artistry, Choice and Leadership- Reframing Organizations, 6th
edition. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2017
                                                     2


                                Course Map and Agenda
Participants Topic(s)                 Readings/Discussion                        Items Due and Dates
June         Chapter 1                Text: Why Are So Many Minority
 5           Overview: Ethnic         Students in Special Education?           Why Are So Many
             Disproportionality in        • Chapter 1                          Minority Students in
Spencer, J.  Special Education        Prior Reading by all students on         Special Education?
                                      overview and background information
             Introduction to the
             American Legal
                                                                               Please identify from a
             System                   Text: The Law and Special Ed.            review of Chapter 1
             Legal Research               • Chapter 1, 2 and 3
Graduate     The History of the Law   Background Information: Spencer’s        • One (1) learning
Students:    and Children with        work shared prior to first day of class  • One (1) confirmation
Participants Disabilities                 • PowerPoints will be sent in        • One (1) wondering
for Chapter                                  advance of the June 5th class
Presentation The Individuals with            for reviewing and reflecting.
             Disabilities Act
                                             The PowerPoints for Chapter
             Section 504 of the
             Rehabilitation Act of
                                             1, 2 and 3 focus on special       The Law and Special
             1973                            education background              Education
                                             information.                      June 5th - PowerPoints
Acosta, C.
                                      The Law and Special Education            and the Assignments:
             The American with        Class Presentations                      Review and Discussion
             Disabilities Act             • Chapters 4 and 5
Crompton, J.                                                                   Please identify from a
             School Structure:        Why Are So Many Minority                 review of PowerPoints:
             Institutional Bias and   Students in Special Education?           • One (1) learning
             Individual Agency         Class Presentation                          from Chapter 1 and
Howard, S.                                • Chapter 2                              3, only
             Cultural Consonance,                                              • One (1) confirmation
                                      Why Are So Many Minority
             Dissonance and the                                                    from Chapter 1 and
                                      Students in Special Education?
             Nuances of Racism                                                     3 only
                                      Class Presentation
                                          • Chapter 3
June 12      In the Classroom:        Text: Why Are So Many Minority           Due: June 12th
             Opportunity to Learn     Students in Special Education?           Interview with Director
             Construction of Family   Class Presentations                      of Special Education
Leagans, J.  Identity: Stereotypes    Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7                   (See Interview questions
             and Cultural Capital                                              embedded on this course
             At the Conference
                                                                               syllabus on page 7.
             Table:
Lopez, C.    The Discourse of                                                  Professional Learning/
             Identity Construction    Text: The Law and Special Education      Development
             Bilingual Issues and the Class Presentations                     • Reframing of one (1)
Nguyen, T.   Referral Process         Chapter 6 and 7                           challenge or critical
             ADA - (1990) President                                             issue based on
             Bush                                                               interview with the
Marina, R.   Every Child Succeeds Act                                           special education
             (2015) President Obama
                                                                                director
                                                3


                               Course MapCourse
                                           andCourse
                                               Agenda
                                                  MapMap
                                                       and Agenda
                                                           and Agenda
Participants Topic(s)                Readings/Discussion              Items Due and Dates
June 18      Procedural Rights of                                     5:00 pm
             Parents                                                  Zoom Class Session for
Lucius       Dispute Resolution      The Law and Special Education    one (1) hour and 30
Bunton,      Mediation                  • Chapter 12                  minutes
ESQ          Due Process Hearing
             • School District
                Responsibilities in
                the hearing
              • Alternatives to
                 Due Process
                 Hearings
             Attorney’s Fees
             Compensatory
             Education
                                     Why Are So Many Minority
June 19      Constructing            Students in Special Education?
             Intellectual
             Disabilities            Class Presentation
                                        • Chapter 8
Ruiz-C., V.  Constructing
                                     Class Presentation
             Learning Disabilities
                                        • Chapter 9
Saenz, C.    Free Appropriate        The Law and Special Education
             Public Education        Class Presentations
             (FAPE)                     • Chapter 8
Stephens, J.
             Identification,         Class Presentation
             Assessment and             • Chapter 9
Stoner, H.   Evaluation
             The Individualized      Class Presentation
             Educational Program        • Chapter 10
             Constructing            Why Are So Many Minority
June 26      Emotional/Behavior      Students in Special Education?      Special Education
             Disorder                Class Presentation                  Equity Audit
Washington,                             • Chapter 10
T.           Special Education:      Class Presentation                  Draft Due:
             Exile or Solution          • Chapter 11                     June 26th
Wurzbach, K.
             Disciplining Students   The Law and Special Education       Submission Due:
Carlson-     with Disabilities       Chapter Presentation                July 6th
Young, B                                • Chapter 13
                                              4


                Assignments for SED S384 - Special Education Administration
          Title                             Description                                       Points/Due
                         Class Participation includes, but is not limited to the following:
                            • Engagement during discussions in professional manner
Class Participation             to include meaningful contributions that reflect               10 points
                                knowledge and mastery of readings.
                                SPECIAL EDUCATION DIRECTOR INTERVIEW
Purpose of Interview         (Interview Questions are included with the Syllabus)
with Special Education
Director                Purpose of Interview with the Special Education Director
                            • Superintendents impact the roles and responsibilities of         Interview
                                special education directors and the decision-making
                                processes aligned with the accomplishments of their            20 points
                                specific job and tasks.
                            • When superintendents increase their own knowledge of
                                special education, they can serve as effective leaders and
                                mangers and impact decision-making process related to
                                special education.
                            • There is a dire need for superintendents to serve as          Due: June 12th
                                leaders for the successful academic and social emotional
                                development of all students to include the
                                implementation of supports and services for students
                                with special needs.
                            • Acquisition of baseline information on how the
                                interactive and collaborative roles and responsibilities of
                                the superintendent and special education director for
                                impacting the success of students in the district with
Reframing based on                                                                          Reframing the
work of Bolman and              special needs.
                                                                                              Challenge
Deal                                                                                         Activity for
                        Reflect on the insights you have gained through your
                                                                                             professional
                        interviews, discussions, and examination of the special
                                                                                               learning/
                        education program.
                                                                                             development
                        Based on the work of Bolman and Deal in Reframing
                                                                                               20 points
                        Organization, use the Four Frames to demonstrate the impact of
                        reframing one critical issue associated with in special education
                                                                                            Due June 12th
                                                   5


Evidenced-Based         As a team, graduate students will present textbook content and             20 points
Practices               identify evidenced-based educational practices that support the
                        education of students with disabilities.                                   Due: See
                                                                                                   Assignments
                        (A Chapter Presentation Rubric is a component of this syllabus             by participants
                        for an academic presentation that is engaging and enriching.)
Special Education        Special Education Equity Audit
Equity Audit
                             •   Each student will complete and submit a comprehensive
                                 Special Education Equity Audit on their district. The
Perquisite Reading               framework for the Special Education Equity Audit will             30 points
                                 be posted online.
CHAPTER10
The Equity Audit as          •   Each student with identify two (2) critical areas
the Core of Leading              requiring district approval.                                      Draft Due:
Increasingly Diverse                                                                               June 26th
Schools and Districts        •   Each student will submit a paper from 2-3 pages on
Colleen A. Capper and            recommended steps for district improvement in the two             Completed
Michelle D. Young                (2) critical area.                                                work Due:
                                                                                                   July 6th
(See Canvas for the     (If you are not currently working in a district, please submit the
article on the Equity   name of a district for review and approval by the professor.)
Audit.)
Reflective questions by
graduate students
                                           Presentation: Lucius Button, ESQ                        Component of
                        Attorney Lucius Bunton is known as a mediator who brings a calming The total
The Law and Special     and thoughtful presence to the mediation process. He has practiced law points for
Education               in Texas for over thirty years. He is a graduate of the University of participation
    • Chapter 12        Texas at Austin and Southern Methodist University law school. He
                        began his practice as an assistant Attorney General of Texas practicing
                        in the areas of education and civil rights. From 1982 to 1988, he was a
                        partner in the firm of Bunton, Nolan, Odé and Cooper and began his
                        own practice in 1988. He has practiced extensively in employment law
                        and civil rights litigation–representing both plaintiffs and
                        defendants. His practice has included work in family law and business
                        litigation.        https://lakesidemediation.com/mediators/lucius-d-bunton
                               Presentation: Tammy Pearcy, Texas Education Agency
                        Deputy State Director, Special Education
Reflective questions by July 2017 – Present 2 years 11 months                                      Component of
graduate students       Program Specialist                                                         the points for
                        Aug 2009 – Present to include 10 years 10 months                           participation
                                                                                                   points
                                                        6


                             Interview: Special Education Director
Special Education Administration-Leadership and Management
    1. What are the challenges facing the Special Education Program?
    2. What are the successes associated with the district’s special education programming?
    3. What is the role of the superintendent in working with the special education director in
         the district?
Special Education Administration- Leadership and Management Related to COVID 19
    4. Explain how the experience of COVID-19 is affecting special education related services
         to students such as physical therapy, occupational Therapy and speech therapy. What is
         the district’s provision for the continuation of related services?
    5. How does your district provide Tier 2 and Tier 3 intervention?
    6. What steps will the district take to minimize the need for compensatory education?
    7. How will needed supports and services be funded considering shrinking budgets?
    8. Based on mandated timelines, what is the district’s plan for updating and/or continuing
         student eligibility and individualized education plans (IEP?
  ASSIGNMENT BASED ON INTERVIEW WITH SPECIAL EDUCATION DIRECTOR
     A. Contemplate on the insights you have gained through your interview and discussion
           with the special education director.
     B. Identify one (1) critical issue impacting the district from your interview data with the
          special education director.
     C. Based on the work of Bolman and Deal in Reframing Organization, reflect on how
          you can impact changes in special education programming by applying the Four
          Frames to one (1) crucial area. Bolman and Deal wrote that “leaders can expand how
          they think by using different mental models to determine what’s going on and what
          to do in complex situations.”
     D. Give comparable attention to each of the four frames by:
           • explaining one (1) challenge or critical issue based on interview from special
               education director
           • determining alternative course/s of action for reframing the issue challenge or
               critical issue
                    Structural Frame             Superintendent’s role as architect
                    Human Resources Frame        Superintendent’s role as coach
                    Political Frame              Superintendent’s role as peacemaker
                    Symbolic Frame               Superintendent’s role as storyteller
      E.    Create a PowerPoint or Prezi presentation based on the identification of a single
            challenge and reframing it. The minimum number of slides, including the cover page,
            and the page with responses from the special education director should be four (4).
.
                                                    7


                        SED S384 - ORGANIZATION OF CLASS
                              Class Structure
Time: 4:00 -7:00pm
Date: June 5, 2020                                  Protocols
  4:00 - 4:10pm                                     Spencer
  4:10 - 4:30 pm                                    Presentation
  4:30 - 4:45pm                                     Break
  4:45 - 6:45pm                                     Presentation
  6:45 - 7 :00pm                                    Wrap up/Close
                                Class Structure
Time: 9:00am -12:00pm                                Protocols
Dates: June 12, 19 and 26
  9:00 - 9:10pm                                      Spencer
  9:10 - 1030 pm                                     Presentation
  10:30 - 10:45pm                                    Break
  10:45 - 11:45pm                                    Presentation
  11:45 - 12:00pm                                    Wrap up/Close
                                         8


Class Meetings
Each online Zoom class meeting will include a combination of some of the following activities: (1)
individual and small group work to define, discuss and give meaning to a concept or issue being
considered; (2) participation in an activity, case study or simulation focused on a topic; (3)
reflective writing; (4) class discussion of readings and assignments; (5) presentation by the
instructor; and (6) presentation by graduate students.
Course Expectations
    1. We will strive to promote an online classroom culture that mirrors what we know about
        learning organizations and that support our goals. It is important that we create a space that
        allows participants to try out new ideas, share opinions, and take reasonable risks. To create
        a positive learning environment, below are some key expectations.
        a. Visually, attend each online Zoom class meeting and enter on time. If an extenuating
            circumstance or emergency arise, please contact the instructor as soon as possible to
            discuss the situation.
        b. Prepare thoroughly by completing all readings and assignments on time and with
            quality. Knowledge and understanding gleaned from the readings will be essential for
            quality class activities and discussions.
        c. Complete all class assignments and activities in accordance with due dates.
        d. During the Zoom class, the instructor may require graduate students to take the lead in
            presenting, responding to or addressing selected questions, concepts or passages from
            the readings and activities.
        e. Be actively involved in the Zoom class sessions by listening carefully and contributing
            thoughtfully and substantively to discussions, tasks, and assignments. Ask questions of
            each other.
        f. Demonstrate respect for the views and opinions of others. Disagreement and debate are
            encouraged. Intolerance for the views of others is not. Conversations may become
            contested or uncertain at times, so commitment to professional, scholarly and respectful
            discourse is important and valued.
         g. Encourage a climate of individual growth, collaboration and support within a learning
             community. Show an awareness of each other’s needs. Recognize and celebrate each
             other’s ideas, contributions and accomplishments.
         h. Engage in genuine inquiry and application. Look for connections between this class,
             other classes, and your personal and professional life experiences. Background
             information of the Four Frames will be valuable for this class.
         i. Practice self-assessment and reflection.
         j. Abide by the time allocations for student presentations.
         k. Communicate learning needs promptly and appropriately.
         l. Know that in addition to major assignments, other out of class activities may be
             assigned; they should be completed on time.
    2. It is important that students produce work that is of high quality for educational leaders and
        graduate students. It is expected that all students will:
                                                     9


        a. Produce academic writing that reflects integration of knowledge, cohesiveness of
           thoughts, focus and depth of discussion.
        b. Use the Rubric prepared for this course as a frame of reference for professional writing.
        c. Make coherent connections to concepts discussed in class, the literature, and your
        d. Use APA guidelines and format, where appropriate. Use 12-point standard font with
           one-inch margins. Use double-spacing. Include name in the header and page numbers.
           Include a cover sheet with paper title, your name, course and date.
        e. Submit all work in a timely manner by the date that it is due.
        f. Electronic files should be submitted in Word so that they can be viewed with feedback
           electronically, if necessary.
    3 Performances on all assignments will be communicated to graduate students.
Attendance
Attendance does affect your participation and can significantly affect your final grade. Attend each
class meeting and arrive on time. If an emergency arises that prevents class attendance, late arrival,
or early departure, notify the instructor as soon as possible.
    ➢ 1st absence =15 points lost
    ➢ 2nd absence=30 points lost
    ➢ 3rd absence= Inability to pass course
Late Work
Late work will be handled on a case-by-case basis. Generally, except in the case of an excused
absence, work submitted after an assigned deadline will not be eligible for full credit. Please
communicate with me if you are having problems keeping to the schedule.
 Grade                   Points Associated
                         with letter grade
 A                       94
 A-                      90
 B+                      87
 B                       84
 B-                      80
 C+                      77
 C                       74
 C-                      70
 D                       65
                         <65
                                                   10


                                  University Policies and Supports
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and
uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words
or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your
sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action,
including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty
and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender
variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal
name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what
appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/them, etc.). Please
advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my
records.
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the
building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective
learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as
early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also
contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video
phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs
and alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your
goals and cope with stress. All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not
alone. There are many helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college
experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often
helpful. If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or
feelings like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
                                                   11


Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
        become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related
incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with
any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making
an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about
reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
                                        Additional References
Ainscow, M., & Sandill, A. (2010). Developing inclusive education systems: the role of
        organizational cultures and leadership. International Journal of Inclusive Education, 14(4),
        401-416.
Armstrong, T. (2017). Neurodiversity: The Future of Special Education? Educational
        Leadership, 74(7), 10-16.
Bolman L. G. and Deal, T. E., Artistry, Choice and Leadership- Reframing Organizations, 6th
edition. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2017
Boroson, B. (2017). Inclusive education: Lessons from history. Educational Leadership, 74(7),
        18-23.
Capizzi, A. M. (2008). From assessment to annual goal: Engaging a decision-making process in
        writing measurable IEPs. Teaching Exceptional Children, 41(1), 18-25.
Cheatham, G. A., Hart, J. E., Malian, I., & McDonald, J. (2012). Six things to never say or hear
        during an IEP meeting: Educators as advocates for families. Teaching Exceptional
        Children, 44(3), 50-57.
Council of Chief State School Officers (2017). PSEL 2015 and promoting principal leadership
        for the success of students with disabilities. Washington, DC: Author. Retrieved from
        http://ceedar.education.ufl.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/PSELforSWDs01252017.pdf
Fiarman, S. E. (2016). Unconscious bias: When good intentions aren’t enough. Educational
        Leadership, 74(3), 10-15.
Fiedler, C. R., Chiang, B., Van Haren, B., Jorgensen, J., Halberg, S., & Boreson, L. (2008).
        Culturally responsive practices in schools: A checklist to address disproportionality in
        special education. Teaching Exceptional Children, 40(5), 52-59.
Harry, B., & Klingner, J. (2007). Discarding the deficit model. Educational leadership, 64(5),
                                                   12


Harry, B., & Klingner, J. (2014). Why are so many minority students in special education? New
        York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Irvine, A., Lupart, J., Loreman, T., & McGhie-Richmond, D. (2010). Educational leadership to
        create authentic inclusive schools: The experiences of principals in a Canadian rural school
        district. Exceptionality Education International, 20(2), 70-88.
Jackson, R. (2016). Helping black and latino males succeed. Educational Leadership, 74(1), 38-
        42.
Kearns, D. M., Hancock, R., Hoeft, F., Pugh, K. R., & Frost, S. J. (2019). The neurobiology of
        dyslexia. Teaching Exceptional Children, 51(3), 175-188.
Lemons, C. J., Allor, J. H., Al Otaiba, S., & LeJeune, L. M. (2016). 10 research-based tips for
        enhancing literacy instruction for students with intellectual disabilities. Teaching
        Exceptional Children, 49(1), 18-30.
Lewis, T. J., Hatton, H. L., Jorgenson, C., & Maynard, D. (2017). What beginning special
        educators need to know about conducting functional behavioral assessments. Teaching
        Exceptional Children, 49(4), 231-238.
Losinski, M., Katsiyannis, A., White, S., & Wiseman, N. (2016). Who is the parent? Guidance
        from case law on parental participation in the IEP process. Teaching Exceptional Children,
        48(3), 144-150.
Miller, R. D. (2016). Contextualizing instruction for English language learners with learning
        disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 49(1), 58-65.
Myers, D., Freeman, J., Simonsen, B., & Sugai, G. (2017). Classroom Management With
        Exceptional Learners. Teaching Exceptional Children, 49(4), 223-230.
Oluwole, J. O. (2009). A principal’s dilemma: Full inclusion or student’s best interests?
        Journal of Cases in Educational Leadership, 12(1), 12-25.
Park, J. H., Alber-Morgan, S. R., & Fleming, C. (2011). Collaborating with parents to implement
        behavioral interventions for children with challenging behaviors. Teaching Exceptional
        Children, 43(3), 22-30.
Patti, A. L. (2016). Back to the basics: Practical tips for IEP writing. Intervention in School and
        Clinic, 51(3), 151-156.
Raskauskas, J., & Modell, S. (2011). Modifying anti-bullying programs to include students with
        disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 44(1), 60-67.
Rodkin, P. C. (2011). Bullying-And the power of peers. Educational Leadership, 69(1), 10-16.
Sadowski, M. (2016). More Than a safe space. Educational Leadership, 74(1), 33-36.
Schwartz, M. A. (2008). The importance of stupidity in scientific research. Journal of Cell
        Science, 121(11), 1771-1771.
Sebag, R. (2010). Behavior management through self-advocacy: A strategy for secondary
        students with learning disabilities. Teaching Exceptional Children, 42(6), 22-29.
Wolter, D. (2016). The opportunity gap in literacy. Educational Leadership, 74(3), 30-33.
Yell, M. L. (2015). The law and special education. Boston, MA: Pearson. Ell, M. L., & Bateman,
D. F. (2017). Endrew F. v. Douglas County School District (2017)
        FAPE and the US Supreme Court. Teaching Exceptional Children, 50(1), 7-15.
Yell, M. L., Katsiyannis, A., Ennis, R. P., Losinski, M., & Christle, C. A. (2016). Avoiding
        substantive errors in individualized education program development. Teaching Exceptional
        Children, 49(1), 31-40.
Ysseldyke, J., Burns, M. K., Scholin, S. E., & Parker, D. C. (2010). Instructionally valid
        assessment within response to intervention. Teaching Exceptional Children, 42(4), 54-61.
                                                   13


    Graduate Team Presentation and Discussion Rubric for SED S384
Student Team
                                                                                       Date:
Assessment Indicators                                                 Student
                                                                  Self-Assessment Professor Assessment
Presentation: Accuracy of Content                                    Feedback          Feedback
Presentation of Content:
    • Provided accurate and thorough content and
        demonstrated knowledge about the chapter
    • Shared content information in a well-organized style
    • Emphasized key points with clarity by identifying and
        communicating key ideas from the chapter
Instructional Delivery Methodology
Utilized appropriate instructional methods to present content
information or led a class discussion to include, but not limited
to the following:
    • PowerPoint, Prezi and/or other visuals
    • Graphic Organizers
    • Questioning and Discussion
    • Discovery Learning
    • Cooperative Learning
    • Small Group Discussion/Activity
    • Handouts
    • Inquiry/Problem-Solving
Class Engagement Activity Related to Content
    • Presented an educational learning activity
        commensurate with chapter content.
Organization of Work:
    • Organized and presented an academically engaging
        learning activity to the class that was commensurate
        with chapter work, and the learning activity illustrated
        a full understanding of the topic/content
    • Followed format of the textbook with an introduction
        that clearly expressed the content of the work
        presented.
    • Sent an electronic copy of Chapter PowerPoint/Prezi to
        professor to review and provide feedback prior to
        presentation
Score: ______________________
                                                        14


                                      Writing Rubric for SED S384
    Areas             Excellent                             Good                        Satisfactory               Unsatisfactory
INTEGRATION   The written work                 The written demonstrates that the   The written work               The written work does
              demonstrates that the            graduate student understands and    demonstrates that the          not demonstrate that the
              graduate student fully           has applied academic content        graduate student, to a certain graduate student has fully
      OF      understands and has applied      learned in the course. Some of      extent, understands and has    understood and applied
              academic content in the          the conclusions, however, are not   applied academic content       academic content related
 KNOWLEDGE    course. Content is integrated    supported in the body of the        related to the research topic  to the research topic and
              into the graduate student’s      written work. The graduate          and information learned        learned during
              own insights. The graduate       student provides some               during instruction. The        instruction. The graduate
              student provides concluding      concluding remarks that show        graduate student provides      student fails to provide
              remarks that show analyses       analyses and syntheses of ideas.    limited or few concluding      concluding remarks that
              and syntheses of ideas.                                              remarks that show analyses     show analyses and
                                                                                   and syntheses of ideas.        syntheses of ideas.
    FOCUS     The written work is              The written work is focused but     The written work is too        The written work format
              comprehensively focused on       lacks direction and clarity of      broad and relevant             is not clearly defined.
              the scope of the assignment.     thoughts and/or information.        information is absent or
                                                                                   vague.
    DEPTH     An exhaustive elaboration,       An exhaustive presentation and      In the presentation, the       The written work reflects
              in all research sections, of     written elaboration, in most        graduate student has omitted   an abbreviated
              the written work is evident.     sections of the paper, is evident.  some pertinent content         presentation of concepts
      OF      Throughout the paper, the        The depth of discussion, in most    related to the researched      and content. The depth of
              depth of discussion              areas, represents detail and rigor. topic. The depth of            discussion lacks detail
  DISCUSSION  represents detail and rigor.                                         discussion is incomplete in    and rigor.
                                                                                   detail and rigor.
COHESIVENESS  The writing demonstrates a       The writing demonstrates an         The writing demonstrates an    The writing is not
              clearly outstanding              above average understanding of      acceptable or average          connected and is created
              understanding of                 relationships among some            understanding of               from disparate issues.
              relationships among all          materials obtained from sources     relationships among            The writing does not
              materials obtained from          to include research articles,       materials obtained from        demonstrate an
              sources to include research      textbook and notes from class       sources to research articles,  understanding of
              articles, textbook and notes     presentations and/or discussions.   textbook and notes from        relationships between the
              from class presentations and                                         class presentations and/or     content in the research
              /or discussions.                                                     discussions.                   articles, textbook and/or
                                                                                                                  class presentations and/or
                                                                                                                  discussions.
 SPELLING and No spelling and/or grammar       No more than two (2) spelling       More than (2) spelling         Noticeable and
  GRAMMAR     errors                           and/or grammar errors               and/or grammar errors          unacceptable number of
                                                                                                                  spelling and/or grammar
                                                                                                                  errors
CITATIONS and Correctly cites all data
   SOURCES    obtained from sources to
              include the textbook and         Correctly cites most sources.       Correctly cites some data      Incorrectly cite most
              notes from class                 APA citation style is used in       obtained from other sources.   sources or do not cite
              presentations. APA citation      both text and bibliography.         Citation style is inconsistent sources
              style is used in for citation in                                     or incorrect.
              both text and bibliography.
                                                                 15


                           SED S384 Special Education Administration
                                    Special Education Equity Audit
                                            Focus: District and School
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
In your data collection and analysis, discuss the strengths and areas for improvement in serving
students labeled with disabilities within your district. Identify concrete, and specific actions or steps
for eliminating disability inequities.
General Data (Report total number/fraction and percent)
1 Number of students in your district:
2. Number of staff in your school (certified and noncertified): Fraction and
Percentage
3. Number of students in your school:
4. Fraction and percentage of staff in your school who are associated with
student services (e.g., special education, special education assistants,
counselors, psychologists, nurses, bilingual specialists, reading specialists,
gifted and talented specialist, etc.):
Questions in this Section relate to your school or a school in your district if you serve in the role of a
central office administrator
Status of Labeling at your School (Report total number /fraction and percent)
1. Students labeled “gifted”:
2.  Students labeled with a disability:
3.  Students labeled special education who are ESL or bilingual:
4.  Students who attend an alternative school/setting:
5.  Students labeled with disabilities in each grade level in your school:
6.  Students by disability label, that is, behavioral challenges, cognitively
    disabled, learning disabled, severely disabled, and so on in your school:
Students labeled with disabilities in your district:
 Special education referrals each year. How has this changed over time?
1. Of those students referred, what fraction/percentage were then identified for
    special education?
2. Do all students with disabilities in your school community attend the school
    they would attend if they were not labeled? Explain.
3. To what extent are students labeled with disabilities proportionally
    represented in all classes, courses, etc. in your school?
4. Do some students with (dis)abilities who do not live in your attendance area
    attend your school or district? Explain.
5. Which/how many students with (dis)abilities are educated primarily in a
    special education setting/classroom? Disaggregate by race, social class, ELL
    label, and gender:
6. Which/how many students with (dis)abilities are educated primarily in the
    general education setting/classroom? Disaggregate by race, social class,
    ELL label, and gender:
                                                        16


Disability Discipline Data
1. Students who were suspended in the past year divide by in-school and out-
    of-school suspensions, and compare students with disabilities with students
    without disabilities:
2. Students who were expelled in the past year compare students with
    disabilities with students without disabilities:
3. Students who were placed in an Alternative Interim Placement in the past
    year, compare students with disabilities with students without disabilities:
4. If your district has an alternative educational setting, compare the students
    labeled with disabilities in this setting to the percent of students labeled with
    disabilities in the district or high school. =:
5. Low attendance and/or truancy compare students with disabilities with
    students without disabilities:
Disability – Achievement Data
1. Reading and math achievement, compare students with disabilities with
   students without disabilities:
2. Graduation rate, compare students with disabilities with students without
    disabilities:
3. Graduated with a four-year academic diploma, compare students with
    disabilities with students without disabilities:
4. Drop-out rate, compare students with disabilities with students without
    disabilities:
5. Participation in ACT, SAT, Advanced Placement exams, compare students
    with disabilities with students without disabilities:
 Test results of ACT, SAT, Advanced Placement exams, compare students with
disabilities with students without disabilities:
 Collect (dis)ability information in at least two other areas in your school/setting and compare to
students without disabilities:
1. Students identified for special education (all categorical areas):
2. Of the number of students identified for special education, what fraction and
what percentage receive free/reduced-price lunch?
3. Students identified as “gifted” (e.g., TAG) or placed in high academic classes
in your setting who receive free/reduced-price lunch. Compare to the % of
students receiving free/reduced priced lunch in the school. (If students are not
labeled gifted, investigate related student groups in the school, such as
Academic Decathlon, Advanced Placement classes, algebra classes):
4. Students receiving RtI Interventions or who are identified as “at risk” in your
setting who receive free/reduced-price lunch. Compare to the % of students
receiving free/reduced priced lunch in the school. (If students are not labeled
“at risk,” investigate related student groupings in the school, such as remedial
reading, summer school, general math).
Social Class Discipline Data
Students who were suspended in the past year, disaggregate these data by
free/reduced-price lunch; divide into in-school and out-of-school suspensions),
compare to the % of students receiving free/reduced priced lunch in the school
                                                         17


Students who were expelled in the past year, disaggregate by free/reduced price
lunch, compare to the % of students receiving free/reduced priced lunch in the
school.
3. Students who were placed in an Alternative Interim Placement in the past
year, disaggregate by free/reduced-price lunch, compare to the % of students
receiving free/reduced priced lunch in the school:
4. If your district has an alternative educational setting, compare the students
receiving free-reduced priced lunch in this setting with the percent of students
receiving free/reduced price lunch in the district or high school:
 Social Class Analysis – See Disability Data Analysis for directions Race and Ethnicity (Report
fraction and percentage for each)
1. Students of color in your school Disaggregate by race:
2. Students of color in the total district. Disaggregate by race:
3. Students labeled for special education:
4. Of the number of students labeled for special education, what fraction and
percentage are students of color? Disaggregate by race. Compare to the percent
of students in the school of color and by each race:
5. Of the number and percentage of students labeled to receive RtI Interventions
or labeled “at-risk” (such as remedial reading, summer school, and general
math), what fraction and percentage are students of color? Disaggregate by
race. Compare to the percent of students in the school of color and by each race:
6. Students identified as “gifted” (e.g., TAG) or placed in high academic classes
in your setting who are of color. Disaggregate by race. Compare to the percent
of students in the school of color and by each race. (If students are not labeled
gifted, investigate related student groups in the school, such as Academic
Decathlon, Advanced Placement classes, algebra classes):
Race – Discipline Data
1. Students who were suspended in the past year; divide into in-school and out-
of-school suspensions and disaggregate these data by race and further
disaggregate by each race, and compare to the percent of students of color in
the school and by each race:
2. Students who were expelled in the past year; disaggregate these data by race
and further disaggregate by each race, and compare to the percent of students of
color in the school and by each race:
3. Students who were placed in an Alternative Interim Placement in the past
year; disaggregate these data by race and further disaggregate by each race, and
compare to the percent of students of color in the school and by each race:
4. If your district has an alternative educational setting, compare the students
who are of color in this setting, further disaggregated by each race with the
percent of student’s color in the district or high school and by each race:
6. Low attendance and/or truancy; disaggregate these data by race and further
     disaggregate by each race, and compare to the percent of students of color
     in the school and by each race:
                                                        18


Students who are labeled Special Education English Language Learners (Report
fraction and percentage)
1. How many Special Education ELLS are in your school, what languages do
  they speak, and how many speak each language? How does this compare to
  other schools in your district?
2. How many students identified as special education ELLSs are in each grade
at your school?
3. How many Special Education ELLS are in the district?
4. Of the number of students labeled for special education, what fraction and
percentage are Special Education ELLS? Compare to the percent of ELL’s in
the school.
5. Of the number of students receiving RtI Interventions or labeled “at-risk”
(such as remedial reading, summer school, and general math), what fraction and
percentage are students who are Special Education ELLs? Compare to the
percent of ELL’s in the school.
6. Of the number and percentage of students labeled “gifted,” (e.g., TAG) or
placed in high academic classes in your setting, what fraction and percentage
are Special Education ELLS? Compare to the percent of ELL’s in the school.
Special Education ELL – Discipline Data
1. Students who were suspended in the past year, divide into in-school and out-
of-school suspensions, compare students who are special education ELL with
students who are not special education ELL:
2. Students who were expelled in the past year, compare students who are
special education ELL with students who are not special education ELL:
3. Students who were placed in an Alternative Interim Placement in the past
year, compare students who are special education ELL with students who are
not special education ELL
4. If your district has an alternative educational setting, compare the students
labeled special education ELL in this setting with the percent of students
labeled special education ELL in the district or high school.
5. Low attendance and/or truancy, compare students who are special
education ELL with students who are not special education ELL:
ELL – Achievement Data
17. Identify the English proficiency levels (beginning, intermediate, proficient)
for each special education ELL student. How many at each level are in each
grade?
Adapted from Leading for Social Justice: Transforming Schools for All Learners (2007), Colleen A. Capper and Elise M.
Frattura. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. Reprinted with Permission.
                                                           19
