University of Texas School of Architecture
Fall 2018_Vertical Studio ARC 694:
warp + weft
Danelle Briscoe, Associate Professor
Anni Albers, Diagram showing method of weaving and draft notation (plain weave)
Description
Warp and weft are terms for the two basic components used in weaving. While the longitudinal warp hold in tension, the
oblique weft traverses over-and-under the warp. This semester, such methods of turning thread into fabric or surface will
also be considered for the design and realization of form and space at multiple scales. In general, this studio invites
students to explore the question of “architecture as construct.” Through processes of weaving, we can shift the perception
of textiles as being "old-fashioned", to instead demonstrate their alternative filigree as building material and system.
Weaving then can be an opportunity to de-familiarize certain conventions related to use and site-specificity
            In particular, the extraordinary life and work of textile artist Anni Albers forms the basis for study and production
in this studio. After arriving in America, Albers traveled with her husband Josef Albers to Mexico more than a dozen times
in the period from 1935 to 1967. On their frequent trips, the route from Black Mountain College to this neighboring country
had them traversing through Texas, often stopping at the Sears in Roebucks in Dallas to stock up on art supplies. As
well as drawing and photographing the Mesoamerican architecture, Anni was an avid collector of ancient Andean textiles
and pre-Hispanic objects. The values apparent in Mesoamerican objects and structures dovetailed with the Albers’ most
cherished Bauhaus principles, especially economy of means, truth to materials and the pursuit of variation within specific
boundaries.
            Driving their Ford Model T to archaeological sites throughout Mexico, from Monte Albán and Teotihuacán, Anni
began the weavings that would go on to inform her work for the rest of their lives. Thus, these trips proved to be incredibly
formative for both of them. This studio will use the work and travels of these adventurers as a springboard to explore
different means and methodologies for architectural design. The course will question the misconception that abstraction
can ever be free of outside influence.


Project
This studio will investigate a series of constructive processes fundamental to design and development of the semester
projects. Investigations will cultivate a design language, cataloguing and a rules system for generation as it pertains to
the projects to follow. These explorations will be iterative and progressive with interchangeable relationships of analogue
and digital means. The initial project will look closely at One of Albers work to aid in the design of a sun visor. The
second series of constructions will culminate into the design of a rest stop outside of Corpus Christi along Highway 77
South. The final project will create an open-air marketplace + canopy (roughly 3000sf) in El Mercado, San Antonio TX.
Content
           Emphases (in terms of the Four Streams outlined for Vertical studios) will be:
                                     Ordering Systems: 30%            (geometry, form, generativity)
                                     Human Factors: 10%               (programmatic exploration, experience, meaning)
                                     Construction: 50%                (fabrication/assembly)
                                     Contexts: 10%                    (ecology, landscape)
Requirements
           Class times will typically be                    1:00 – 6:00pm MWF
           Office hours (GOL 4.134):                        9am – 11, Monday (or by appointment)
           Contact                                          briscoed@utexas.edu 512.810.3133
           You are also required to fulfill UTSOA’s woodshop training as soon as possible and the on-line UTSOA
           training (https://utdirect.utexas.edu/ehs/class.WBX?s_course_comp=0&s_course_prefix=OH&s_course_number=0500 )
Readings
           Albers, Anni. On Designing. “Constructing Textiles” Middletown: Wesleyan University Press, 1959, pp 29-33.
           Filler, Martin. Josef and Anni Albers Designs for Living. “The Marriage of True Minds, the Designs of Josef and Anni
           Albers”. New York: Merrill Publishers Limited, 2004, pp32-41.
           Gardner Troy, Virginia. Anni Albers and the Ancient American Textiles. “Anni Albers in the United States and Mexico.”
           Burlington: Ashgate Publishing Limited, 2002, pp 97-119.
           Reynolds Kaye, Jennifer. Anni Albers “Anni Albers as Collector” Edited by Ann Coxon, Briony Fer, and Maria Muller-
           Schareck, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2018, pp 106-109.
Basis of assessment
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic
areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant portion of
each grade is derived from a broader, more subjective set of issues. Grading for studio courses is broken into three
components: 1/3 grasp (ideas combined with an appropriate process of inquiry), 1/3 process (the consistent and
rigorous development of ideas) and 1/3 resolution (the understanding of the project and its architectural implications).
ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS for absences, late work and late arrivals.
           A/ A- : excellent
           Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual rigor,
           craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is discussed in
           class. Project is complete on all levels.
           B+/ B/ B- : above average


           Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas and
           suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Project is complete on all levels and
           demonstrates potential for excellence.
           C+/ C/ C- : average
           Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor. Project is
           incomplete in one or more areas. (Please note: a C or better is required for the course to count towards the graduate
           student’s program of study.)
           D+/ D/ D- : poor
           Project is incomplete. Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are
           not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.
           F : failure
           Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be
           assigned when you have excessive unexcused absences.
           X : (excused incomplete)
           Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing work on time is not an
           adequate cause for assigning this evaluation.
Attendance
Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with three (3) unexcused absences may be dropped
from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than three unexcused absences is a full letter
drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact the instructor prior to class if you expect to be late or miss class.
A student who is absent from a class for the observance of a religious holy day may complete the work missed within a
reasonable time after the absence, if proper notice has been given in advance of the days to be missed. A student
who fails to complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic penalties.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical need. You will be
requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate
accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for Students
with Disabilities, also found via the web at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
Security, safety and the studio
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the careful attention to the
needs of everyone in it. Please see your instructor, if there are any problems (music, visual pollution) that you are
unable to resolve on your own. All spraying of fixative, spray paint or any other substance should be done in the shop.
Security is a necessary component for a studio that is accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week. Please be mindful not to admit any uninvited visitors and keep all exterior doors locked after hours.


Schedule                  (subject to change as necessary with guest lecturers, field trip, etc.)
                      M -
      08.27. 18  W 01 W Lottery
                      F Introduction | course overview | begin Construct 1
                      M holiday
      09.03. 18  W 02 W desk crits *
                      F Pin-up | begin Construct 2
                      M * | Tutorials (vacuum former, sandblaster)
      09.10. 18  W 03 W Lecture: Benedikt | Tutorial (baby press, vinyl cutter, wire bender)
                      F *
                      M *
      09. 17. 18 W 04 W *
                      F *
                      M *
      09. 24. 18 W 05 W Lecture: DiPiazza
                      F Pin-up
                      M *
      10. 01. 18 W 06 W Lecture: Briscoe
                      F *
                      M *
      10. 08. 18 W 07 W *
                      F *
                      M MID- REVIEW | begin Construct 3
      10.15. 18  W 08 W Lecture Weidemann
                      F Danelle away ACADIA Conference
                      M *
      10. 22. 18 W 09 W *
                      F Field Trip El Mercado, San Antonio TX
                      M *
      10. 29. 18 W 10 W Lecture Cooper Hunt
                      F *
                      M *
      11. 05. 18 W 11 W Lecture Alter
                      F *
                      M Review
      11. 12. 18 W 12 W *
                      F Drawing Show
                      M *
      11. 19. 18 W 13 W holiday
                      F holiday
                      M *
      11. 26. 18 W 14 W *
                      F *
                      M dead day
      12. 03. 18 W 15 W Final Reviews
                      F Final Reviews
