               ADV 468K/483-3 ​         Portfolio 2
                                                      (Unique Numbers: 06570, 6765)
the person handing out grades:                         the real brains of the operation (your TA):
Ryan Romero                                            Regan Gavin
twoleftthumbstoo@gmail.com                             rtgavin@utexas.edu
Office: BMC 4.306                                      Office: ADV Bullpen
Hours: Mondays and Wednesdays                          Hours: TBD
        11am - 12:30pm, 4pm - 5pm
Second verse same as the first
Well, almost. You’ve done it before, now we’re going to do it again only bigger, better, and
creative...er. You’re going to come up with big ideas that don’t only work once, but multiple
times, in multiple directions, on multiple media. Your design must be better. Your execution
must be better. Your copy must be better. Your YOU must be better.
Class Objectives
    ●   Tell Bigger, More Relevant Stories Based on Insight
        We don’t make ads for ourselves or even our clients. We make ads for our target.
        Students learn to tell them stories they want to hear, not just the ones they or their
        clients want to tell. In addition to connecting more deeply with an audience, they are
        required to connect more broadly with them utilizing all manner of media and
        experiences available to them including, but not limited to, traditional, digital, and
        cutting-edge immersive.
    ●   Understand and Leverage Target Audience Behavior
        Target audiences perform repeated actions, follow behavioral patterns, and interact
        with people and products on a daily basis. Students are taught to find and leverage
        these patterns in order to inject their communication seamlessly into the targets’ lives.
    ●   Selling an idea
        Coming up with a concept is just the beginning. Nothing gets made if you can’t
        effectively communicate it to your client. Teams are required to present working
        concepts from the beginning all the way through their final iteration and learn to
        effectively represent these ideas in their portfolio.
    ●   Fearless Failing
        Teams are taught to get used to bringing big, risky ideas to the table time and time
        again without fear or worry of failure. Once a concept is chosen, it is to be pushed to its
        limits and proudly presented. Where ideas and presentations were tentative in Portfolio
        1 becomes they become more and more steady in Portfolio 2.
    ●   Skills and Software - Presentation
        More time is spent on the development of skills and software first learned in Portfolio 1.
        Work should have a more finished look and students are expected to be learning new


         and varying skills as their individual ideas and executions necessitate them. The ideas
         themselves dictate the knowledge and practice gained.
Trading books for tiny statues
While most classes require books and course packets that cost you hundreds of dollars, P2
mostly just costs all of your free time. However, we highly encourage you to begin setting aside
money for entry, tickets, postage, etc. for work you wish to submit to award shows.
Depending on the semester, you may wish to enter several pieces of work in anywhere from 2
to 4 award shows. For reference, the local Addy Awards usually costs $25-$35 per
entry/category, with tickets to see the show around $50 for students. So, save those pennies.
Stand and deliver
You’ll be presenting more than simply hanging stuff up on walls, though that happens as well.
This means you’ll need a more final idea before you stand in front of the class and make a fool
of yourself. How much sleep did you think you were getting this semester? Might want to
rethink that. Half-baked ideas will not be critiqued. Bring your A game.
Final critique, take 2
As before you are expected to fully execute the best of the best ideas using all digital, manual,
bought, borrowed and stolen methods available. Unlike before, the expectation is higher. In
final critique you will show a MINIMUM of 15 pieces. Even more so than in P1 you’ll be working
on your projects in your “free” time. Don’t underestimate the commitment. P3 is not a given.
         NOTE: The lightnin’ round
         If you don’t show the required work in final critique (for whatever reason) you cannot
         earn a grade higher than an 80...and that’s if you were perfect (read: not gonna happen).
         I must see and approve all portfolio work prior to the critique. I reserve the right to
         remove work shown without my approval. If I remove work and you don’t meet the
         minimum requirements you may not participate and you won’t advance to P3.
Push your pixel pushing skills. What passed for quality in P1 doesn’t cut it anymore. You have
to grow. Though no longer mandatory, Lynda classes and the like are highly encouraged.
Remember, advertising is subjective. There are no right answers. Do better each time and play
nice with others. The ad biz is small and incestuous. Your friends here will be your colleagues,
competitions, and cohorts. Love them. Fear them. Respect them. You’re all in this together.
                 Go buy this stuff...again (yes, that means you’re mounting work):
                 ‣ 500 sheets of white copy paper (cheap is good)
                 ‣ Black Sharpie fine-tip markers (A stack of them. They tend to get lost.)
                 ‣ 1-2 Sheets of black on black foam core board
                 ‣ A fresh X-Acto #1 knife + pack of extra blades (borrowable/shareable)
                 ‣ A metal straightedge ruler (borrowable/shareable)
                 ‣ A can or 2 of 3M Spray Mount (NOT Super 77)
                 ‣ ​TWO​ black queen-size FLAT bed sheets (lowest thread count wins!)


Final Grade Breakdown
         20% = Project 1 -
         20% = Project 2 -
         20% = Project 3 -
         10% = Critique Score
         20% = Participation, Professionalism, & Peer evals
         10% = All-or-nothing “checklist” for portfolio work this semester
Hey, wait a sec...what’s this last thing? This semester you’re going to have to check several
boxes with the work you do. They needn't be in any particular project or campaign but at the
end of the day if they’re not all there you’ll receive a letter grade sized ding to your final grade.
Probably worth keeping track.
    - Killer video execution(s) - ​Could be a single online video, a series of 6 second
         pre-rolls, a three-piece television campaign or something else. Plan and shoot it well.
    - Unique Digital Interaction - ​Tech is limitless and new stuff comes out every day. Find
         a way to leverage digital dots you know or could conceive of actually existing and
         connect them to something new for an experience we’ve never seen before.
    - 15 Total Pieces (min) - ​This means your campaigns will need to be broad and diverse.
Note: There is a catalog requirement for all Advertising and PR majors to have a minimum grade of C in all
communication courses and all courses required and electives for their major. I believe that grade is a B for
graduate students. Grades are true to form. You earn a C by being average. That means you showed up and
checked all the boxes. Impress me and get a B. If I think you could start a business with me tomorrow maybe that’s
an A.
How to succeed
         ‣ Treat this like it’s already your job.
         ‣ Fail big! Make mistakes and own them. We all learn from them.
         ‣ Play nice. Be a good partner. Seriously. Do your end and then some.
         ‣ Spend at ​LEAST​ 10 hours outside of class for every one hour in class. But I think you
         all know 10 hours isn’t going to cut it for a great book.
         ‣ Study award shows and latest work, seek out all kinds of existing and emerging
         creativity, and develop your skills. Keep your eyes open. More important than you think.
         ‣ Seek a balance. Absorb advertising and culture as much as possible but leave
         yourself time for your own contributions. Remember, you’re a creative. Create.
Open Away From Face
As a child I once asked my father to explain to me the words printed on the caps of bottled soda. He
said it was there to keep people who shook up the soda from accidentally hitting themselves in the eye
when they opened the bottle. “But that’s common sense. We have to tell people basic information like
this? What a giant waste of time.” So anyway, here’s your bottle cap.
         showing up.
         I do not take roll but there is an expectation that you are here. Missing a class that moves as
         quickly as we will puts you significantly behind. If you have a job interview or some other
         pressing emergency it’s up to you to make the call. You are an adult and can decide which is
         more important to attend. You needn’t let me know you’re going to miss a class (see efficiency
         in emails point). Know that repeated absence or lack of participation in class could influence
         your grade. You are a budding professional in a deadline-driven industry. That means you are
         expected to do all of the work all of the time. Show up ready to present in every class. If I decide
         to call on you or your partner to show me what you’re up to, you better have something to say. If


the class, as a whole, does not have enough prepared for class then class may just be canceled.
And trust me, you need every bit of class time you can get each semester.
favorites exist.
I, like every professor, has on occasion been accused of having favorites. Guess what. I do. So
do your parents, your bosses, everyone you meet in the world, and you. Maybe you care about
being a favorite and maybe you don’t, but I’d encourage you to keep reading. The thing is, my
favorite students are the ones who apply themselves, do the work, process all the feedback and
work to better their work and themselves. They needn’t always do as I suggest but they should
seek to understand criticism and use that information to do better. Then, they come back big,
hard, and often. They don’t make excuses. They don’t show up without work. They don’t keep
repeating the same mistakes over and over without seeking help to rectify them. Why do I like
these people? Because they’re here to do the work.
Good news! You’re already my favorite student and staying that way makes you more
successful at what you came here to do. But show me you don’t want to work, you don’t want
to care, you don’t have time to participate and while you won’t lose the opportunity to do good
work, you will begin to lose respect from me, your peers, and future bosses. That’s how the
world works. Nobody expects you to be good right off the bat, few are. You just have to want to
be good and then take the steps to get there. Do that and you’ll always be my favorite
snowflake.
thicker skin through advertising.
No matter how much of an introvert you may be, how delicate your feelings are, or how attached
you are to your art, advertising is not and will never be private. It is a public endeavor. Period.
Your work will be seen and judged, sometimes harshly, by your colleagues and me. Fair and
honest critique can be brutal if you’re not ready for it. It can even be difficult for those who are.
Remember: you are not your work. Don’t take criticism to heart, take it to head. Consider it.
Process it. Use it. Keep your cool and know that very few ideas make the final cut. Critique is
difficult to hear no matter who says it and no matter how they say it. The people in this room are
here to build your book and get you a job. We are not a creative director worried about you
taking his job, we’ve nothing to gain from making you feel bad, and we’re not the internet trolls
who will tear your work down from the shadows. Sadly, all of that is going to happen later on in
the real world. For now, know that we’re your instructors, your colleagues, and your friends
trying to make you better.
let’s get passionate.
We talk about a lot of things in class. As creatives, our goal is to make real, truthful human
emotional connections. And both humans and emotions are nothing if not messy. Touchy
subjects will be brought up and discussed because we’re putting real work out into the real
world where those subjects exist. While we have to discuss (and grow from doing so) the impact
these thoughts and ideas have on society from an academic perspective, I will not tolerate
racism, hate speech, misogyny or any other kind of marginalization and neither should you.
We’re navigating a very delicate time in our society and if someone, including myself, ever
crosses a line, even accidentally, I encourage you to come to me or to my TA and address your
concerns. Chances are the person in question was simply mistaken or ignorant on the subject


         and will want to apologize. This is how we grow. This is how we move forward. You are safe
         here. You are welcome here. Do not bottle up your concerns as nobody can feel creative if they
         don’t feel safe and we won’t undermine our mission to grow your creativity.
         things change, stay in touch.
         In this course, and in Texas Creative in general, we have a few methods of communication.
         Make sure your Canvas email is updated to a current, reachable account. Join Slack. You can
         find ours at: ​Texas-Creative.slack.com​. You will be responsible for checking Canvas, Email, and
         Slack and staying up to date on all topics. Do so or risk missing important news, class updates,
         jobs, announcements, money giveaways, beach vacations, concert tickets, and more.
UT Made Me Say It
A collection of mandatory stuff from the University. You should probably glance at it anyway.
Don’t cheat. Don’t steal work.
The usual university rules apply to cheating and plagiarism. When it doubt, refer to Wheaton’s
law. If you are caught doing either, you will automatically fail this course. Please familiarize
yourself with the university’s policy on plagiarism​ ​here.
It’s tough out there
The world is a little more stressful lately. So, if stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling
unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, UT has options available for support. Our
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW | CMA
4.134 | 512.471.7642 (leave a message if she is unavailable)
         Need Immediate Help?
                      - Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
                           | 512-471- 3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
                      - CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 |
                           cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
If there’s a family emergency, you’re having health issues, miss class, etc.
Hit up Student Emergency Services first. Let them handle telling your profs.
https://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Need other accommodations?
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information:
https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
This is a safe space, just not always a confidential one. So says the federal government.
You can talk to me about anything. However, if it involves sex discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence (including dating and
domestic violence), stalking, or discrimination on the basis of pregnancy ​I am required by law
to disclose this information to our Title IX office or I will lose my job and be legally prosecuted.
You can find more info at ​titleix.utexas.edu


But, when? WHEN?!​ ​(subject to change)
W, 1/22     Syllabus, Introductions - Begin Project 1
M, 1/27     Project 1
W, 1/29     Project 1
M, 2/3      Project 1
W, 2/5      Project 1
M, 2/10     Project 1
W, 2/12     Project 1
M, 2/17     Project 1      Deadline for Project 2 choices.
W, 2/19     Project 1
M, 2/24     Project 2      PROJECT 1 DUE
W, 2/26     Project 2
M, 3/2      Project 2
W, 3/4      Project 2
M, 3/9      Project 2
W, 3/11     Project 2      Deadline for Project 3 choices.
3/16 - 3/20 Spring Break
M, 3/23     Project 3      No slacking. Let’s see some great ideas!
W, 3/25     Project 3      PROJECT 2 DUE
M, 3/30     Project 3
W, 4/1      Project 3
M, 4/6      Project 3
W, 4/8      Project 3
M, 4/13     Project 3
W, 4/15     Project 3
M, 4/20     Production Mode: Any project          PROJECT 3 DUE
W, 4/22     Production Mode: Any project
M, 4/27     Production Mode: Any project


W, 4/29       Production Mode: Any project
M, 5/4        Production Mode: Any project
W, 5/6        Production Mode: Any project
THURSDAY 5/14 P2 Final Critique!
              8:00am          -   Doors open and setup.
              8:30am          -   Doors close. You’re there or you don’t participate.
              9:00am          -   Tables finished. You leave.
              12:00pm         -   Doors reopen. Late students do not advance.
