                      THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
                  Second Year SPANISH II– Summer Session 2 2019
                                     SPN 611D – 84245
    §   This document contains important information and represents an agreement between the
        Department of Spanish and Portuguese and its students.
    §   You are responsible for knowing all of the information contained in this document.
    §   You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
1. OBJECTIVES OF THE LANGUAGE PROGRAM
The objectives of the Spanish Language Program address the basic tenet of a liberal arts education:
the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of language in society. This
objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and economic
internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.
The Language Program promotes the development of multilingual literacies through the analysis
and use of Spanish as a second or third language. The program focuses on three major types of
competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):
    1) linguistic competence: phonetics/phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon, discourse, etc.
    2) communicative / interactional competence: sociocultural uses of language, pragmatics,
        cultural backgrounds, perspectives, etc.
    3) metalinguistic competence: language as a conceptual, symbolic system
2. COURSE DESCRIPTION AND GOALS
SPN 611D is the third course in The University of Texas lower-division Spanish program. The
course focuses on developing speaking, listening, reading and writing skills in Spanish, while
building vocabulary, learning basic rules and terminology of Spanish grammar, and gaining a
better understanding of Hispanic cultures in order to communicate in an accurate, effective, and
informed manner within a variety of sociocultural situations.
By the end of this course you should be able to do the following in Spanish:
(a) describing in detail
(b) narrating in the past
(c) narrating past events and reacting subjectively to them
(d) expressing opinions and reacting to dramatic events and situations
(e) reporting what other people said
(f) discussing past actions affecting the present
(g) recognizing dialectal, social and contextual variation
(h) talking about actions completed before other past actions
                                                                                                  1


(i) talking about hypothetical situations in the future or past
(j) understanding the main ideas in moderately complex written texts (with improved skimming,
cognate recognition, and inference skills)
(k) understanding the main ideas of moderately complex oral discourse (with improved
recognition of tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)
(l) maintaining conversations of a substantial length (with improved fluency strategies, such as
circumlocution, discourse markers, etc.)
(m) producing written work of a substantial length (with improved organization, connectors, and
appropriateness of register)
3. PLACEMENT / PREREQUISITES
The prerequisite for this course is a passing grade (C or better) in SPN 610 D, equivalent credit
transferred from another university, or credit by exam. If you do not have the prerequisite, please
drop the course now. If you are a heritage speaker of Spanish (if you grew up speaking Spanish
with family), consider enrolling in SPN 612 instead of SPN 611D. If you have any questions
regarding placement, please speak with Sarah Singer, the Liberal Arts Advisor for Spanish &
Portuguese, either in person (in BEN 2.108) or via email (ssinger@austin.utexas.edu).
4. COURSE FLAG
This course carries a Global Cultures Flag. Courses with this flag are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present. At least one third of the course
grade for SPN 611D is based on content related to Global Cultures.
5. CONTACT INFORMATION
Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any questions or problems you may have relating to
the class. If you have a concern that you wish to discuss with someone other than your instructor,
contact the Course Supervisor. If you feel that the issue has not been satisfactorily addressed by
the Course Supervisor, you may refer the matter to the Director of the Language Program.
  Course Instructor
  Name: Mónica B. Ocasio Vega
  Office: BEN 5th
  Office hours: M & W 8:30-10:00 am
  Office phone:
  Email: mocasio@utexas.edu
  Course Supervisor                                  Program Director
  Name: Celina Nevárez                               Name: Dr. Melissa Murphy
  Email:celina@austin.utexas.edu                     Email: mmurphy@mail.utexas.edu
                                                                                                   2


5. COURSE TEXTBOOK AND RESOURCES
Textbook:         Ogando-Lavín M.; Murphy, M.; Montesinos, D.; Por mí mism@ 3th edition
                  revised. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt, 2014. [At the Co-op or online at
                  https://he.kendallhunt.com/product/por-mi-mism
TalkAbroad:       You must purchase TWO “conversations” ($15 each) at Talkabroad.com.
Canvas:          This course uses Canvas as its course management system. You are
                 responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for important
                 documents, assignments, grades, etc.
Movies:          Pelo malo, Venezuela, dirigida por Mariana Rondón, 2013 (Link provided)
                 No, Chile, dirigida por Pablo Larraín, 2012 (Link provided)
                 También la lluvia, España, dirigida por Iciar Bollaín, 2010 (Available in Netflix)
6. ATTENDANCE POLICY
Attendance is required at all classes and is checked daily. All absences count (except religious
holidays, documented jury duty, documented military duty or university-sponsored
activities). Your instructor will take attendance at the beginning of each 75-minute session
(i.e. twice per day). Up to four 75-minute session absences will not result in a reduction of your
final grade because of the absence itself. However, each absence during a 75-minute session
beyond four, regardless of the reason for the absence, will carry a 1%-point penalty toward your
final grade. Three tardies equal one absence. Note: Arriving more than 35 minutes late counts
as an absence. 4 tardies (arriving to class at least 5 minutes late) equal one absence.
7. POLICY ON MISSED WORK
Please familiarize yourself with the following procedures:
  Reason for absence       Procedures
  Religious holiday         • Notify your instructor via email during the first week of class.
                            • For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will
                              receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
                              instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.
                            • For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.
                            • At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
                              upon return.
  Jury duty                 • Notify your instructor via email as soon as you are aware of the
                              conflict.
  Military duty
                                                                                                   3


 University-                • For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will
 sponsored activity            receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
                               instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.
                            • For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.
                            • At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
                               upon return.
 Documented illness         • Notify your instructor immediately via email.
 or emergency               • No make-ups are permitted.
                            • Fill out and submit to your instructor a “Request for Grade
                               Averaging Form” (posted on Canvas), along with the appropriate
                               documentation. A Supervisory Committee will determine whether
                               or not you may receive grade averaging for your missed
                               assessment(s).
Grade averaging =       The average from your other scores in the same category will be used as your score on
                        the missed assessment. Note: No grade averaging is available for labs, since the lowest
                        score is already dropped in these categories.
8. FINAL EXAM
DO NOT MAKE PLANS TO LEAVE TOWN UNTIL AFTER THE LAST DAY OF THE
FINAL EXAM PERIOD. Please read the following information carefully:
The listening comprehension section of the final exam will be given on the last day of classes.
There are no make-ups.
The written section of the final exam will be given during the final examination period. Please
note that the written final exam will NOT follow the date and time listed in the Course Schedule.
The Registrar’s office will publish the official Final Exam Schedule approximately three weeks
prior to the end of the semester. You will be able to access your individual exam schedule at
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/registrar/exam_schedule.WBX
There is absolutely NO MAKE-UP FINAL and students who miss the regularly scheduled final
will receive a grade of 0 for the exam. CHECK YOUR SCHEDULE NOW TO MAKE SURE
YOU DO NOT HAVE A CONFLICT WITH THE FINAL EXAM!!!
9. GRADING SCALE
There is no curve or extra credit available in this course. If your final average is 89.9, your
course grade will be a B+. Do not expect to receive a passing grade simply because you complete
all requirements. To receive an “A”, all or most of your work must be excellent. A “B” indicates
that your work is very good. A “C” means that your work is adequate and you may continue with
the next course. Please keep in mind that a grade of C or higher in this course is required in
order to continue in Spanish. A grade of C- or Pass is not sufficient to go to the next level.
Final letter grades are assigned according to the following scale:
                                                                                                               4


     93-100 A                 83-86.9 B               73-76.9 C                63-66.9 D
     90-92.9 A-               80-82.9 B-              70-72.9 C-               60-62.9 D-
     87-89.9 B+               77-79.9 C+              67-69.9 D+                0-59.9 F
10. GRADE DISTRIBUTION AND COURSE ASSESSMENTS
The grade distribution in SPN 611D is as follows:
 3 Exams                                                                     20%
 3 Listening Quizzes                                                         10%
 3 Final Tasks                                                               15%
 Oral Activities
      • TalkAbroad (2)                                                       10%
      • ¡A Hablar! (3)                                                       5%
 Noticias y sociedad (3)                                                     5%
 Culture Journal (3)                                                         10%
 Homework                                                                    5%
 Final Exam                                                                  20%
 TOTAL                                                                       100%
EXAMS: You will have 3 exams, one after each chapter. The exams will include vocabulary,
grammar, semantic, pragmatic and cultural topics covered in the textbook, in class discussions,
and in homework assignments. Both listening comprehension and written skills will be evaluated.
The focus of each exam will be the material from the most recent chapters. However, since learning
a second language is a cumulative process, you should also expect to encounter previous material
on exams. Exam dates are listed on your course calendar.
LISTENING QUIZZES: Once per chapter, you will have a short listening quiz in class. This will
offer you the opportunity to have regular, low-stakes, listening assessments rather than less
frequent, high-stakes listening assessments on major exams.
FINAL TASKS: There will be 3 “final tasks”, one at the end of each chapter. Two will be oral
activities (a debate and a presentation) and one will be written (a news report). The topics will
relate to the vocabulary themes and cultural content of the respective chapters.
TALK ABROAD: Two times during the semester you will have a 30-minute (recorded)
conversation online with a native Spanish speaker living in Latin America. In addition to the
conversations themselves, you will complete a pre-activity, which is designed to help you prepare
for your conversation, and a follow-up activity, in which you will reflect on what you have learned
about your partner’s country (customs, geography, dialect, etc.)
                                                                                                  5


¡A HABLAR!: This is one of the oral components of the course. Once per chapter, you will spend
25-30 minutes speaking in small groups. These discussions will be unrehearsed, and will relate
directly to the chapter themes. Your grade will be based on your ability to express yourself,
maintain a conversation and interact effectively with others. The dates are listed on your course
calendar.
READING ACTIVITIES: Towards the end of each chapter, you will complete a reading
assignment (called Noticias y sociedad). You will do the activities at home and have them
completed by the dates indicated in your calendar. On these dates, you will be given a brief, open-
book quiz over the material that will count as your grade for each of these activities. These are
in-depth activities that require you to think about both familiar and unfamiliar vocabulary and
grammatical structures as well as the content and organization of each text. Plan to set aside several
hours in order to complete each one, as this process will help you develop stronger reading and
linguistic skills.
CULTURE JOURNAL: One time per chapter, you will be given written texts and movies
exploring a variety of cultural perspectives related to the chapter themes. You will 1) summarize
the content, demonstrating comprehension of the material, and 2) comment subjectively, reflecting
on what you have learned and making comparisons between the culture(s) presented and US
culture. We will drop the lowest grade.
HOMEWORK: Your instructor will assign homework to turn-in and be evaluated. Participation in
class, exercises and homework are essential for success in the course. At times you also will be
required to correct your own homework using a homework key posted on CANVAS. Class time
will be used for interactive and creative exercises. See important notes about the use of translation
devices in the section on Academic Integrity on page 9.
FINAL EXAM: The final exam is comprehensive and will assess your knowledge of vocabulary,
grammar and pragmatic / sociolinguistic material covered throughout the semester. It will also
assess the fundamental skills developed in the course (e.g. listening comprehension, reading,
writing, and data analysis). Please remember that (1) the listening section will be given the last
day of class and (2) the written section will be on the uniform date/time released by the
registrar. There are no make-ups. Please see additional information in Section 9 of this
syllabus.
11. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT ASSESSMENTS
Throughout the semester, you will be acquiring knowledge (e.g. vocabulary, grammar) and you
will be developing skills (e.g. reading strategies, data analysis). Therefore, course assessments are
designed to reflect your progress in both of these areas. Assessments can include material not
explicitly studied, but that is closely related to the course content and tests a student’s ability to
apply acquired information and abilities to unfamiliar situations and contexts.
KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                                     6


Vocabulary: You are responsible for all words and phrases on the vocabulary lists. You should
know the meaning, gender and spelling of these items. Furthermore, you will be expected to use
these words within a context. Therefore, make sure you know not only the English translations
for the words, but also understand how they would be used in Spanish discourse.
Grammar: You are expected to know all grammar structures included in the course syllabus.
Make sure you fully understand all formulas and rules. For verb conjugations, you will be expected
to know how to conjugate not only regular verbs, but also irregular verbs and verbs with spelling
and stem changes.
Terminology: In order to talk effectively about language, you will be expected to know the
appropriate terminology. You should be prepared to answer questions involving technical
linguistic terminology and/or identify these elements both in class and on exams or other
assessments.
Sociocultural: Your instructor will expose you to different interactional contexts and a variety of
dialects and their principal characteristics throughout the semester. You must familiarize yourself
with this material and will be expected to recognize these features on exams and other graded
assignments.
SKILLS
Reading: Of the four skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking), the ability to read is typically
retained for the longest period of time. With this natural tendency in mind, one of the main goals
of our program is to develop strong reading skills that will stay with you for years to come. In this
course, you will be given many opportunities to develop these skills, both in groups and
individually, both at home and in-class. You will develop skills such as skimming, recognizing
cognates, making inferences, etc. It is in your best interest to work pro-actively on developing
these reading skills at home, since you will be tested on your ability to read and comprehend
unfamiliar texts containing unfamiliar vocabulary and to do so with relative speed.
Data analysis: Our department implements a guided inductive approach to language learning.
This means that you will be exposed to language data (written or oral) and will be encouraged to
formulate your own rules and test your own hypotheses regarding language forms and structures.
Since a substantial part of the course will involve this type of data analysis, you should expect to
be tested on this skill via graded assignments and exams. In other words, you will not only be
expected to reproduce language practiced in the classroom, but will also be given new data, about
which you will be asked to draw conclusions.
12. EXPECTATIONS OF STUDENTS ENTERING SPN 611 D
 Students are expected to enter this course with a working knowledge of:
    • nouns , adjectives , pronouns (agreement, placement)
                                                                                                    7


     • conjugations of regular, irregular and stem-changing verbs (present, present progressive,
       preterit and imperfect, periphrastic future, synthetic future, formal and informal
       commands, present subjunctive, past subjunctive, conditional)
     • mood selection (indicative, subjunctive, imperative)
     • simple and complex sentences
     • reading strategies (skimming, recognizing cognates, making inferences, etc.)
     • listening strategies (tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)
     • speaking strategies (circumlocution, fluency, etc.)
     • writing strategies (process writing, discourse connectors, paragraph organization,
       paraphrasing, etc.)
     • metalinguistic skills (recognizing parts of speech, recognizing dialectal variation,
       identifying functional uses of grammar, etc.)
If you feel you have weaknesses in any of these areas, it is your responsibility to review your
610 D material as soon as possible and consider working with a tutor if necessary.
13. STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
In order to be successful in this course, students must fulfill several responsibilities both in class
and at home and must also be able to demonstrate their progress in course assessments.
Homework: Your instructor will assign homework regularly. Many of these assignments are
given in order to prepare you for the following class day. Therefore, it is imperative that you
complete this work in order to be able to participate in class. Homework is also given to provide
you with ample opportunities to practice the course material and identify potential areas of
weakness. As a result, you will experience an increase in self-awareness, which will enable you
to take a pro-active stance in your progress, thus becoming a more effective learner overall.
Studying: You should not limit your work at home only to homework assignments collected by
your instructor for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis,
since attempts to memorize large amounts of material quickly before an exam are not normally
successful. You should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of
any items you may not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions
and resolve issues before a quiz or exam.
Practice: Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as re-reading or staring
at tables and lists of words / rules. This type of traditional studying is not sufficient in a language
course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t develop the
automaticity necessary to successfully complete exams and compositions within a limited time
frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to:
     • practice conjugating verbs
     • practice writing sentences, letters, essays, etc.
     • practice reading newspaper articles, ads, etc.
     • practice speaking with friends and/or classmates
     • practice listening via news broadcasts, television or online videos
                                                                                                      8


Interaction: Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and
rely heavily on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will
be pair work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the
facilitator. All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.
Focus: The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class. Smart
phones, tablets, laptops and outside reading materials are NOT allowed in class, as they limit your
participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.
Spanish: In order to improve your oral communication skills, you must practice both listening to
and speaking Spanish! Therefore, your instructor will speak almost exclusively in Spanish, which
will not only help you learn new vocabulary and grammar structures, but will also increase your
comfort level over the course of the semester. In turn, you are expected to speak in Spanish during
all activities and for basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom,
asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.). Don’t be shy! You won’t be graded on the
accuracy of your speech in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.
14. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students
with disabilities. Any students with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who require
academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students, 471-6259, as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. Before course accommodations can be made, the letter from SSD
must be presented to the instructor. Approved accommodations will not change the basic elements
of the course.
15. ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
The University’s honor Code states: “the core values of the University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
respect toward peers and community.” Please note that all graded work                   (e.g. essays,
homework) done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing that appears to be the
work of someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or print source) or that
appears to have been written in English and then translated by an online translation program will
not be accepted, and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on the particular assignment.
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the university. Since
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the university, policies on
academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, visit the Student Judicial
Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
                                                                                                    9


16. STUDENT CONDUCT
Any student who, acting singly or in concert with others, obstructs, disrupts, or interferes with any
teaching, educational, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, or other activity or
public performance authorized to be held or conducted on campus or on property or in a building
or facility owned or controlled by the U.T. System or institution is subject to discipline. For more
information, visit http://www.utsystem.edu/bor/rules/50000Series/50101.pdf.
17. EMERGENCY EVACUATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police department, or Fire Prevention Services
office. Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                     SPN 611 D: CALENDARIO SUMMER 19
                              Capítulo 1: Dime cómo eres…
    •    Contenidos funcionales: Describir personas, expresar cambios, expresar acuerdo y desacuerdo e
         interrumpir
    •    Contenidos semánticos: Las apariencias y la personalidad, Los estereotipos, la belleza y la
         autoestima
    •    Contenidos culturales: Visionado de la película Pelo malo dirigida por Mariana Rondón
    •    Contenidos gramaticales: Ser/estar +adjetivos, verbos de cambio
    •    Contenidos socioculturales: Los atenuadores del discurso
    •    Contenidos pragmáticos: Estructuras para aumentar la fluidez
    •    Estrategia de lectura: Predecir palabras por el contexto
    •    Lectura: Relaciones con los demás. Objetivos: comprensión lectora y revisión del subjuntivo
    •    El tema en la literatura: D. Juan Manuel y Bécquer
    •    Tarea final: Un debate
                                                                                                     10


15 julio       • Introducción al curso
               • ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema
               • Entrando en materia: Las apariencias y la personalidad
16 julio       • ¡Gramaticando! Usos de ser y estar
               • ¡Gramaticando! Usos de ser y estar II
               • Pre-actividad de TalkAbroad
17 julio       • Entrando en materia: Los estereotipos
               • Pre-actividad de la película Pelo malo
 Del 17 de julio al 24 deben ver la película Pelo Malo. Su instructor les proporciona un link para
su visionado.
18 julio       • ¡Gramaticando! Adjetivos que cambian de significado con ser y estar
               • Entrando en materia: La belleza y la autoestima
               • Listening quiz 1
19 julio         • ¡Gramaticando! Verbos que expresan cambios
                 • Mejorando el discurso: Estructuras para aumentar la fluidez
                 • Entregar TalkAbroad 1
22 julio            •   El tema en la literatura
                    • A hablar 1
23 julio            • El lenguaje vivo: Atenuadores del discurso
                    • Prueba de Noticias y sociedad 1
24 julio            • Actividad de post visionado de Pelo Malo
                    • Tarea final 1: el debate
                    • Revisión para el examen 1
                                                                                                   11


25 de julio        • Examen 1
            •       Entrega del diario de cultura 1. Escritura sobre Pelo Malo
            •       Introducción al capítulo 2: Déjate volar y Abriendo el tema
            •
                        Capítulo 2: La máquina del tiempo
  •    Contenidos funcionales: Relatar hechos en el pasado, hablar de hechos cerca del presente o en el
       pasado del pasado, enfatizar el paciente
  •    Contenidos semánticos: Acontecimientos esenciales para el mundo, logros sociales, rituales
       festivos
  •    Contenidos gramaticales: Pretérito e imperfecto, los pasados compuestos, voz pasiva y se pasivo
  •    Contenidos socioculturales: Los arcaísmos
  •    Contenidos pragmáticos: Conectar y ordenar
  •    Contenidos culturales: Visionado de la película No de Pedro Larraín
  •    Estrategia de lectura: Mejorar la comprensión de un texto
  •    Lectura: Mujeres rompedoras. Objetivos: comprender y resumir un texto
  •    El tema en la literatura: Arráncame la vida Ángeles Mastretta
  •    Tarea final: Un reportaje
26 julio        • Entrando en materia: Acontecimientos que marcaron el mundo
                • Gramaticando! Pretérito e imperfecto I
29 julio        • Gramaticando! Pretérito e imperfecto II
                • Previsionado de la película No
   Del 29 de julio al 5 de agosto deben ver la película No. Su instructor les proporciona un link para
   su visionado.
30 julio       • Entrando en materia: Logros sociales a través de la historia
               • ¡Gramaticando! Los pasados compuestos
               • Pre-actividad de TalkAbroad
                                                                                                    12


31 julio      • Entrando en materia: Rituales festivos
              • ¡Gramaticando! Voz pasiva y se pasivo I
              • Listening quiz 2
1 agosto        • Gramaticando Voz pasiva y se pasivo II
                • Mejorando el discurso: Conectar y ordenar cronológicamente
                ● A hablar 2
2 agosto        • Entregar TalkAbroad 2
                • El tema en la literatura
                • Tarea final: Reportaje (Se hace en clase)
5 agosto       • Revisión examen 2
               • Post-visionado de la película No
6 agosto       • Examen 2
               • Entregar Diario de cultura 2
               • Comenzar el capítulo 3: ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema
                       Capítulo 3: Ciudadanos del mundo
   •   Contenidos funcionales: Expresar condiciones, expresar deseos, finalidad, mandatos, opiniones
       negativas…
   •   Contenidos semánticos: El medio ambiente, el mercadeo internacional, los derechos y las
       responsabilidades
   •   Contenidos culturales: Película También la lluvia, España; dirigida por Iciar Bollaín en 2010
   •   Contenidos gramaticales: Cláusulas con si, usos del subjuntivo
   •   Contenidos socioculturales: El lenguaje corporal
                                                                                                     13


   •   Contenidos pragmáticos: Conectores que dan coherencia al discurso
   •   Estrategia de lectura: Identificar tipos de texto y sus características
   •   Lectura: Transgénicos. Objetivos: Análisis de la estructura del texto y debate sobre el mismo.
   •   El tema en la literatura: “A la deriva” Horacio Quiroga
   •   Tarea final: Una presentación
7 agosto        • Noticias y Sociedad 2
                • Entrando en materia: El medio ambiente
8 agosto        • ¡Gramaticando! Condiciones potenciales
                 •   Actividad de pre-visionado de También la lluvia
 Del 8 al 13 de agosto se debe ver la película También la lluvia
9 agosto         • Entrando en materia: El mercadeo internacional
                 • ¡Gramaticando! Claúsulas con si
                 • A Hablar 3
12 agosto         • Entrando en materia: Los derechos y las responsabilidades
                  • ¡Gramaticando! Repaso de algunos usos del subjuntivo I
                  • Listening quiz 3
13 agosto         • ¡Gramaticando! Repaso de algunos usos del subjuntivo II
                • Actividad de post-visionado de También la lluvia
                • Prueba de Noticias y Sociedad 3
14 agosto        •   El tema en la literatura: “A la deriva”
                 •   El lenguaje vivo: El lenguaje corporal
                 •   Mejorando el discurso: conectores que dan coherencia
15 agosto         • Tarea final 3: Presentación de un producto
                  • Revisión del examen 3
                                                                                                      14


          • Entregar el diario de cultura 3
16 agosto • Examen 3
          • Revisión del examen final
19 agosto    EXAMEN FINAL (check EXACT day/time in the Registrar’s online office)
                                                                                  15
