Course Title: Great Discoveries in Archaeology – A Global Cultures Flag Course
Fall 2018
ANT 326F (Unique #31770)
EUS 346 2 (Unique #36200)
MW 4:00 – 5:30
RLP (former CLA): 1.106
Instructor:         Dr. Mariah F. Wade
                    Office: SAC 4.146
Office Hours: M 10:00– 12:00 PM or by appointment
                    Telephone: 512-232-4876; Email: m.wade@mail.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant:
Ms. Julia Earle
Office hours: W 2:00-4:00 pm
Office: SAC 4.
Email: jearle@utexas.edu
Course Description:
Archaeology shapes the way we understand the human past, and the history of archaeology was shaped by the great discoveries in
archaeology and the people who made them. This course aims to illuminate and understand how archaeological work and innovating
techniques came to affect the ways in which we perceive different cultures and how such work and changing perceptions impact local
peoples’ view of their past. The course surveys the stories and myths behind some of those discoveries as well as the background of
the discoverers and the cultural, social, political and economic conditions under which the discoveries were made. In the process we
will discuss how they acquired knowledge, formulated hypotheses, and the impact their early discoveries had on the ways we know
the world, think about ourselves, and on how archaeology is practiced today.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups
outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the
practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Requirements: Upper division standing or consent of the instructor.
Required Text Books:
All required readings will be on Canvas.
Policies and Administrative details
     •   Pre-requisites                There are no pre-requisites for this course other than those shown above.
     •   Attendance                    Attendance is required, and absences will result in a lower grade.
     •   Class participation            Students who do not participate in the class discussions will not be penalized, but those who do
         will be rewarded as their questions and comments will enhance the discussion and benefit everyone.
     •   Canvas:                      Lecture materials will be placed on Canvas after the class. Other course materials also will be
         placed on Canvas.
     •   Policy                        There are no make-up quizzes or extension on deadlines, except when the absence is unavoidable
         in which case the student is expected to contact me, and I will require proof of the problem.
     •   Quizzes                       There will be an in-class quiz every two weeks. Quizzes will cover readings and lecture materials
         from the previous two weeks. Quizzes will be short and take place at the beginning of the class on Wednesdays.
     •   Papers                        Students will prepare three short papers each dealing with (1) a concept, (2) an archeological
         site and (3) a specific individual discussed in detail in lecture. In papers 2 and 3, cultural aspects of the peoples
         involved must be addressed. All papers MUST be related to concepts, sites and individuals discussed in lecture. See
         below the schedule for delivery of drafts and final papers. Papers must be 2 to 3 pages in length, excluding references
         and cover page. NOTE: the order of preparing the drafts of the papers is your choice. You may decide to start with a
         paper on an archeological site and have your last draft be the concept paper, but all the final papers are due on the
         same day, in class, typed, double-spaced, with cover page, full references and clean. There are no extensions or
         exceptions.
     •   Scholastic honesty            Scholastic dishonesty will not be tolerated and the rules of the University of Texas will apply.
         University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
         leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
         through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
                                                                                                                                         1


     •   Plagiarism                   You may also want to see these other sites, which include information about plagiarism and how
         to deal with web sources. Use of web material, particularly text, has to be referenced as completely as if you were dealing
         with a library book. For more information please visit this site:
         http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism
     •   Computers                    Students have access to the Student Microcomputer Facility (SMF). Please visit this site for more
         information: http://www.utexas.edu/smf/
     •   Disabilities                 Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
         Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video
         phone) or http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd. If you have a disability please let me know at the beginning of classes,
         and no later than the second week of classes.
     •   Religious Holy Days         According with UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
         days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
         project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
         reasonable time after the absence.
     •   Cell phones                  Please make sure that your cell phones are turned off while in the classroom.
     •   According to University Rules any recording of lectures is not permitted, unless the instructor has granted permission.
     •   Contact:            You can contact me by email, by coming to the office hours, or by appointment. You can contact your
         TA by email of by reaching her during office hours. E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence;
         therefore, you are responsible for reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You
         are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail
         regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
         communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your
         e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
     •   Emails received after 9:00 pm will not be answered until the following day.
     •   Emergency Evacuation Policy Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
         outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
         evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door
         may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
     •   If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow
         my instructions. Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin
         Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
Evaluation and Grading:
         Quizzes: 7 at 5 pts each = 35 pts.
         Papers: 3 papers at 20 pts each = 60 pts.
         Class attendance and participation = 5 pts.
Assignments:
     •   Reading assignments must be completed before class.
     •   There are no make–up quizzes (see above)
     •   Class attendance is required
Schedule
Week 1
August 29 – September 5
Introduction
Setting the stage
Time is the essence
Week 2
September 10-12
Human Origins
Pride and Prejudice
                            Quiz
Week 3
September 17-19
Searching for the past (in the past)
                                                                                                                                         2


Week 4
September 24-26
Whose skull is it, anyway?
                           09/24 Draft of 1st paper
                           Quiz
Week 5
October 1-3
Egypt and the Near East
But could they write?
Week 6
October 8-10
Egypt and the Near East
Catastrophe, Death, and Mystery
                           Quiz
Week 7
October 15-17
Egypt and the Near East
Sequence dating and baulk excavation
                           10/17 Draft of 2nd paper
Week 8
October 22-24
The Aegean
                           Quiz
Week 9
October 29-31
Mesopotamia
Week 10
November 5-7
Middle East and Fertile Crescent
                           11/07 Draft of 3rd paper
                           Quiz
Week 11
November 12-14
Europe
Nautical Archaeology
Week 12
November 19
North America
                           Quiz
                           Thanksgiving Holiday 21-24
Week 13
                                                      3


November 26-28
North America
Week 14
December 3-5
Rethinking the past
                          12/03 All final papers due
                          Quiz
Week 15
December 10
Conclusions
                          Last class day – December 10
                             What you should expect to get (and know!) when you finish this course
 A sense of history and the importance of archaeology to the understanding of humankind and its achievements and failures
             q   The history of archaeology and its relevance to modern thought: archaeology helps us to understand how
                  humans leave their footprints in the physical world.
             q   The interconnectedness of scientific thought: the history of archaeology is part of the history of geology,
                  paleontology, biology, zoology, geography, political history…
             q   The discoverers, their discoveries, and the historical context that affected both and the countries and peoples
                  involved.
             q   How and why the early history of archaeology raised questions that led to the development of modern
                  archaeological techniques.
             q   A synthetic chronology of major archaeological discoveries and events.
             q   The politics and reasons that lead modern countries to claim the return of art objects.
             q   A deeper understanding of how colonization affected the development of archaeology and archaeological
                  thought, and how the politics of gender directed the ways archaeologists viewed humankind and its
                  achievements.
             q   The historical links between archaeology and travel, photography, social media, politics, and spying.
                                                                                                                                 4
