               AFS 102K SYLLABUS
         Unique Numbers 30415/30420
     Foundations of the USAF
Course Syllabus AY 19-20 (Fall Semester)
                AFROTC Detachment 825
            The University of Texas at Austin
      Capt Gabrielle Zuniga, Assistant Professor
               Office Phone: (512) 232-2371
        Office: CLA 5.722 Hours by Appointment
                                                 1


                                                                                           Fall 2019
MEMORANDUM FOR AS 100 STUDENTS
FROM: Capt Zuniga
SUBJECT: Welcome to AS100/Foundations of the United States Air Force
 1. Welcome to Air and Space Studies 100; Foundations of the United States Air Force. This
 two-term course is designed as an introduction to the Air Force Reserve Officers Training
 Corps (AFROTC) and the Air Force (AF). It will allow college students like you to experience
 our program to see if the Air Force is the right fit for you. By taking this course you ARE NOT
 committing to the Air Force. That particular decision is in the future, if you are qualified and
 that is what you decide to do.
 2. The topics we will cover this term include the history and heritage of the greatest Air Force
 in the world, the Air Force’s mission, organization and combat capabilities, the amazing career
 opportunities coupled with the outstanding benefits, and some customs, courtesies and standards.
 You will begin to practice your communications skills through briefings and in writing. A
 majority of these topics are a basic introduction to the Air Force and the military.
 3. Some of you have had Junior ROTC or Civil Air Patrol experiences, grew up in military
 families, or have already served on active duty. As a result, you have already been exposed
 to some of the topics we will discuss. Let that work in your favor; use your experience to
 help others. For the vast majority of you who do not have a military background, this will
 be a true learning experience. Regardless of your experience, you are all starting on an equal
 footing and we are all here to help and learn from each other.
 4. Good luck as you prepare to take this important step in your Air Force career, a career
 of service to our great nation!
                Integrity First – Service before Self – Excellence in All We Do!
                                                               //signed//
                                                   GABRIELLE R. ZUNIGA, Capt, USAF
                                                   Assistant Professor, Dept of Air Force Science
                                This syllabus is subject to change                                 2


                                         Course Syllabus AY 19-20
                      AFROTC Detachment 825, The University of Texas at Austin
Course Location and Hours: (30415) Wednesday 1300-1400, CLA 5.404
                                           (30420) Wednesday 1400-1500, CLA 5.404
Office Location and Hours:                 CLA 5.722 – hours by appointment (calendly.com/gabrielle-
                                           zuniga)
                                           Office: 512-232-2371
                                           E-mail: gabrielle.zuniga@austin.utexas.edu
                                            Course Requirements
Course Objective: The fall semester of AS100, “Foundations of the United States Air Force”,
establishes foundations for future development. It emphasizes critical skills required of Air Force
Officers, to include: foundation for becoming an Airman, Air Force customs and courtesies, Air Force
dress and appearance, listening skills, Air Force Values, and leadership requirements. Students will be
required to learn core information about the Air Force and recall the information as reference points. This
is a one (1) credit-hour course and requires critical thinking and understanding of materials presented.
Course Text: Students are not required to purchase a textbook. We will also use The Tongue and Quill
(AFH 33-337, 27 May 2015 edition) and other study resources as appropriate. All course material will
be posted on Canvas.
                                              Attendance Policy
Attendance Policy (AFROTCI 36-2011, 9.10.1): Cadets and participating students (non-cadets) in this
class must achieve a minimum of 80 percent attendance over the course of the term to receive a passing
final grade. All absences will initially be categorized as unexcused and will count against the 80 percent
attendance requirement. If you will be late or unable to attend, make every effort to coordinate this with
the instructor before class. Examples of excusable absences are: Family emergency, conflicting
appointments (i.e. - Air Force physical), and events beyond your control. Examples of unexcused
absences are: Studying for a test, sleeping in, etc. Make-up work may be allowed for excused absence at
the discretion of the instructor.
When you must miss class for valid, unavoidable reasons, notify your instructor as soon as possible but
no later than before class start time. In case of unexpected circumstances (i.e., emergencies), you should
notify me no later than 24 hours after class session. Alternate requirements or makeup activities will be
arranged for the valid, unavoidable criteria listed below:
             •   Participation in an approved field trip or other official University activity (e.g., athletics,
                 debate, music, theater arts, AFROTC physical). Note: Fraternity and/or sorority functions
                 are not official University activities; or
             •   Sickness or medical confinement…must provide documentation (missing class because
                 you have a headache from studying late the night before is an unexcused absence); or
                                   This syllabus is subject to change                                            3


             •   An emergency (e.g., death in the family, automobile accident).
        **Administrative Requirement: Regardless of circumstance, if you miss class, email course
        instructor within 24 hours about the absence (with ABSENT as your subject line).
        Any unexcused absence will result in a 2% reduction of your overall class grade.
                                 Student Responsibilities and Guidelines
Classroom Conduct:
   •    When a ranking officer/instructor enters the classroom, students will stand and come to attention
        until told to be seated by the officer. When the officer prepares to leave the classroom, the
        students must again come to attention until dismissed or until the officer leaves the classroom.
        Class members will select a class monitor and alternate who will make these announcements for
        all class sessions.
   •    Students are not required to stand or raise your hand when contributing to class discussions, but
        you must be respectful of others at all times. You will properly address the instructor as
        sir/ma’am or by rank (e.g., Captain, Major, and Colonel) and address NCOs as sergeant.
   •    No, smoking, or use of other tobacco products while in class (tobacco use of any kind is
        prohibited on the UT campus). Drinks are allowed; however, containers must have a lid.
   •    Cell phones will be put away during class unless used to support class discussion (e.g. Kahoot).
   •    Use of laptops/tablets is only permitted for note taking, unless additional use authorized by
        instructor to support class objectives.
Cadet Standards: Cadets must be aware of membership requirements (refer to AFROTCI 36-2011).
Here’s a recap of your requirements (these are not all-inclusive):
   •    Report all negative civil, military, or school involvements to the detachment within 72 hours. If
        the incident occurs during a school break lasting longer than 72 hours, cadets may wait to report
        the involvement NLT 72 hours after their return to classes following the break.
   •    Maintain a full academic load of 12.0 credit hours (exceptions for final semester) and term and
        cumulative GPA of 2.00 or greater. You must also pass all AS courses with a C or better and no
        F or incomplete grades in any of your classes. For scholarship cadets, maintain term and
        cumulative GPA of 2.50 or greater. Additionally, should a contract cadet’s cumulative GPA
        drop below 2.50, a Conditional Event will be issued. We will also investigate for disenrollment,
        except for first term HSSP scholarship winners whose scholarship will be suspended.
   •    Remain in good standing at your institution.
   •    Discuss plans to drop classes or change majors with cadre in advance.
                                 This syllabus is subject to change                                       4


    •    Meet physical fitness and weight standards.
    •    Meet medical standards and advise us of any changes in your status.
    •    Maintain Air Force standards of appearance, leadership, self-discipline, and behavior.
    •    Saluting/Reporting: When in uniform, render a hand salute and verbal greeting to all military
         officers outside, and when reporting in (whether or not in uniform). Salute all ranking cadet
         officers, of all military services, when in uniform. Unless told to enter at ease, you must use
         proper reporting procedures when entering the office of a commissioned officer.
    •    Uniform Wear: Wear your uniform properly and proudly! You must maintain grooming and
         weight standards to wear the uniform. Note: AFI 36-2903 requires that dress and appearance
         standards are followed on- and off-duty.
    •    Civilian Clothes/Uniform: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2008 cadets will wear their
         uniform for at least one full day per school week, during their attendance at LLAB, and for
         Practical Military Training (PMT). If not in military uniform, all cadets will wear appropriate
         civilian attire to their AS class. At all times, appropriate uniform or civilian clothes will be worn
         will be worn in RLP. NO hats will be worn in the buildings at any time.
    •    Hazing: Hazing is neither honorable nor respectful behavior. Hazing is inconsistent with military
         order. Do not use your cadet position or rank to take advantage of, or inflict cruelty on
         subordinates, to include indignity, oppression, or deprivation of any right or privilege to which
         they are legally entitled. Be honorable, be respectful.
    •    Drugs & Alcohol: No drugs, period. No drinking alcohol unless you are of legal age. Be
         responsible—do not abuse alcohol and never drive while or after drinking.
                                                Administration
Timeliness: Be on time; treat class as a military appointment.
Course Materials: Students are not required to purchase a textbook. We will also use The Tongue and
Quill (AFH 33-337, 27 May 2015 edition) and other study resources as appropriate. All course material
will be posted on Canvas.
Instruction: Academic classes are conducted as a combination of lecture and guided discussion. Be
prepared for class by reading assignments in advance. Be able to share your knowledge and personal
views in class. Classes may be supplemented with videos.
Counseling Interviews: In accordance with AFROTCI 36-2011 and detachment policy, each cadet will
meet with their course instructor for an academic plan review and term counseling interview. We will
have at least one per term, with the first one occurring within the first few weeks of each semester. Plan
on 30 – 45 minutes for your appointment and be on time. Don’t forget your WINGS login information.
         Fall Term: All cadets must have their academic plan reevaluated and recertified by their
         university academic advisor every term. The academic advisor will sign/date in the “remarks”
         section of the plan.
                                    This syllabus is subject to change                                        5


Office Hours: If you need my assistance or wish to discuss the course, the Air Force, or anything else,
don’t hesitate to schedule an appointment with me. Please use Calendly to do so at
https://calendly.com/gabrielle-zuniga. The link will also be posted on Canvas.
Academic Integrity: Integrity is an Air Force core value. Plagiarism and cheating are just a couple
examples of behavior that show a lack of integrity. These and other examples will not be tolerated.
Academic integrity means honesty and responsibility in scholarship. Professors have to obey rules of
honest scholarship, and so do students. Additionally, the core values of the University of Texas at Austin
are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community. For further information on academic dishonesty, please visit
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/
Students with Disabilities: Students with Disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, (512) 471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
Accommodations for Religious Holidays: By UT policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given
an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow
students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL: 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something
doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
                                 Course Requirements and Grading Policy
Class Participation: Class participation is worth 10 points or 10% of your grade. I expect active
participation from all students during every class period. Active participation is essential to your
individual development as a student…and specifically in this course that is preparing you for your
transition into the Active Air Force. Prior preparation and attentiveness during class are keys to
maximizing your participation credit.
Examinations: There are two examinations – a midterm and a final – each worth 30 points or 30% of
your grade. These tests may be a combination of short answer, multiple choice, and True/False questions.
The material for the examinations is selected from class discussions and presentations (to include student
presentations), student readings, supplemental readings, guest speakers, and videos.
Writing Assignments: There are two writing assignments. Follow the general writing assignment
guidelines below as well as unique requirements for each individual assignment.
General Guidelines:
     • All assignments are due not later than the start of class period they are due.
     • Students must hand in a hard-copy & submit an electronic copy of all written assignments.
         Electronic copies will be submitted via e-mail with the following subject line: “AS 100 – Cadet
         XXXXX – Title of Assignment”
     • All references will be integrated and appropriated cited within the flow of your paper.
     • Grading: I will consider three main areas in grading your work: grammar and format;
         justification/clarity/conciseness; and effectiveness in meeting the tasking.
                                   This syllabus is subject to change                                      6


Writing Assignment # 1 – This is a one-page official memorandum covering why you are in AFROTC
and why you want to be an officer in the Air Force. Be sure to include specifically how you heard about
Det 825 at UT; what you hope to gain through the program as well as strengths you bring to cadet wing.
Use the Tongue and Quill format pages 183-185 to assist you.
The memorandum is worth 10 points which is 10% of your grade.
Writing Assignment #2 - Write a 1-page talking paper in accordance with AFH 33-337, The Tongue and
Quill, from the instructor supplied Air Force Specialty Code (AFSC) topic list. A description of careers
can be found at the following link (https://www.afrotc.com/life-after-rotc/).
The talking paper is worth 10 points which is 10% of your grade.
Briefing Assignment: Deliver a prepared briefing on your second writing assignment topic. The
presentation will last 3 minutes (+/- 1 min). This will be an information briefing intended to educate the
audience on your AFSC topic. PowerPoint presentation is optional. The briefing will be presented in
accordance with this syllabus schedule (See course outline for due dates).
The briefing is worth 10 points which is 10% of your grade.
         General Guidelines:
              • Arrive early and ensure the presentation works properly.
              • PowerPoint optional for this presentation/briefing.
              • Grading: I may use the HOLMCENTER Form 6 - Informative Briefing Grading Sheet –
                   to grade the briefing.
                       o If your briefing is over or under the allowable timeframe, I will lower your
                           briefing score by one letter grade.
Grading Computation: Your grade is computed using the following formula. Note that the total score
possible is 100 points and will be converted into the letter grade/4-point GPA scale used by UT-Austin.
                     SPRING SEMESTER                                                Grading Criteria
 Graded Area                                             Points                   Score        Letter Grade
                                                                                               (GPA Points)
 Exam #1                                                   30                    93-100           A/4.0
 Exam #2                                                   30                    90-93            A-/3.67
 Writing                                                   20                    87-89            B+/3.33
 Why AFROTC?                                           10                        84-86            B/3.0
 AFSC Talking Paper                                    10
                                                                                 80-83            B-/2.67
 Briefing                                                  10                    77-79            C+/2.33
 Class Participation                                       10                    74-76            C/2.0
 Total                                                    100                    70-73            C-/1.67
                                                                                 67-69            D+/1.33
                                                                                 64-66            D/1.0
                                                                                 60-63            D-/0.67
                                                                                 0-60             F/0.0
                                   This syllabus is subject to change                                       7


Course critique requirement: Your feedback on the course and course instructor is critically important
for two reasons. First, the feedback helps ensure the course is meeting its objective. Second, your input
helps improve the course and instructor for future students. Specifically, all UT students must complete
item 1 below. All cadets must complete items 1 through 3 below.
        1. Every semester, complete the university critique, “Course Instructor Survey,” online.
        2. Every semester, complete the AFROTC sexual assault assessment found on line (URL to be
        provided by instructor), usually completed NLT two weeks prior to course end date;
        3. At the end of each spring semester, complete AFROTC end-of-term survey on line (URL to be
        provided by instructor), usually completed NLT two weeks prior to course end date.
                ***This space intentionally blank, course outline begins on next page***
                                 This syllabus is subject to change                                       8


          AFS 100 COURSE OUTLINE – FALL 2019
 Date  Lesson #                       Subject               Assignments
28 Aug      1   Welcome and Course Overview            Cadet Reader
                Introduction to ROTC
4 Sep       2                                          Cadet Reader
                *Assign Career Field Briefings*
                Air Force Core Values                  Cadet Reader
11 Sep      3
                                                       1st Written Assignment Due
18 Sep      4   Formation of the Air Force             Cadet Reader
25 Sep      5   Dress and Appearance Standards         Cadet Reader
2 Oct       6   Customs & Courtesies                   Cadet Reader/Note Taker
9 Oct           EXAM #1
16 Oct      7   Speaking Overview                      Cadet Reader
23 Oct      8   Writing Overview                       Cadet Reader
                Career Field Briefings                 Cadet Reader
30 Oct      9
                                                       2nd Written Assignment Due
6 Nov     10    Benefits of Service                    Cadet Reader/Note Taker
13 Nov    11    Introduction to Leadership             Cadet Reader
20 Nov    12    Heritage Series
27 Nov          Thanksgiving Break
4 Dec           EXAM #2
                    This syllabus is subject to change                     9


                            Classroom Evacuation Instruction:
    1.  Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
        when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
    2.  Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    3.  Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
        class.
    4.  In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    5.  Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at Austin
        Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Other important Emergency Information: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                   This syllabus is subject to change                                               10


This syllabus is subject to change 11