                                                         Spring - 2019
                                 AET363C: Visual Programming – Unique #: TBC
                                                      Michael McKellar
                                            mmckellar@austin.utexas.edu
                                                Office Hours: by appointment
                                           Tuesday & Thursday 9:30 – 11:00 AM
                                                    PAC 3.204 – ‘PLAI LAB’
                                                REQUIRED assets for Class:
                                                       A notebook & pen
                                                      Harddrive/USB drive
OVERVIEW
The goal of visual programming is to both introduce and teach the fundamentals and beyond of the development
environment touchdesigner (www.derivative.ca). A software commonly associated with large-scale interactive and
immersive experiences.
Learning will cover most aspects of creation inside touchdesigner beginning at simple 2d graphic manipulation growing in
complexity through to external data sources and API integration.
COURSE DESCRIPTION
This practical lab class introduces students to use code to realise and implement artistic vision.
Touchdesigner is a programming and creative environment that is beginning one of the most sought after creative
technologist skills for creative agencies around the world.
This class will take students through a complete introduction and learning experience covering most core concepts of
developing and working with Touchdesigner.
By the end of the course students will have advance understandings of the capabilities of Touchdesigner and the methods
to implement creative vision.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
By the end of the semester, students will be able to:
     •     Critically analyse and discuss the qualities of computer-generated art;
     •     Develop and understanding of the foundations of coding practise;
     •     Demonstrate practical development, creation and implementation of creative coding;
     •     Gain experience in various industry software;
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
     •     Participation (10%): Students should be prepared to raise ideas, critique designs and add to class discussions, this
           is expected weekly
     •     Attendance (5%): Attendance is taken during every class
     •     Technical Challenges (25% total): technical challenges are graded on a pass/fail basis (for 4 points) if they meet
           the scope set out in the specific challenge, some challenges will have an additional grade point available allowing
           for creative or other adaptive implementation by students.
     •     Project 1 (20%): Playback machine – students will create a control system for a pre-defined projected where they
           will need to be able to perform a number of key tasks as an ‘interactive engineer’.
     •     Project 2 (35%): An interactive experience created in collaboration with the UT dance department. Students will
           form part of a team to create an augment visual, lighting and dance experience showcased in the Payne theatre
           at the end of the semester.
CLASS POLICIES
UT ELECTRONIC MAIL NOTIFICATION POLICY


Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students. Students are
 expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related
 communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked
 daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or her official e-
 mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail returned to
 the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable
 messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action
 required of the University or instructor.
(see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
ATTENDANCE
Attendance and punctuality are professional attributes. This class is designed to provide students skills for a more practical
and professional future career.
You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for in-class assignments
or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up.
However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please
inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving
class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being absent.
Unexplained absences beyond the three outlined above will result in a penalty to your final grade. Normally a single grade
drop per unexplained absence. (E.g. A, becomes A-, C+ becomes C etc.)
Learning, research and development within the class all build on knowledge gained from previous lessons, you are
responsible for making up for work missed during any absence. It is your responsibly to obtain any notes or assignments
from one of your classmates.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS
Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or other required
activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student
whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an
examination or complete an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be
absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
(from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-
6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations
promptly.
CLASSROOM ETIQUETTE
       1.   Be on time at the start of class time and after any breaks
       2.   This class is a place for artistic discussion and critique, not texting on your phone – please turn them on silent
       3.   Discussion is good, distraction is bad – I reserve the right to reduce marks for participation for repeat offenders
       4.   Consider bringing headphones/earphones for any periods of solo work, such as class work sessions – any other
            time, these are never seen
COURSE COMMUNITACTION
The syllabus and assignments will be posted on the course Canvas site. All communications outside class hours will take
place via canvas.
This class is designed around discussion and group learning, it will help everyone if you post questions in the discussion
area wherever possible. I will post, comment and otherwise add to the discussion wherever relevant, or with topics to help
steer general discussion in class.
I will attempt to respond to all private communications within 24 hours on weekdays.
I normally check emails twice per day, once in the afternoon, once in the evening.


           •    Always ask questions where there is doubt. Do not make assumptions.
       ASSIGNMENTS
           •    All assignments will be given out and discussed during class time and available to view on Canvas.
           •    Some classes will have specific technical assignments with focus on students learning specific skills in a software
                or working with a hardware. Additional smaller assignments may be made throughout the semester as the need
                arises.
           •    You are responsible for making up for any class work missed – specifically technical challenges completed during
                class time as these, and the homework assignment contribute heavily to the final grade.
           •    It is your responsibility to ask and inquire if you are unclear about what is required or when.
           •    If an assignment will make use of lab accessible technology. You are responsible for making sure you leave
                appropriate time to access all the required technology for a given assignment.
       ASSIGNMENTS DEADLINES
           • It is vital that you do not get behind in this class as all work builds upon previous work.
           • As a general rule all projects, reading, research and homework assignments must be completed before the
                beginning of each class period. However, many class assignments have a due date and time in the evening before
                class. This allows time for review and feedback, as well as discussion based upon the submitted work during the
                next lesson. Any work not submitted on time will still receive feedback but will not benefit from peer review in
                class time.
           •    All work is due as specified in the assignment listed on canvas. Work not completed before the canvas deadline
                will be considered late.
           •    Any work turned in late, without prior consent and valid reason, will be accepted for a week past the original due
                date penalized with a full grade drop from the deserved reward (an A submission will reward a B etc).
           •    You will be shown your estimated class participate grade during mid-term week (normally week 7) based on
                current engagement. Use this as a chance to evaluate your engagement and participation in discussions and
                critiques and whether a change on your part is required.
           •    Technical challenges are given out between weeks 2 – 6 on the first class of the week, due the following Lab day
                (normally 9 days)
           •    Project 1 is given out in week 7 and due week 9 – This project runs over Spring Break
           •    Project 2 is officially given in week 1 to allow for complete participation. Work will be expected outside of
                contact class time to successfully complete it. Weeks 11 – 15 are dedicated Project 2 working time. Project 2
                culminates in two scheduled performance nights on the final Thursday and Friday of week 15.
       CLASS SCHEDULE
       Due to holidays, university breaks and other external factors some dates from the below table may change slightly from
       semester to semester.
W/C  Week   Lecture (Tuesday)                                 Lab (Thursday)                    Other            Assignment       Assignment
Date                                                                                                             Given (Tues)     Due (Thurs)
Jan  1      •    Course Introduction                          •    Drawing patterns &
21          •    Assignment Overview                               Shapes (Pattern copy                          Project 2
            •    Learning Principles                               exercise)
            •    Lecture
                       o The ID
                                 ▪      RealTime
                                 ▪      Timeline
                                 ▪      Window/network
                                 ▪      Performance
                       o Data Flow (execution)
                       o Data Types (Variables)
                                 ▪      TOPS
                                 ▪      CHOPS
                                 ▪      DATS
                                 ▪      COMPS
                                 ▪      MATS
            •    Lab - TOPS


                         o    Drawing Shape
                         o    Existing content
Jan 2         •    Lecture                                  •    Animation, patterns and         P2 - Meet         Challenge 1 –
28                       o    Adding data to our network         shapes (moving objects)         collaborators     Recreate the
                         o    CHOPS                                                              wed 30th 5-       patterns
                         o    Constant                                                           6pm
                         o    Button
Feb 3         •    Lecture                                  •    Building a specific                               Challenge 2 –  Challenge 1
4                        o    INTERFACES & PANEL                 Interface                                         Reactive
                         o    COMPS layers                                                                         visuals W/
                         o    UI design and interaction                                                            Project Plan
                         o    ‘Planning out Projects’
Feb 4         •    Lecture                                  •    Building specific shapes                          Challenge 3 –  Challenge 2
11                       o    Introduction to 3D                                                                   3D object
                         o    SOPS                                                                                 interface
                         o    GEOMTERY
Feb 5         •    Lecture                                  •    Instancing and interaction                        Challenge 4 –  Challenge 3
18                       o    3D part 2                                                                            Recreate the
                         o    Instancing                                                                           patterns 3D
Feb 6         •    Lecture                                  •    Referencing, linking and                          Challenge 5 -  Challenge 4
25                       o    Introduction to Python             connecting                                        Python
Mar 7         •    Lecture                                  •    Pure Python usage and                             Project 1      Challenge 5
4                        o    Python pt2                         integration
Mar 8         •    Lecture                                  •    Timeline controlled             P2 - Design
11                       o    Playback and the Timeline          interfacing                     Proposals in                     Participation
                                                                                                 foundry                          grade shown
Mar                                                                       Spring break
18
Mar 9         •    Lecture                                  •    Working with the outside                                         Project 1
25                       o External Data & protocols             world
Apr 10        •    Lecture                                  •    Final performance
1                        o Preparing your networks for           interfacing
                              showcase                      •    Project 2 Lab
Apr 11        •    Project 2 Lab                            •    Project 2 Lab
8
Apr 12        •    Project 2 Lab                            •    Project 2 Lab                   P2 - Final
15                                                                                               Design
                                                                                                 changes
                                                                                                 signed off
Apr 13        •    Project 2 Lab                            •    Project 2 Lab
22
Apr 14        •    Project 2 Lab                            •    Project 2 Lab                   P2 – load in
29                                                                                               begins
May 15        Project 2 Test run                            Project 2 Test run                   P2 – dry runs                    Project 2
6                                                                                                / final shows                    canvas & blog
                                                                                                                                  submissions
May 16                                                                      No class
13
       EVAULATION & GRADING
       GENERAL
       Neatness, scholarship and presentation will all count towards your final grade. When designing being able to visually
       communicate ideas is part of the process, this does not mean that artistic merit is awarded.
       TECHNICAL CHALLENGES
       Technical challenges for this class are graded on a pass/fail criteria. Every technical challenge will present a number of
       bullet point objectives to achieve for submission.
       Unless all points marked required are present the assignment will be graded fail.
       Some challenges will include ‘optional’ additional points that are not included in the grading criteria but offer advanced
       skill or creative challenge.


PROJECT WORK
Each assignment will be given a specific grading rubric covering exactly how students will earn points. A rubric section is
normally assigned a grade from 0-5:
0 – Null, not covered in submission
2 – Okay, attempts to answer brief but fall short of minimum requirements
3 – Good or great, answers the brief
4 – Excellent, goes above and beyond the brief
5 – Exceptional, a perfect professional piece of work
Some rubric points may have double (or higher) weighting that will result in your award being multiplied by weighting.
Example:
  Grading Section          Award         Weighting      Total
  1                                  3              2        6/10 (60%)
  2                                  4              1         4/5 (80%)
                                                Total   10/15 (66.67%)
YOU WILL BE GRADED ON
      •    Reading, discussion, Participation (10%);
      •    Attendance (5%)
      •    Technical Challenges (1-5) (25%)
      •    Project 1 – System show controller (20%)
      •    Project 2 – EvoLutIon – live interactive event (35%)
This course does not have a final exam, but student exhibition will make part of the assigned grade.
GRADING SCHEME
This class uses a mixture of points and percentages. Assignments will be given in points, but the final grade will be
calculated via the percentage of awarded points vs total available points across all assignments.
To ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.000 through 83.999... The University does not recognize the grade of A+. Thus, the conversion from
percentage value to letter grade is as follows:
      •    A=        94+
      •    A- =      90 – 93.999…
      •    B+ =      87 – 89.999…
      •    B=        84 – 86.999…
      •    B- =      80 – 83.999…
      •    C+ =      77 – 79.999…
      •    C=        74 – 76.999…
      •    C- =      70 – 73.999…
      •    D+ =      67 – 69.999…
      •    D=        64 – 66.999…
      •    D- =      60 – 63.999…
      •    F=        0 – 59.999…
PRIVACY
This class is designed to be an open space for discussion, critique and learning. What is said about each other’s work during
this class should remain in the classroom. It will not be published in a blog or any other personal website, tweeted or
posted on social networks.
MOBILE DEVICES
Mobile devices of any kind must be silenced and out of sight.
There may be times when using a mobile is appropriate, such as aiding in discussion or during dedicates solo work – these
times will be very obviously announced. Usage of a mobile device outside of these terms – with or without warning, will
result in severe penalty to your class participation grade.
RESOURCES AND EQUIPMENT
This class will make use of the commercial programming environment Touchdesigner, available through www.derivative.ca


Touchdesigner offers a free non-commercial version that can be installed on most modern Windows or MacOS machines.
Each student will have access to the PLAI lab space for both class and proctor hours. Granting access to high-power
Windows laptops. These laptops have a mix of non-commercial and unlocked educational license.
If you wish to use your own laptop for develop and class work please make sure it meets the minimum requirements for
the software at: https://derivative.ca/wiki088/index.php?title=System_Requirements
This is a very active and involved class. Learning will be adapted to suit the class – as such notes should be taken in class to
record topics discussed. As such as note pad and pen will be required for every class session.
