                    Introduction to Islam – Summer 2019 – Boville
                            MTWTHF 10:00-11:30 – GDC 6.202
           (ISL s310 (82795), RS s319 (83325), HIS s306N.7 (82060), ANS s301M.15 (79545)
                              *** This course carries a Global Cultures flag. ***
Email: Please use Canvas private messages
Office: CAL 4
Office Hours: M 11:00-12:00 TH 11:30-12:30 or by appointment
Course Description
The objective of this course is to give students an understanding of what it has meant to be Muslim
to a variety of people throughout history, in terms of beliefs and practices (cosmology, theology,
rituals, and morality). We will also spend time discussing the structure and nature of arguments. In
order to achieve these objectives (familiarity with argumentation strategies and Muslim beliefs and
practices), we will discuss materials from a variety of perspectives. We will begin with a discussion of
the very earliest period of the religion because it is necessary to understand where the religion began
in order to understand where it went later; even if it has been conceived as universal and eternal, a
religion is always shaped by historical context. Islam is a religion that many throughout history have
considered a complete worldview and a complete moral system. We will explore what this
consideration means and how it has manifested throughout history, in terms of doctrine, ritual, and
philosophical, ethical, and spiritual thought. This course is designed for students with no prior
knowledge of Islam.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial
portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at
least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Course Texts
         Readings available as pdfs on Canvas
Recommended:
      SparkChart on Islam (author Hina Azam)
      The Qur’an: You can read from any translation that you have or can access online
              o I recommend tanzil.net or Quran.com
Grading
Participation                                20%
Reading responses                            20%
2 Tests—15% each                             30%
Final exam                                   30%
Participation will account for 20% of your grade. You will receive a grade out of 5 points for
participation every day except for test days. Your three lowest participation grades will drop. This
means, in effect, that each participation grade after those three will be 1% of your final grade.
If you are absent, you will receive a 0 for participation. Exceptions will only be made at my
discretion and with appropriate documentation of, for example, serious illness, death in the family,
and similar emergencies.
                                                       1


Participation is scored out of 5 points. A full score indicates that you came to class having read the
assigned readings and prepared to discuss in class. It means that you are alert, actively involved in
class, and volunteer information. A full score will require you to be respectful of your classmates and
the material at all times. Finally, a full score for participation means that you were ready to begin
class on time. You will lose 1 point for being late and an additional point for every 5 minutes you
arrive after the start of class.
Reading Responses will account for 20% of your grade and they are graded on completion. That
is, you can either get 1 or 0 points. These will be due on Canvas at midnight before the class period
for which the reading is assigned (i.e. if a reading is assigned for Wednesday, you must post the
response on Canvas by midnight on Tuesday). This is to allow me to read the responses and address
them in class.
You will not be required to submit responses on test days or the first day of class and your two
lowest grades will be dropped. This leaves 20 reading response grades, meaning each is 1% of your
final grade. If you receive credit for all 22 reading responses, you will receive 1% extra credit applied
to your final grade.
A good reading response will be about 50-100 words. You should start with context from the
reading to frame your response. Then, you might present something that you found particularly
surprising or intriguing, a question that occurred to you during the reading, or something you noticed
that connects this reading to a previous one. If you ask a question, it may not be a yes/no
question. These are only examples of what you could do. You may also respond to someone else’s
response. However, your response must still be unique and insightful, so it must build upon the
previous response. Simple agreement is not enough.
Finally, you may propose a question that could be used on a test as a short answer question. This
should provide context for the question and be open enough that it can draw upon multiple readings.
In the process of writing the tests, I will take these questions into consideration and select them
based on merit, so you may know some of the questions in advance if you do this.
Tests will cover both readings and lectures. They will be scheduled to take the entire class period
and if you come in late, you will have less time to do the test. Make-up tests will only be permitted at
my discretion. If you have a scheduling conflict, you must obtain permission from me at least two
weeks in advance. Emergencies should be documented and I should be notified immediately.
Grading Rubric
Percentage Grade             Letter Grade              Percentage Grade          Letter Grade
93-100                       A                         73-76                     C
90-92                        A-                        70-72                     C-
87-89                        B+                        67-69                     D+
83-86                        B                         63-66                     D
80-82                        B-                        60-62                     D-
77-79                        C+                        59 and below              F
Note: Final course grades will be rounded to the nearest point, eg:
89.2 = 89 = B+
89.7 = 90 = A-
89.5 = 90 = A-
                                                       2


Note: Cellphone use is prohibited in class. You may use a computer or tablet if it remains
quiet enough to not be a distraction.
Note 2: all electronic communication will be conducted via Canvas, so please make sure you
check those messages regularly or have them forwarded to your email.
                                              3


IMPORTANT POLICIES
UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity
The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam that is not your
own, or that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. Please see here for
further details regarding the UT Honor Code and Academic Integrity:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
All students with 1) an Arabic-speaking parent or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking
country or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to enrollment
in this course must take the departmental placement examination for Arabic before beginning their
study of Arabic at UT. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Disabilities
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that documents
the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of
Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). This letter
should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester and
accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an exam the
student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be needed. See website
below for more information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Religious holy days
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance
of a religious holy day MUST inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so
that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time of the absence.
Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected
site is created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for
class work and announcements. Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided
by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It
is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail
address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current
with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The
complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop (drop without academic penalty) Policy
The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may
not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
                                                     4


transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows
good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Harassment and Physical and/or Sexual Assault
It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin to foster a campus environment that is free from
intimidation and one in which students may be educated to their fullest potential. Therefore, the
University will not tolerate any forms of harassment, physical abuse, threats of violence, physical
assault, or any form of sexual assault, including but not limited to acquaintance or date rape. Title IX
makes it clear that violence and harassment based on sex and gender is a Civil Rights offense subject
to the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to offenses against other
protected categories such as race, national origin, LGBTQ identity, etc. If you or someone you know
has been harassed or assaulted in any way, you can find the appropriate resources here:
Voices Against Violence Program
(512) 471-3515 for information, counseling and advocacy.
UT Austin Police:
http://www.utexas.edu/police/
Dean of Students:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sh/
http://www.utexas.edu/ogs/student_services/ethics/harassment.html
Student Counseling & Health Services
http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Campus Carry
1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a gun, do not
attempt to question or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police are trained to handle
this situation.
2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited,
including some portions of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are responsible for
knowing the locations that exclude concealed handguns and to plan their daily activities carefully.
3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on campus.
"About" the person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered – in a backpack or
handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license holder can grasp it
without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have
enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
4. All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times when the
consequence of your activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if you are going to
a Rec Sports area, have a class that requires role playing, rolling, or spinning or contact with other
students, you might expose the handgun. Remember that there is no storage on campus except in a
privately owned vehicle.
5. Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand those
passions.
However, regardless of your opinion about the legislation, you are required to follow the laws laid
out by the State of Texas, and the policies of The University of Texas at Austin. We also ask that
everyone show respect toward other members of the university community who have different
views.
                                                     5


Schedule
DATES TO REMEMBER:
First day of class               Monday, July 15
First Test                       Monday, July 29
Second Test                      Monday, August 12
Last day of class                Friday, August 16
Final exam                       Saturday, August 17
       15-Jul Introduction, syllabus, and the idea of “religion”
                       How to read an academic article or chapter
       16-Jul Basic concepts
                       Shepard, Introducing Islam, Ch.1 (1-14, Approaching the Subject)
                       Shepard, Introducing Islam, Ch. 5 “The Qur’an”
 History
       17-Jul Pre-Islamic period, Muhammad, and the advent of Islam
                       Donner, Muhammad and the Believers, Ch. 1
       18-Jul The Early Caliphate and Early Sectarian Divergences
                       Donner, Muhammad and the Believers, Ch. 2
       19-Jul The Beginnings of Government
                       Crone, God's Rule, Section I
       22-Jul Periodization and the First Islamic Millennium
                       Shepard, Introducing Islam, Ch. 4
 Theology and Philosophy
       23-Jul Prophecy and Prophethood
                       Shepard, Introducing Islam, Ch.6 (84-98, “The Prophet Muhammad”)
       24-Jul Systematic Theology
                       CCCIT, ch 4: The Developed Kalam Tradition
       25-Jul Argumentation
                       The Atlantic—Are American Muslims Assimilating?
                       Martin Luther King, Jr. “Letter from Birmingham Jail”
       26-Jul Islamic Philosophy
                       CCCIT, ch. 3: Islamic Philosophy
       29-Jul Test 1
 Law and Practice
                                                   6


      30-Jul Islamic “Law”
                      Shepard, Introducing Islam, Ch.10 (146-162, Islamic law)
      31-Jul Islamic Law and Modernity
                      Hallaq, The Origins and Evolution of Islamic Law, Introduction and Conclusion
     1-Aug Islamic Ethics
                      CCCIT, ch. 8: Ethics
     2-Aug Rituals
                      Shepard, Introducing Islam, Ch.7 (99-119, Rituals and Ceremonies)
     5-Aug Medieval Shrine Rituals
                      Mulder, Shrines of the `Alids, Introduction and Conclusion
     6-Aug Sufism
                      Shepard, Introducing Islam, Ch.12 (175-193, the Sufi Path to God)
     7-Aug Sufism Again
                      McGinn (ed.), Knowledge of God in Classical Sufism, Introduction
Islam, Modernity, and the West
     8-Aug Modernity, Muslims, and Imperialism
                      Shepard, Introducing Islam ch. 15: Modern Challenges
                      Shepard, Introducing Islam Ch.20 (322-341, Globalization: Challenge and Opportunity)
     9-Aug Islam and the State
                      Oxford Handbook of Islam and Politics, Chs. 3 and 4
    12-Aug Test 2
    13-Aug Islamic Constitutionalism
                      Hefner (ed.) Sharia, Ch. 2: Shari`a and the Rule of Law
    14-Aug Islamism and Salafism
                      Lauzière, The Making of Salafism, Introduction and Conclusion
    15-Aug Democracy
                      OHIP, Ch. 5: Islam and Democracy
    16-Aug Islam and Feminism
                      Hefner (ed.) Sharia, Ch. 3: Moral Contestations and Patriarchal Ethics
                                                  7
