The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | School of Design and Creative Technologies | Department of Arts and Entertainment Technologies
  AET Foundations of Digital Imaging and Visualization
  306 Introduction to digital content creation, manipulation, transmission, and critical inspection
                 (Unique No. 20390)
                   Fall 2019 | Tue/Thur 9:30–11:00am | DFA 4.126
                   INSTRUCTOR: Greg Hervey - ghervey@utexas.edu
                   Office Hours (by appointment): T/TH 7:00-8:00am (1st floor of DFA)
                   CLASS WEBSITE: canvas.utexas.edu
                 COURSE OVERVIEW
                 This course presents technical aspects of visual communication using industry-standard software (for image manipulation,
                 videography, 2D graphics, and motion graphics), and conceptual considerations for effective visual communication
                 (including basic elements and principles of design, color theory, composition, and typography).
                 Exposure to the processes and vocabulary of visual communication enables students to make educated technological
                 and conceptual decisions when planning and utilizing digital technology, and maximize the effectiveness of visual
                 communication within their own creative and technical careers.
                 Research and practice outside of classroom hours is mandatory. The pages —and linked content— of the course
                 website are required reading (there is no required textbook). Other than grading and attendance policies, parts of this
                 syllabus are subject to change with advance notice, as deemed necessary by the instructor.
                 COURSE MODULES
                   Digital Imaging & Design (Adobe Photoshop, image editing, image resolution, digital image/video capture, color space,
                   and printing): Development of basic digital image editing skills. Introduction to elements and principles of design.
                   Vector Graphics, Iconography and Typography (Adobe Illustrator, vector vs. raster space, layout and typography):
                   Exploration into vector vs. raster, digital file formats, introduction to typography.
                   Non-linear Video Editing (Adobe Premiere Pro, storyboarding, digital cinematography, digital presentation, and
                   transmission): Exploration into digital video, capture, editing, manipulation, transmission and presentation in technical
                   and creative capacities.
                   Motion Graphics (Adobe After Effects, digital rotoscoping, and 2D Animation): Development of traditional and digital
                   animation skills, keyframing and motion tracking, compression theory, digital animation workflows, and practical
                   storyboarding.
                 COURSE REQUIREMENTS
                 • Personal Laptop (DFA computers have Adobe software; but you will need access outside of lab & library hours)
                 • Adobe Creative Cloud (UT student price: $99/yr at CampusComputer.com)
                 • Internet access and a working email address (class notifications, assignments, and quizzes will all be administered
                   through Canvas)
                 • High capacity USB storage and/or Cloud Storage (Dropbox, Google Drive, Box, etc. UT students have free Box access)
                   ***backup of your data is solely your responsibility and should be done frequently to avoid loss of any work***
                 “My computer crashed” or “my files got corrupted” is the 21st century equivalent of “the dog ate my homework”
                        Archive all work files until you receive your final grade (in case files get corrupted when uploading to Canvas).
                 LEARNING OBJECTIVES
                 By the end of the course, students should:
                 • understand technical parameters of digital images and digital video,
                 • recognize the pros and cons of vector and raster images, and the related file formats,
                 • identify and employ the Principles of Design and fundamentals of visual composition,
                 • be conversant in color theory and typography,
                 • demonstrate foundational skills in Adobe Photoshop, Illustrator, Premiere, and After Effects


CALENDAR
Dates and lecture topics are subject to change. Calendar is provided for overview purposes only.
DATE           MODULE/TOPIC/PROJECT                                                            POINTS (260 TOTAL)
Week 1         MODULE 1: Introduction to Digital Imaging, Introduction to Photoshop
Week 2		                   Principles of Design & Color Theory/ PROJECT 1a                            10
Week 3		                   Composition / PROJECT 1b                                                  20
 		                        Module 1 Quiz                                                             20
Week 4         MODULE 2: Introduction to Vector Graphics, Introduction to Adobe Illustrator
Week 5		                   PROJECT 2a, Introduction to Typography                                     10
Week 6		                   Iconography, PROJECT 2b                                                   30
Week 7		                   Module 2 Quiz                                                             20
Week 8         MODULE 3: Introduction to Digital Video, Introduction to Storyboarding
Week 9		                   Introduction to Adobe Premiere, PROJECT 3a                                 10
Week 10		                  Lumetri color correction, creating credits, PROJECT 3b                    40
Week 11		                  Module 3 Quiz                                                             20
Week 12        MODULE 4: Motion Graphics, Introduction to Adobe After Effects
Week 13		                  PROJECT 4a, Rotoscoping                                                    10
Week 14		                  PROJECT 4b                                                                50
Week 15		                  FINAL QUIZ                                                                20
GRADING
Your final grade in this course will be the total of four module grades (above), and a fifth ‘professionalism’ grade. The
professionalism grade is determined by attendance, punctuality, class participation, and completion of assigned video
training exercises (on Photoshop, Illustrator, and After Effects). The Professionalism grade is 340 points (300 of which are
for attendance/punctuality), for a maximum point total of 600 for the course.
Grading in a creative course is inevitably subjective, meaning that the final evaluation of work presented is based not only
on how the criteria for assignments is met, but also on instructor assessment of the work’s creativity and quality. Generally,
assignments are equally weighted on Creativity (delivering an interesting, atypical solution), Craft (displaying control
over the software), and Execution (meeting assignment parameters, including technical settings, file-naming, and on-time
submission). When providing feedback on assignments, I may reference concepts not explicitly required in the instructions,
to explain how I converted my reaction to your creative endeavor into a numeric grade. Each student is graded on an
individual basis, not relative to other students. The grading scale has a built-in curve so I can reserve perfect scores for
exceptionally outstanding work.
Final grades are calculated as a percentage: points earned ÷ points possible (330). A = 100–93%, A– = 92–88%,
B+ = 87–83%, B = 82–78%, B– = 77–73%, C+ = 72–69%, C = 68–66% C– = 65–63%, D+ = 62–60%,
D = 59–56%, D– = 55–51%, F=<51%.
(NOTE: The University does not recognize the grade of A+. Any floating points are rounded up. )
Late or incomplete work will seriously affect your grade. If you feel you may not be able to complete all work on time, you
should ask me for a grade of Q, or drop before the deadline for doing so passes (see Q drop Policy, below).
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Attendance and use of the full class period is expected. This is a hands-on, instructor-led, project-based course so
punctuality is essential. If you are more than 20 minutes late (or leave class more than 20 minutes early), it counts as an
absence. Four absences will drop your final grade in the course by one letter grade. Each additional absence
beyond that will result in another incremental grade drop (e.g. from B to B–, B– to C+, etc.). If a medical or personal
situation affects your attendance or punctuality, discuss it with me ASAP. Absences or arriving late/leaving early will
adversely affect your grade—and when excessive, may result in failing the course.
Roll will be taken daily at the start of the class. Roll call is visual and based on seating assignments. If you arrive late, or are
out of your seat during visual roll call you may be marked late or absent. It is your responsibility to contact me or the TA
within 48 hours to ensure your attendance/punctuality is correctly recorded (you cannot contest your attendance record
later in the semester, when there is no way to verify it). Canvas will alert a grade change if you are recorded absent, late, or
leave before class is dismissed.
I do not distinguish excused from unexcused absences; if you’re not in the classroom participating in the lesson, you are
absent (unless you’ve prescheduled a religious holiday; see religious holy days below). A single absence or tardiness is an
aberration and will not impact your grade (but multiple absences or tardiness is a pattern, and will affect your grade). If you
are absent, you MUST schedule office hours with me to make up the missed work, within one week of the absence, or 10
additional points will be deducted from your Professionalism grade.


Q drop Policy The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six (6).
As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit
an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
UNIVERSITY ATTENDANCE POLICY: RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s
responsibility to keep the University and instructor(s) informed as to changes in his/her e-mail address. Students are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating
your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
CLASSROOM AND CLASS WEBSITE
The class will be held in the lab located in DFA 4.126. All technical demos and class work will be held in the Lab. The lab is
locked outside of classroom hours. Additional computers with Adobe software are available on the 3rd floor of DFA. I use
Canvas to distribute course materials, communicate and collaborate online, post grades, receive your assignments, and to
give you online quizzes and/or surveys. You can find support for using Canvas at https://canvas.utexas.edu/
SERVICES FOR STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu,
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the
first week of class, so that I can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
ACADEMIC HONESTY
University of Texas Honor Code The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Use of Class Materials The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law
and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without
the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University’s Honor Code and an act of academic
dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to
websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
COPYRIGHT AND FAIR USE
Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers. Many of the uses we will
make of text, images, and videos will be covered by the doctrine of Fair Use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of
your own and other copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will
discuss these issues as needed.
A useful resource is the Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by
phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office
of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.


EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be
  the one you used when you entered the building.
• If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class proctors/TAs. After evacuation, do not leave the
  vacinity without checking in with me or our TA.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department,
or the Fire Prevention Services office.
CAMPUS CARRY
The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as buildings and spaces
that are accessible to the public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms.
It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while
on campus. “About” the person means that a license holder may carry a holstered handgun in a backpack or handbag, but
the backpack or handbag must always be close enough that the license holder can grasp it without materially changing
position. The holster must completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled.
A license holder may not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university
driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.
The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried gun on campus should
immediately call 911. (from https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
CELL PHONES
You must silence your cell phone in class (if your phone interrupts my class, you owe me a Frappuccino™). Texting or social
networking in class—even during free lab time—is prohibited.
