MAS 374/AMS 321/ WGS340: Chicana Feminisms (40381, 31065
              and 45590)
Dr. Nicole Guidotti-Hernández Office Hours M 11:30am-12:30pm
Spring 2019                   and 2:30-4:30pm
MW 1:00-2:30pm                or by appointment
EJC 1.308


Emerging out of the social protest movements of the 1960’s, Chicana Feminists offered an
alternative mapping of feminist literary and political thought with the issues of gender, race, and
sexuality as their primary concerns. In this course, we will examine what constitutes Chicana
Feminism in its multiple incarnations, both historically and epistemologically. Tracing Chicana
feminist theory as it broke off from Chicano nationalist politics of the 1960’s, to a politics that is
concerned with practices of communal feminism that encompasses men and women of the
working classes, we will examine how it has shifted and changed over time. We will also look at
how Chicana feminist thought breaks with and intersects with Euro-American or European
models of feminism. In addition, we will examine the ways in which Chicana Feminists have
moved towards a more third-world and/or transnational model of feminism that takes into
account the inequities that exist between first and third world subjects. Through the study of
essays, history, archives, performance, and literatures that engage feminism, we will discuss how
material conditions, spirituality, gender inequality, class inequality, racial inequality, and
questions of sexuality allow Chicana women to engage in activities that we might understand as
feminist.
It is easy for academic subjects to become abstract and meaningless to students. I dislike this
practice and so I strive to share with you a practical and personally meaningful education. At the
same time, I am responsible for balancing the desires of the University, the influences of
economic forces, and the mandates of the government with my teaching style. Each collective
member of the classroom must advocate for his or her own needs. With your help, I hope to
never lose track of what’s truly important: our mutual learning.
Learning Objectives: The main purpose of this course is to understand the role of sex, race,
gender, and class in Chicana feminist thought from a historical perspective. Students will
•learn the history of Chicana feminisms
•develop a sophisticated and responsible vocabulary for discussing the history of Chicana
organizing in the U.S.
• understand how intersectionality creates overlapping and interdependent systems of
disadvantage and inequality in historical context
• develop critical reading and writing skills
•develop an independent research project using archival source material
Cultural Diversity in the United States
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that
has experienced persistent marginalization.


Required Texts
Blackwell, Cotera and Espinoza          Chicana Movidas
García, Alma, Ed.                       Chicana Feminist Thought: The Basic Historical
                                        Writings
Viramontes, Helena                      The Moths and Other Stories
Course Requirements
Attendance and Participation
You are required to be actively involved in the learning process. Please bring your books and
articles to class for the appropriate day’s material. This includes any e-documents from the
Canvas website. All students will be expected to attend all classes and to be prepared to discuss
the assigned readings. You will be expected to take initiative in thinking through ideas and
discussing them in class. In addition, I realize that not all students are talkers. If you don’t talk in
class, I would recommend that you do so in office hours. Please use this medium to bolster your
participation. I hope you actively participate in this course because I have found it is the best way
to engage you in learning. Please keep in mind that if you have four or more absences, you will
not be able to receive higher than a “B” grade.
Laptops are allowed in class given the mass of digital content we will work with. Please be
judicious and mindful of your screen usage in class, utilizing it for the task at hand (readings and
taking notes). Students should have the opportunity to engage in multiple forms of learning and
this is one that should be done with good faith intentions. Groundrules: When I lecture, you can
use your laptops; when we are engaging in conversation with one another, we put them away.
When you are solving problems, you can use your laptops; when we discuss the meaning of
those problems, we put them away. When we write in class, you can use your laptops; when we
are giving one another feedback on our writing, we put them away.
(25% of course grade)
Presentation
All students will give a short presentation on 1-2 essays from the Chicana Feminist Thought
anthology. Keep in mind that you will be the point of entry into a critical discussion with your
presentation. Presentations should last 5-7 minutes, summarize the key arguments of the piece(s),
provide historical background to the argument and then provide one discussion question based
on the essay(s). Students will be graded on presentation organization, ability to keep within the
time frame, quality of discussion questions and ability to lead a short class discussion. Use
Powerpoint or Prezi for the presentation. Provide one discussion question for the group to answer
at the end of your presentation. You will field questions at the end of the presentation (10% of
grade)
Critical Response Papers


The three 1-2 page critical response papers will provide a short but detailed analysis of a designated
text from the class. It is your choice in selecting which chapter, essay, or short story you wish to
write about. Each paper should contain a strong, argumentative thesis that defends a particular
view or position, cited evidence from the text we read for class, and an introduction and conclusion.
The first paper will be about a selection from Chicana Feminist Thought: The Basic Historical
Writings. Students need to write about an essay other than the one(s) they did their presentation
on. The second paper will be about a selection from Chicana Movidas. The third paper will be
about a short story from The Moths.
For example, the section on Chicanas founding public radio in Washington state was informative
because it relates to the recent work of Radio Ambulante. You can write your 1-2 page paper
applying the theories of the in class essay to contemporary public radio movements.
Students will have an opportunity to rewrite the any of essays if they received a “B” grade or
lower. The two grades will be averaged for the final total.
If you are concerned with your particular level of writing expertise, please see me during Office
Hours for more information and additional skills-based support.
(20% of final grade)
Archival Assignment and Archive Days:
After our visit to the Benson Library, students will complete the archival assignment. You must
choose a document that we did not view on our visit. It is fine to work within the same collection
but the document for analysis should not be something we’ve seen already as a class. You will be
given the archival research document on the first day of class and turn it in once you’ve
completed the assignment.
To make sure you have enough time to dedicate to finding archival materials for your final research
paper, I have designated particular class days as archive days. You should use these class periods
to do archival research at the Benson, Briscoe, or Ransom. Ideally, you want your archival sources
lined up before the prospectus is due. I want you to produce the best paper possible with stellar
research. Use the time for this wisely. (5% of grade)
Final Essay
Your final essay will be an 7-8 page archival research paper. Based on your work with historical
sources about Chicana Feminisms, you will develop a topic and work on the paper throughout
the semester. Students will need a minimum of 5 archival sources about Chicana feminisms,
feminists, or feminist struggles, along with 5 secondary sources. The archival sources are
considered primary historical sources and can include photographs, paintings, broadsides,
pamphlets, maps, zines, conference programs, personal handwritten notes, manuscripts,
newspapers, yearbooks, and other forms of ephemera.
A handout will be provided during the 2nd week of class so that you can work with the archival
sources throughout the semester. Please consult the handout and the Professor for approval of
your topic.


(25% of grade)
Prior to the end of the course, you will be required to do a pre-write or what is commonly known
as a Prospectus of your final paper. It will consist of the first two pages of the final paper,
incorporation of 3 archival sources, two secondary sources from outside the class and must
contain a well-developed thesis paragraph and annotated bibliography.
(10% of grade)
Graded Drafts and Peer Review of Final Papers
On designated days listed throughout the syllabus, students will turn in drafts of their final papers
to the instructor for a grade. This will provide you an opportunity to receive feedback early and
refine your ideas to write the best paper possible.
Similarly, on designated days, students will perform peer review on each other’s papers. Please
save all drafts, graded and peer reviewed, so that they may be turned in the last day of class.
(5% of grade)
Extra Credit
Students can earn extra credit by reading one to two of the unused essays from the course in the
Chicana Feminisms or Chicana Movidas and write a 1-2 page response paper. Students must
discuss how the article or chapter engages or changes the theoretical concepts we have used
during the semester to discuss the social political projects that make up what we call Chicana
Feminisms. This paper can add up to 2% onto your attendance and participation grade. For
example, if you have an 85% average in the category, and earn full credit from the extra papers it
will give extra points and bringing you to an 87%.
In addition, there will be events that students can attend throughout the semester to earn extra
credit. On designated days, the professor will alert the students of these opportunities. After
attending one of these events, students must write a 1-2 page critical response paper detailing the
event, providing an analysis and arguing how it does/does not relate to the course.
In preparation for developing your final research project, students can meet with Dr. Daniel
Arbino at the Benson library for a formal research consultation to earn extra credit. The
consultation will be 30 minutes or more, depending on how prepared you are for the
conversation. Please follow all of the steps to ensure you complete the assignment. All students
are required to complete the consultation by March 4th and turn in the signed form in class that
day or earlier.
    1. Email Dr. Arbino to set up an appointment d.arbino@austin.utexas.edu
    2. Once the appointment is set, go to the consultation with your form printed and a potential
        topic or two that you’d like to discuss. Make sure that your topic is an issue or event that
        occurred after 1960. If you have no idea about what you’d like to research, use this as an
        opportunity to figure out what a possible topic might be.
    3. Discuss your topic and take notes about the collections he recommends based on your
        topic.


    4. Make sure to fill out the form with your notes and have Dr. Arbino sign at the end of your
        consultation.
Turn in your form as soon as possible so that you can receive credit. I will return them asap so
that you may have your notes with which to continue your research.
Students can write a maximum of two of these papers or one paper and the archival consult for
extra credit. The maximum total for extra credit is two.
The last day to turn in extra credit is May 8, 2019 with the exception of the archival consultation.
Final Non-graded one page addendum:
For the last week of class, please write a one-page summative, ungraded statement about what’s
changed for you in taking the class. This course is about transformation and critical thinking and
I’d like to hear from you.
GRADING
The grade distribution is as follows.
                Class Participation (discussions and attendance)     25%
                Oral Presentation                                    10%
                Critical Response Papers                             20%
                Archival Assignment                                  5%
                Final Paper Drafts and Peer Review                   5%
                Prospectus of Final Paper                            10%
                Final Paper                                          25%
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from
the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
    • Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
    • Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
        accessible
    • Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
