  Instructor                                                  Email
  Alex Karner, PhD                                            alex.karner@utexas.edu
  Assistant Professor
  Graduate Program in Community & Regional                    Office hours1
  Planning                                                    SUT 3.134
  School of Architecture                                      Monday 3-5
Course overview
Transportation systems connect us to the people and things we need to lead a fulfilling life: school,
work, food, medical care, friends, and family, to name just a few. But these connections do not come
without costs—transportation systems produce profound environmental and social impacts. Greenhouse
gas emissions from transportation activities constitute a third of the US total, urban air quality continues
to be a problem in many areas of the country, and about 30,000 people die each year due in collisions
involving motorized vehicles. Many of these impacts are associated with the automobile. Although
automotive technology continues to improve, resulting in cleaner, safer cars, relying on them as our
primary mode entails public health implications and the threat of crippling urban congestion.
This course is an introduction to urban passenger transportation policy and planning in the US with a
sustainability focus. The course is structured around three components on which we will spend
approximately four weeks each:
     1) History, theory, and problem definition
     2) The planning process, and
     3) Solutions
Throughout the semester, we will come to understand how our current transportation systems came to
be, what a sustainable system would look like, policies and planning approaches that will help is to
achieve it, and challenges we’re likely to face. Part of the difficulty arises from the fact that planning is
inherently a political as well as technical activity. Determining what the “best” solution is in any given
situation is likely to involve the varied needs and desires of elected officials, members of the public, and
experts. As engineers and planners, ones who will interact with engineers and planners, or regular folks
who care about transportation-related issues, you will need to navigate this sometimes-fraught landscape
to make progress. We will examine the actual transportation planning process at all levels of
government, hear from local and regional planners about their work, and learn about the (quantitative
and qualitative) methods that planners use to both comply with the law and help inform decision makers.
1
  Schedule an office hours appointment here: https://alexkarner.youcanbook.me. Students who have booked an appointment
will receive priority, but drop-ins are always fine.
                                                            -1-


ARC 327R/URB 352: Urban Transportation                                                               Karner
Learning objectives
Upon completion of this course, students will have demonstrated mastery of the following concepts
through in-class discussion and debate, detailed analysis and thoughtful reflection in assignments, and
performance on examinations:
    1. The relationship between transportation and land use, including how and why the current
        transportation system emerged, and why transportation planning is a vitally important endeavor.
    2. The multifaceted and evolving nature of sustainability and how it is being applied to real-world
        transportation planning efforts across the United States.
    3. The practice of transportation planning at federal, state, regional, and local levels, including the
        laws and regulations that planners follow regarding transportation plans, environmental review,
        air quality conformity, and environmental justice, among others.
    4. The analytical methods employed by transportation planners to assess the performance of
        existing and future transportation systems (e.g. key concepts related to regional travel demand
        models, traffic impact assessments, level of service analysis, and parking demand analysis).
    5. Public participation in planning, specifically how members of the public make their views
        known, formally and informally, in the transportation planning process and how that (sometimes)
        affects outcomes.
    6. Concrete policies and planning strategies that facilitate sustainable urban transportation systems
        on both the infrastructure and land use sides. Legal and policy frameworks and initiatives that
        support the development of such systems.
How to succeed in this course
There is no secret to success in this course. If you attend all classes, complete required readings on time,
pay attention, take notes, and participate actively, you will certainly be well-positioned to perform well.
Importantly, I am not looking for students to espouse specific viewpoints. In fact, I welcome
disagreement and debate as a key method by which we can all make our arguments sharper and more
convincing. The last thing I want is for you to give me an answer you think I want to hear, rather than
the one you believe to be true.
Note about office hours: I hold office hours for your benefit. They are a time for you to come and get
more clarity on the course material or ask about assignments. They are also an opportunity to talk with
me in a more informal setting about academic issues that are not directly related to class (e.g. graduate
school, letters of recommendation, career advice, etc.). I’ve set up an appointment scheduler to make it
easy to book time in 15-minute increments (https://alexkarner.youcanbook.me) but also feel free to drop
in during the scheduled time.
Course expectations and policies
Attendance
Attendance during all class periods is mandatory; this is especially important because our class only
meets once a week. Please arrive on-time and stay the entire class. I understand that occasional events
may prevent you from attending class. In the event that you’re missing class due to an approved
absence, you will be allowed to make up missed graded work. If you miss class due to a major medical
or family emergency, I will require additional documentation and make up work will be allowed at my
discretion. Regardless of the reason for absence, students alone are responsible for any class material
they miss.
                                                     -2-


ARC 327R/URB 352: Urban Transportation                                                               Karner
Readings
There is no assigned textbook for this course. All readings are available either on Canvas or are linked to
from this syllabus. For each week, all assigned readings must be completed by the beginning of class.
These readings were selected carefully so that they are accessible and not overly burdensome. Reading
and synthesizing them will be vitally important to facilitate good in-class discussions. The final slide of
each lecture will include a “further reading” list that students can use to dive deeper into subjects of
interest.
Guest speakers
Throughout the semester we will have an opportunity to hear from planning professionals working in the
region on various issues. Please extend them the same courtesy that you would extend to me. It also
helps to ask really good questions – use the time to get to know what real planners are doing in the
world, what they love/hate about their jobs, the challenges they face, and successes they’ve won. This
will make sure that they want to come back in the future!
Use of laptops, phones, and other devices
Use of technology in class is generally permitted provided the use is for purposes related to the course.
Please turn all cell phones to silent (not vibrate) when in class. Do not text, email, or browse non-class
websites during class time. These activities are distracting to you, your peers, and me. Violation of this
policy may result in dismissal from class and the loss of credit for that day’s in-class activities.
Disability accommodations
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical
information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building
needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning
environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible.
I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for
Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). More information
is available here: http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Plagiarism and cheating
We will be completing writing assignments for this course. Plagiarism involves using the words or ideas
of another person as your own. It is perfectly acceptable to borrow ideas from other scholars. Indeed,
this is how scholarship advances. But those words and ideas must be appropriately referenced with a
citation and page number, as appropriate. Please use APA format for work prepared for this class. If you
are planning to continue in academia, it will be in your interest to learn to use one of the many pieces of
available citation management software. Zotero is a great option that’s free for everyone.2
If you are caught plagiarizing or cheating, you will be dealt with according to the University of Texas
Honor Code. For any questions involving these or any other Academic Honor Code issues, please
consult me or http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-
and-conduct/. If you are not sure what constitutes cheating or plagiarizing, please come see me.
2
  https://www.zotero.org/
                                                     -3-


ARC 327R/URB 352: Urban Transportation                                                                 Karner
Student assessments
The student assessments for this course will involve a mix of participation, in-class presentations,
quizzes, a midterm examination, written assignments, data analysis, and a final examination.
Some projects will be completed in groups, but unless specifically identified as group work, all
assessments are to be completed by you alone. All group work will involve the completion of peer-
evaluation forms by each group member. Details regarding each category of evaluation are included
below.
Participation
Because of the technical and political nature of transportation planning and policy (not to mention the
lived experience and frustration of congestion, long public transit wait times, and inadequate bicycle and
pedestrian facilities), I’m sure that many of you have opinions to share about our current and future
transportation systems! Please share these during class while being respectful of other students’ opinions
and time. We will also have structured in-class participation activities involving small group
discussions. Students are expected to be active and engaged during these times; ideally they’ll give
students who are less comfortable with public speaking a low-stress opportunity to speak their minds. I
will post midterm participation grades so you will have a sense of your standing and the ability to
improve during the second half of the course. These will not be made final until the end of the semester.
Quizzes
At the end of most class meetings (as indicated on the syllabus), there will be a very short quiz on that
week’s reading and lecture material. These will consist of multiple choice, true/false, and short answer
questions and are designed simply to assess whether you have completed the readings, attended lecture,
and paid attention. They are not meant to be too difficult or to stretch your understanding of the material.
I will drop your lowest quiz grade. If you miss a quiz due to an unexcused absence, you will receive a
zero.
In-class activities
We will often have in-class activities that will be completed in small groups, discussed, and submitted
for credit (as indicated on the syllabus). These will sometimes involve basic math, so having a scientific
calculator on all class days will be helpful. I will drop your lowest in-class activity grade. If you do not
attend class on the day that an in-class activity is conducted, you will receive a zero.
Assignment #1: Planning memo (due 10/2 by 11:55pm), addresses learning objectives 1 and 2
You will complete this assignment in groups of two that you choose. You can also work solo. As a
practicing transportation planner, you will often be called upon to give your opinion or summarize your
analysis about a particular project or policy. In this assignment, you will discuss one of four
transportation-relevant projects in the Texas Triangle megaregion:
    1.  North Houston Highway Improvement Project: http://www.ih45northandmore.com/
    2.  Texas Bullet Train (Houston-Dallas high-speed rail): https://www.texascentral.com/
    3.  Dallas D2 subway: https://www.dart.org/about/expansion/downtowndallas.asp
    4.  Capital Metro “Remap”: https://www.capmetro.org/remap/
You can also examine a project that you choose. It could be within or outside of the Texas Triangle.
Please discuss it with me beforehand to make sure it’s appropriate.
Imagine that you are a practicing planner and your boss (the planning director) has asked you to assess
the potential for the project to advance the sustainability goals discussed in the first third of the course.
Based on assigned course readings and at least two other sources (academic articles or agency reports)
                                                      -4-


ARC 327R/URB 352: Urban Transportation                                                                Karner
that you will search for and cite appropriately, deliver your opinion on the project. Begin by
summarizing what the project is and its stated goals using materials that you can find online. Follow up
by describing the project’s (likely or realized) sustainability impacts. The memo should be concise: no
longer than two pages (12 point, Times New Roman font, 1” margins, single-spaced), not including your
references. Further details about the assignment will be available on Canvas.
Assignment #2: Accessibility analysis (due 11/6 by 11:55pm), addresses learning objectives 3 and 4
The second third of the course will introduce you to some of the technical methods that planners use to
evaluate transportation projects and plans. In this assignment you will work with actual data gleaned
from regional travel demand models and US Census Bureau sources. You will work in groups of up to
three that you choose. You can also work solo, but it is likely that the assignment will be very
challenging if you work alone. The assignment’s goal will be to analyze the effects of a particular
planning effort on different demographic groups in terms of accessibility. The project can either be
completed on your own or in groups of two that you choose. All of the required analyses can be
completed using Microsoft Excel, but if you’re familiar with another platform (e.g. R, Python, Matlab),
you’re welcome to use it.
To be successful, at least one group member should be reasonably familiar with Excel (or another
platform). If you’d like to complete the work on your own and your Excel abilities are rusty, you’ll want
to give yourself plenty of lead time to complete the assignment. Please see Dr. Karner if you need
additional help or guidance.
You will submit a final report that includes a mix of text, figures, and tables that will be four pages in
length (12 point, Times New Roman font, 1” margins, single spaced), again not including references.
Complete details about the project will be available on Canvas.
Midterm examination
A midterm examination will be given on 10/18 during the regular lecture period and will cover material
up to and including the lecture on 10/4. The midterm will consist of multiple choice, true/false, and short
answer questions. Make-up exams will be allowed only for excused absences. It is the student’s
responsibility to contact the instructor as soon as possible to schedule a make-up exam. Use of a
scientific calculator will be permitted.
Final examination
A final examination will be given during the regular examination time and will be cumulative (i.e. will
cover the entire course). The final will consist of multiple choice, true/false, short answer, calculations,
and essay-style questions. Use of a scientific calculator will be permitted.
Policy on late work
All written work must be turned into Canvas at the date and time noted on the assignment prompt. Work
submitted late will receive a five-point penalty (on a traditional 100-point grading scale) per day or
portion of day late, unless prior arrangements have been made with the instructor.
                                                     -5-


ARC 327R/URB 352: Urban Transportation                                                             Karner
Grading
Final percentage grades will be assigned based on the following seven components, weighted as shown:
                             Participation                               5
                             In-class exercises                         10
                             Quizzes                                    15
                             Assignment #1: Planning memo               15
                             Assignment #2: Accessibility analysis      15
                             Midterm examination                        15
                             Final examination                          25
                             Total                                     100
The results of any individual assessment may be weighted upward or downward (i.e. curved) at Dr.
Karner’s discretion. After any curve is applied, and to ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute and will
not be rounded up or down. Your final percentage will be translated into a letter grade as follows:
 A          94-100     B+         87-89      C+         77-79      D+         67-69    F          0-60
 A-         90-93      B          84-86      C          74-76      D          64-66
                       B-         80-83      C-         70-73      D-         60-63
                                                   -6-


ARC 327R/URB 352: Urban Transportation                                                                 Karner
Schedule (version 1.0, current as of 08/29/2018)
The following table outlines the course schedule including due dates, examinations, readings, and other
important events. This schedule is subject to change, and the most current version can always be found
on Canvas.
  Week Topic                           Readings and Assignments Due
 History, Theory, and Problem Definition
           Course overview,
                                       Readings (required)
  8/30     motivation, and key
                                       None
           transportation concepts
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #1
                                       In-class activity #1
           Urban transportation
   9/6
           history
                                       Readings (required)
                                       Muller (2004). “Transportation and urban form.”
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #2
                                       In-class activity #2
                                       Readings (required)
           Travel behavior and land
                                       Washington DOT. (2012). “Tools for estimating VMT
  9/13     use-transportation
                                       reductions from built environment changes.” pp. 2-12.
           interactions
                                       Giuliano (1995). “The weakening transportation-land use
                                       connection.”
                                       Cervero and Landis (1995). “The transportation-land use
                                       connection still matters.”
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #3
                                       In-class activity #3
           Sustainability, resilience, Readings (required)
  9/20
           and equity                  Tumlin. (2012). “Sustainable Transportation Planning.”
                                       Chapter 2.
                                       Chester and Horvath. (2010). “Life-cycle assessment of high-
                                       speed rail.”
 The Planning Process
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #4
                                       Readings (required)
                                       Transportation for America (2011). “Transportation 101” pp. 23-
           Transportation planning     57.
  9/27                                 USDOT. (2009). “A guide to transportation decisionmaking.”
           process 1: Governance
                                       Federal Highway Administration. (2015). “The Transportation
                                       Planning Process Briefing Book.” Part 1.
                                       http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/publications/briefing_book/p
                                       art01.cfm
                               PLANNING MEMO DUE 10/2 BY 11:55pm
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #5
                                       In-class activity #4
           Transportation planning     Readings (required)
  10/4     process 2: Regional         Sciara (2017). “Metropolitan transportation planning.”
           transportation planning     Federal Highway Administration. (2015). “The Transportation
                                       Planning Process Briefing Book.” Part 2 (only read the
                                       sections on “Air quality,” “Transportation equity,” and
                                       “Performance-based planning”, and “Planning data and tools”).
                                                         -7-


ARC 327R/URB 352: Urban Transportation                                                                  Karner
                                       http://www.fhwa.dot.gov/planning/publications/briefing_book/p
                                       art02.cfm
                                       Assignment 2 preparation. Bring a laptop with Microsoft Excel
           Performance-based           installed for this class if you can.
  10/11    planning: accessibility
           analysis                    Readings (required)
                                       TBD
  10/18                                     MIDTERM EXAMINATION
  10/25    Dr. Karner away at ACSP (no class)
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #6
           Transportation planning
                                       Readings (required)
           process 3: Public
                                       Bullard (2004). “Introduction.” (From Highway Robbery.)
           participation and
                                       Marcantonio and Karner (2014). “Disadvantaged communities
           advocacy
                                       teach regional planners a lesson in equitable and sustainable
                                       development.”
                          ACCESSIBILITY ANALYSIS DUE 11/6 BY 11:55PM
 Solutions and strategies
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #7
                                       In-class activity #5
           Full cost pricing, tolling,
   11/8
           HOT lanes, parking          Readings (required)
                                       Litman. (2014). “Economically Optimal Transport Prices and
                                       Markets.”
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #8
           Land use policies and
                                       In-class activity #6
           strategies: Jobs-housing
  11/15
           balance, affordable
                                       Readings (required)
           housing
                                       Benner and Karner (2016). “Low-wage jobs housing fit.”
  11/22    Thanksgiving (no class)
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #9
                                       In-class activity #7
           Alternative modes:
  11/29    Bicycling, walking, and     Readings (required)
           public transit              Pucher, J. and R. Buehler. (2008) “Making cycling irresistible.”
                                       Walker, J. (2012). “Why we should stop talking about ‘bus
                                       stigma.’” (Atlantic CityLab post.)
                                       Lecture/readings quiz #10
                                       In-class activity #8
                                       Readings (required)
                                       Walker, J. (2012). “Will driverless cars abolish buses?” (Blog
                                       post.)
                                       Agyeman, J. and D. McLaren (2016). “Apps Don’t Make a City
   12/6    Future of transportation    Smart.” https://www.bostonglobe.com/ideas/2016/08/13/apps-
                                       don-make-city-smart/YrEuTHcHAFArq5piut1nrN/story.html
                                       Watch these:
                                       Prof. Chandra Bhat on automated vehicles:
                                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=85kzWIFuwXg
                                       Matt George on Bridj:
                                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cDzimeOpQfM
                               FINAL EXAMINATION 12/13 7:00-10:00pm
                                                         -8-
