N354 Summer 2019                 Meadows-Parrish
                     N354
       SPANISH FOR HEALTH
       CARE PROFESSIONALS
                 Unique #: 87225
                 Summer I 2019
                               1


N354 Summer 2019                                                                           Meadows-Parrish
                                     N354 Spanish for Health Care Professionals
                                                 Summer 2019
                         Mrs. Parrish Tuesday & Thursday 11am-3pm NUR 1.106
Title:                    Spanish for Health Care Professionals
Credit:                   3 Credit Hours
Course Facilitator:         Dr. Nancy Guillet. MSN, RN
    Office:                 NUR 5.136
    Phone:                  (512) 475-7481
    Office Hours:           TBA
    Email:                  nguillet@mail.nur.utexas.edu (Email professor through Canvas only).
Assistant Instructor:       Claire Meadows-Parrish
    Office:                 NUR 2.308
    Phone:                  TBA
    Office Hours:           Tuesdays and Thursdays 9-10:30 am
    Email:                  Email professor through Canvas only
Clock Hours: 40 clock hours for 3 credit hours, plus time for reading and assignments. Class meets
for 8 hours (Tuesdays and Thursdays) per week over 6 weeks. College-level courses require
approximately 3 hours of study outside classroom per semester hour per week, in addition to the 8
classroom hours per week. Therefore, students should plan on spending 20-32 hours per week on this
course.
                                               Required Textbook
Guillet, N., & Echavarria, M. (Revised edition for Fall 2018). Spanish, culture & health: An introduction for
         healthcare professionals. Austin, TX: University Co-op-Forty Acres Press.
         ISBN: 978-1-61043-036-4
         Textbook available at the CO-OP store on Guadalupe St.
Other course materials can be accessed through the Canvas platform: http://canvas.utexas.edu/
Teaching/Learning Methods: This class is offered in a blended format, with online discussions, in-
class meeting times and outside the classroom assignments. Teaching methods used in this course
include reading assignments, in-class small group work, in-class and online discussions, student’s
presentations, short writing assignments, etc.
                                               Course Description
Basic health care Spanish language skills and phrases related to assessment and nursing activities. This
course focuses on the cultural values of Latino patients who seek health care in the United States.
Three lecture hours a week for one semester. Offered on the letter-grade basis only. Prerequisite:
Nursing 310 preferred.
                                                                                2


N354 Summer 2019                                                                            Meadows-Parrish
                                             Course Objectives
•    Students will feel confident in brief, basic conversation in Spanish using medical- and healthcare-
     related expressions and terminology.
•    Students will be able to articulate and respond to patient concerns.
•    Students will be able to respond to patient's requests regarding care and comfort.
•    Students will be able to conduct basic interviews (assessments) in Spanish, such as the registration
     interview, health history, physical exam, and the more detailed situations of women's health.
•    Students will understand cultural and social factors that influence the practitioner-patient
     communication with Latino people and immigrants to the U.S.
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity courses
are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural
experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments
covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group that has experienced
persistent marginalization. N354 course focuses on the culture of Latino patients that live and may
seek health care in the United States. Health beliefs and practices as well cultural similarities or
differences for health care will be discussed in class.
Note from instructor: The N354 course is designed for students in nursing who want to learn basic
medical Spanish related to heath assessment activities and, in addition, to understand the cultural values
of the Latino peoples in the United Sates. This course is not a Spanish language class per se, but is
designed to teach nursing students how to communicate with patients in Spanish. All non-native
speakers of Spanish at various levels are encouraged to enroll in this course. Students who are
interested in acquiring Spanish language skills in general are invited to enroll in traditional Spanish
courses.
                                       Copyrighted Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, textbook, exams, quizzes, and homework
assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized use or copying of the class materials is a
violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may
be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could
result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to
websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
                        Translation of Professional Behaviors in the Classroom
As healthcare professionals in practice or in training, N354 students are expected to uphold
professional behaviors and attitudes in the classrooms that mirror professional standards in the clinical
setting. On the first day of class students will have the opportunity to collaborate with peers and
professor and define acceptable behaviors in the classroom such as but not limited to use of media,
attendance, in class collaboration, etc. that will be taken into account in the participation grade.
                                                                                3


N354 Summer 2019                                                                          Meadows-Parrish
Using Canvas
Course documents will be posted on Canvas, students are advised to get familiar with the course
Canvas website. Log in to Canvas at http://canvas.utexas.edu/ enter your UTEID and password, and
select this course. If you have any questions or problems, please contact ITS Help Desk at (512) 475-
9400.
                                      Description of Assignments
Quizzes
We will be covering a large amount of material throughout the semester and there will be vocabulary
quizzes and comprehensive chapter quizzes pertaining to the content covered in class.
Chapter Quizzes are based on course material covered during class (Worth 30%).
Vocabulary Quizzes
Students are expected to study vocabulary in advance and know the chapter (s) vocabulary BEFORE
class. Vocabulary quizzes will be schedule weekly. (Worth 13%)
There are no make-ups for students that miss taking the quizzes and a grade of zero will be
assigned.
Culture Readings and Online Discussion
The readings are related to the cultural values and other healthcare-related topics that influence care of
Latinos in the United States. Students will engage in discussion of how the content of the readings may
apply to real life scenarios and how to approach Hispanic clients within a culturally competent
approach. The reading response posted online is the student’s reflection of cultural differences
and similarities found in the readings compared to the student's own culture and the student’s
response to the content of the assigned reading. Reading responses are to be submitted on or
before the due date via Canvas under the Discussions tab; students will post their response and then
reply to at least 3 other posts/responses from classmates as scheduled. To get credit for reading
response post and group discussion, the student must submit his/her response on Canvas as
scheduled. Late post submission of student’s initial response to assigned readings is subject to 10%
grade reduction per day. (Worth 22%) (See Canvas for grading rubric).
Criteria for Discussion Board Postings (see Canvas for more online etiquette):
1. Post is the student’s initial response to the assigned reading(s).
2. Post is 2 paragraphs or more and 200-400 words in length total.
3. Post contributes thoughtful, substantive ideas about the topic, or responds to the postings of
     other classmates in a substantial way. (“I agree with your comment” is not substantial. Stating
     agreement or disagreement AND why you agree or disagree would be substantial.)
4. Posts thoughtful replies to at least 3 other posts/responses from classmates.
5. Posts displays good manners, is respectful, considerate, and polite (no name-calling, bullying, etc.).
                                                                              4


N354 Summer 2019                                                                            Meadows-Parrish
Health Assessment Interviews
The Health Assessment Interviews are health-related conversations with native Spanish speakers of
Latino background that simulate the interaction between a nurse and a Spanish-speaking patient in an
environment outside the classroom setting.
The content of the interview(s) is first study and practiced by students, to master the Spanish
vocabulary and grammar structures needed to complete a task (e.g. filling out an intake form, health
assessment, personal and family health history, women health history, etc.); then in class the
interview(s) will be practiced once more with classmates and finally, the interview is practiced or
performed with a Spanish native speaker, students must record it as an audio file of the HAI, and
submit it on Canvas. Students must request authorization to record the voice of the volunteer Spanish
speaker collaborating in this assignment before posting it on Canvas.
Students will submit on Canvas a short self-critique reflection (2-3 paragraphs), of his/her
performance in the HAI recording, stating what were the strengths and also identify what areas of the
conversation that need improvement. (i.e., fluency, healthcare and general vocabulary, grammar,
content, etc.).
The aim of this assignment is to allow students for multiple opportunities for practice in a safe learning
environment, to enhance students’ listening and speaking skills during patient intake/health assessment
interviews. (Worth 12%)
Culture and Health Presentation
Students will work in small groups to develop a 10-minute presentation (in English) on a topic of their
choice on cultural issues regarding Latinos and health (e.g. breastfeeding among Latina mothers, use of
natural healers in Mexico, elderly health care, alcoholism, etc.). Students must choose a date and
approve the topic with the instructor the first day of class. At least three days before the
presentation date, students must provide to the instructor with an electronic file of the presentation
slides and references (must include at least two scholarly references different than the ones
posted for online discussion) and post on Canvas one scholarly article as reading assignment
for peers. Also due that day are two phrases in Spanish related to the chosen topic that healthcare
providers might need to communicate with Spanish speaking patients (e.g., “It is important to drink
lots of water to stay hydrated” [for breastfeeding among Latina mothers], “Have you taken any natural
remedies?” [for use of natural healers in Mexico], etc.
Finally, after the presentation, students must include a short class activity after the presentation (e.g.
discussion questions, pop quiz, etc.). The presentations will occur throughout the semester and the
presentation date cannot be changed once scheduled. Students are graded individually for this
assignment. Students in the audience are expected to engage, take notes, ask questions and participate
in the activities provided by the presenting group. (Worth 5%)
Participation & Attendance
Because language learning is not a purely solitary activity, students will be practicing the use of Spanish
in class. Each student has a very important role in this course as each class day students are expected to
work with peers for vocabulary and speaking/listening and other class activities and assignments.
Being prepared in advance for class is therefore an expectation as the use of learned language
skills will be important and necessary for the group activities.
                                                                                5


N354 Summer 2019                                                                            Meadows-Parrish
Due to the nature of the class, the emphasis on oral presentations, class discussions and the fast pace
of the course, class attendance is required. Missing class will directly affect student’s grades for missed
in-class activities, quizzes, assignments, etc. If 2 or more class days are missed, up to 5 grade points will
be deducted from the final grade. Students are strongly encouraged to schedule personal and other
appointments outside of the class schedule.
The grade for participation will be a combination of class attendance, as well as the instructor’s
observations of the student’s ability to stay on task, participation on cultural reading discussions,
participation in culture and health presentation group activities, communicate and work with a variety
of classmates, and maximize your language use in our limited meeting times. Leaving early or coming
late to class will impact the participation grade. See below: “In class” under student responsibilities for
more details on class participation (Worth 5%).
Exam – Based on Health Assessment Interviews
At the end of the semester after several opportunities of practicing the health assessment interviews
both in class and with a native speaker, students will take an exam based on these interviews. The exam
will encompass content from the interviews and vocabulary learned during the semester. The health
assessment interviews exam is a culmination of students’ health assessment interview skills in Spanish
(Worth 8%).
Health and Culture Reflection Paper
Towards the end of the semester, students will turn in on Canvas a self-reflection paper (2 pages long)
addressing their learning experience during the semester in working with a Latino individual and
reflecting on learned cultural differences and similarities drawn from the health assessment interviews,
the cultural presentation and cultural readings and discussions. In this paper students will also reflect
on how language and culture play a role in the delivery of care to individuals of a different cultural
backgrounds. Content for this assignment should be an overall reflection and not a mere copy of
previous reading responses (Worth 5%).
                              Submitting Assignments & Late Work policy:
All course assignments are to be submitted on due dates as scheduled. Students are advised to schedule
personal and medical appointments in a fashion not to conflict with the class schedule. Assignments
turned-in past the due date will receive no credit. The instructor has the discretion to exempt students
of late work policy on an individual basis if were there extenuating circumstances for not submitting an
assignment on time. Yet the instructor is not obligated to change due dates. Late work submission may
be subject to a 25% grade/day reduction; this late work policy applies only for documented
extenuating circumstances; even if arrangements were made, assignments turned-in late after the new
arranged due date, would not be accepted and a zero will be given for a grade. Exams and quizzes are
not rescheduled.
                                                                                6


N354 Summer 2019                                                                             Meadows-Parrish
                                                    Grading
The final grade is based on the percentage of total points earned. No make-up work is allowed to affect
the final grade. Points are distributed as follows:
                                     Assignment                                         Grade
         Chapter Quizzes                                                                30%
         Vocabulary Quizzes                                                             13%
         Cultural Readings & Online Discussions                                         22%
         Health Assessment Interviews - Audio/Recordings                                12%
         Culture & Health Presentation                                                   5%
         Participation                                                                   5%
         Health Assessment Interviews – Exam                                             8%
         Health & Culture Reflection Paper                                               5%
         Final Grade                                                                   100%
Grading Scale: All grades will be posted on Canvas and will be kept in numerical form until the end
of the semester, when grades will be averaged to determine the final letter grade. Final letter grades are
assigned according to the following percentage totals: 100 – 90 A, 89 – 80 B, 79 – 70 C, 69 – 60 D, 59
or less F.
Final grade is based on 100 points. No plus or minus will be assigned, there is no curve in N354.
N354 course does not offer extra assignments for grades.
                                    STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
In order to be successful in this course, students must fulfill several responsibilities both in class and at
home and must also be able to demonstrate their progress in course assessments.
AT HOME: Even though the course is not a language course per se, for learning basic phrases in
Spanish and to be able to understand patients even for basic dialogues, continuous practice is required.
Since it is a process that relies on active participation on the part of the learner, do not expect to master
the material simply by coming to class once a week. In order to perform well in this course, your at-
home effort in the following 3 areas is essential:
Homework: Your instructor will assign homework regularly. Many of these assignments are given in
order to practice more on the class content and to prepare you for the following class day. Therefore, it
is imperative that you complete this work on your own in order to be able to participate in class.
Homework is also given to provide you with ample opportunities to practice the course material and
identify potential areas of weakness. As a result, you will experience an increase in self-awareness,
which will enable you to take a pro-active stance in your progress, bring questions to class, thus
becoming a more effective learner overall.
Studying: You should not limit your work at home only to homework assignments. Instead, you should
also study the course material on a regular basis, since attempts to memorize large amounts of material
(vocabulary, grammar rules, etc.) quickly to prepare for a graded assignment are not normally
successful. You should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of any
                                                                                 7


N354 Summer 2019                                                                            Meadows-Parrish
items you may not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important questions and
resolve issues you did not understand before a quiz and well prepare you before performing the
professional conversations and other assignments with a Spanish speaker. Students must study
vocabulary of the chapter to be reviewed in class in advance. Vocabulary quizzes will be administered
every class day in addition to the scheduled chapter quizzes. Now begin studying!
Practice: Practice makes perfection. Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as re-
reading or staring at tables and lists of words/rules. This type of traditional studying is not sufficient in
a language course. Students who don’t actively use the target language (Spanish in this case) at home or
outside the classroom, often don’t develop the automaticity necessary to successfully perform basic
professional conversations in Spanish with Spanish speaker patients or when performing the course
final evaluation assignments within a limited time frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also
set aside time to:
•    Practice vocabulary and conjugate verbs
•    Practice orally and writing sentences in giving response to patient requests and concerns, etc.
•    Practice reading newspaper articles, ads, etc. to get more exposure to the Spanish language
•    Practice speaking with friends and/or classmates to master dialogues
•    Practice listening via news broadcasts, television or online videos to improve listening skills and
     cultural awareness
For practice purposes, working outside of class with a classmate is allowed; however, homework and
other class assignments must be performed only by the student without help from a classmate unless
prior approval is granted by the instructor to work with a classmate for a specific assignment, otherwise
it will be considered a violation of the scholastic dishonesty policy and professional integrity.
IN CLASS: Class meetings are important opportunities for you to interact with your classmates and
your instructor. Participation is an essential component of the course and does not refer exclusively to
attendance (see above: grading for class participation). In order to receive a high participation grade in
this course, the following expectations must be met:
Interaction: The N354 course is not a lecture course. Instead, classes are student centered and rely
heavily on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work will be pair
work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is the facilitator of
your learning. All students are expected to participate equally in these activities and will be graded
accordingly.
Spanish: In order to improve your oral communication skills, you must practice both listening to and
speaking Spanish! Therefore, as the semester goes on, your instructor will speak frequently in Spanish,
which will not only help you learn new vocabulary and grammar structures, but will also increase your
comfort level over the course of the semester. In turn, you are expected to speak in Spanish during all
practice activities and for basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to the bathroom,
asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.). Don’t be shy! You won’t be graded on the accuracy of
your speech in these situations. You are, however, expected to make the effort.
                                                                                8


N354 Summer 2019                                                                            Meadows-Parrish
Focus: The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class. The use of
electronic devices and outside reading materials is not allowed in class as they limit your
participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful when not used for class purposes. The
use of any items such as these will lower your participation grade substantially as it will not be a
professional behavior, and may be a reason to sign a learning contract for inappropriate class behavior
and or will be reported to the Dean’s office thru early warning system at the discretion of the course
instructor.
                                       UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Students are responsible for reading and following all university policies including, but not limited to,
adding and dropping courses, academic advising and evaluations.
Scholastic Dishonesty: Refer to the General Information for information on the Scholastic Dishonesty
Policy Sec. 11-802. Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
falsifying academic records, and misrepresenting facts. The Dean of Students Office records acts of
dishonesty and notifies the School of Nursing of each incident. In addition to all of the University
statements and policies relative to academic dishonesty, the School of Nursing recognizes the strong
link between honesty in academic work and professional integrity. Any act of academic dishonesty,
including fabrication of reports or records of interactions with clients, is considered incompatible with
ethical standards of nursing practice. The School of Nursing does not admit students who have a
record of violations to the professional sequence. Students who engage in scholastic dishonesty may be
subject to dismissal and may jeopardize their eligibility for licensure as a registered nurse.
Honor Code: The profession of nursing has a legacy of public respect and trust. We provide
specialized care for the health needs of individuals and the community with integrity, honesty,
compassion, and state of the art knowledge and skills. Learning and practicing responsible and ethical
professional behavior is a vital part of professional education. The Institutional Rules on Student
Services and Activities given in the General Information Catalog (Chapter 11) and The University of
Texas at Austin’s Honor Code apply to all nursing students:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Additionally, the School of Nursing has its own honor code: As a student in The University of Texas at
Austin’s School of Nursing, I pledge myself to be honest in all of my student activities including, but
not limited to, all of my scholastic work and interactions with patients, members of the community,
faculty, and peers. Furthermore, I will not use any substance prior to or during my interaction with
patients that could alter my judgment or ability to render safe care: this includes but is not limited to
any use of alcohol, illegal drugs, and prescription or over-the counter drugs that may impair my mental
and/or physical abilities required to perform safe patient care. I will disclose to my instructor any
violations of the above standards of conduct.
Student Conduct Policy: Students and faculty in The School of Nursing each have responsibility for
maintaining an appropriate learning environment. Faculty have the professional responsibility to treat
students with understanding, dignity and respect and to guide the teaching/learning process. Students
                                                                                9


N354 Summer 2019                                                                                  Meadows-Parrish
are expected to refrain from verbal and nonverbal behaviors in the classroom and clinical that may be
distracting to others, such as, but not limited to: arriving late or leaving early, side conversations, text
messaging, note passing, surfing the internet or answering e-mail on laptops, and answering cell phone
or pager. Students who persistently engage in behaviors that are disruptive to the teaching/learning
process may be required to leave the setting. For further information refer to General Information,
Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities, Chapter 11: Student Discipline and Conduct.
Students with Disabilities: Refer to the General Information for information on Academic and
Program Accommodations for Students with Disabilities or contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities office in the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259. The School of Nursing works to
ensure that students who have disabilities have equal access to the University’s programs and services.
If you have any questions about services or accommodations for students with disabilities, please talk
with the faculty member, the Assistant Dean for Undergraduate Programs, or the Assistant Dean for
Student and Clinical Affairs or directly call the Office of the Dean of Students, Services for Students
with Disabilities, 471-6259.
Missed Work Due to Religious Holidays: A student who misses an examination, work assignment, or
other project due to the observance of a religious holy day will be given an opportunity to complete the
work missed within a reasonable time after the absence, provided that he or she has properly notified
the instructor. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that the student must notify the
instructor at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates he or she will be absent to
observe a religious holy day. For religious holy days that fall within the first two weeks of the semester,
the notice should be given on the first day of the semester. The student will not be penalized for these
excused absences, but the instructor may appropriately respond if the student fails to complete
satisfactorily the missed assignment or examination within a reasonable time after the excused absence.
Nursing Building Evacuation Plan
If you see smoke, see flames, smell something burning, or become aware of another emergency that may
require evacuation of the building, immediately:
1.    If possible, ISOLATE the fire or other emergency by closing the door.
2.    ACTIVATE the nearest FIRE ALARM PULL STATION.
3.    EVACUATE to the PRIMARY or SECONDARY ASSEMBLY AREA.
4.    Dial University Police at 911 or Dispatch 471-4441.
DO NOT CALL 911 UNTIL YOU ARE OUTSIDE THE BUILDING.
IF A FIRE ALARM IS ACTIVATED OR IF YOU HAVE RECEIVED AN EVACUATION ORDER:
• In a calm and orderly manner, proceed to evacuate the area and follow the instructions of the Floor
     Managers or emergency response personnel. Each floor has two designated floor managers. Their role is
     to ensure that everyone on their floor has proceeded to the fire exit stairs. Occupants in areas 1, 3, 5, 7,
     and 9 are to exit the first level of the southwest stairwell. Occupants in areas 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 are to exit
     the first level of the northwest stairwell. See maps that follow these instructions.
                                                                                   10


N354 Summer 2019                                                                                 Meadows-Parrish
•     Do not rush, push or panic.
•     Close your office, classroom, or lab door behind you.
•     EVACUATE to the designated ASSEMBLY AREAS. If your progress to one of the PRIMARY assembly areas
      is impeded, proceed to the other PRIMARY assembly area without either re-entering the building or
      attempting to move through any obstruction. SECONDARY assembly area is unavailable at this time due
      to construction.
•     DO NOT USE ELEVATORS TO EVACUATE. Descend the nearest fire exit stairs in single file down to the
      GROUND LEVEL (first floor) and exit the building. Primary fire exit stairs are located on the southwest
      and northwest ends of the building.
•     If there is someone who requires assistance, please escort them to the STAGING AREA, outside the
      stairwell. Once everyone has moved down the stairs, they should move/be moved inside the stairwell,
      which is considered to be “outside” the building.
•     Do not reenter the building unless directed by UTPD, an Austin Fire Department Officer in charge, or
      Building Manager.
•     Faculty are responsible for informing their students and any guests of these procedures. If for some
      reason your class should meet in a classroom that is not your assigned classroom, you should provide
      evacuation instructions for that location.
Refer to the floor-specific plans to determine your evacuation route and assembly area.
DO NOT BLOCK ACCESS TO BUILDING FOR EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Do not exit through the front door of
the building unless you are in the lobby areas outside the central elevators/stairwell or unless access to one
of the other stairwells is blocked. If you are in the courtyard outside the second floor lobby, you may exit
through the glass doors to the east or west, then out to one of the designated assembly areas.
ASSEMBLY AREAS
From NORTHWEST FIRE STAIR EXIT—proceed to first floor stairwell exit door to outside of building. DO NOT
ENTER FIRST FLOOR HALLWAY AND EXIT THROUGH GLASS DOORS. Primary assembly area is outside the
building to the bridge. Secondary assembly area, which should be used in inclement weather, is the 4th level
of the Trinity Garage.
From SOUTHWEST FIRE STAIR EXIT— proceed to first floor stairwell exit door to outside of building. DO NOT
ENTER FIRST FLOOR HALLWAY AND EXIT THROUGH GLASS DOORS. Primary assembly area is outside the
building to the foot bridge. Secondary assembly, which should be used in inclement weather, area is the 4th
level of the Trinity Garage.
EVACUATION ASSISTANCE
It is expected that faculty and staff will assist those among us who require assistance in case of evacuation. If
you, or a guest or student, require assistance in emergency situations, please inform the Building Manager
at the beginning of the semester of the type of assistance needed based on the following categories:
•     Alarm Notification – occupant has hearing and visual impairments; may be able to easily navigate stairs
      but require notification if the alarm has activated. This can be the case if a person with hearing
      impairments is working in an office with the door closed.
                                                                                     11


N354 Summer 2019                                                                              Meadows-Parrish
•    Slow Evacuation Capability – occupant can navigate stairs but requires some assistance or who move at
     a much slower pace than others.
•    Impractical Evacuation Capability – occupants who cannot navigate the exit stairs. To evacuate the
     building, this occupant must be carried down or evacuated through an elevator provided with
     emergency service.
The names of those provided will be kept in the fire alarm panel for use by emergency responders.
STAGING AREA
If an occupant needs assistance, please escort them to the area outside the stairwell. If they are unable to
use the stairs, wait until everyone has evacuated the area, move them into the stairwell, and after
evacuating the building, inform the Communication Coordinator where you have left them.
BUILDING EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT TEAM
1. Building Manager/Emergency Manager                     Margaret Hill              512.471.9906
2. Communication Coordinator                              Charla Carrington          512.471.2062
3. Floor Manager/Floor 1                                  Jane Denson (P)            512.471.9905
                                                          Kellie Ann Plack (P)       512.471.1945
                                                          Sergio Delgado (A)         512.471.2628
4.    Floor Manager/Floor 2                               Jeanne Morriss (P)         512.471.7924
                                                          Matthew Parker (P)         512.471.8307
5.    Floor Manager/Floor 3                               Cindy Taylor (P)           512.232.4710
                                                          Vicki Kullberg (P)         512.471.9077
                                                          Rachel Whitefield (A)      512.965.7594
6.    Floor Manager/Floor 4                               Mayra Suarez (P)           512.471.9062
                                                          Lisa Costa (P)             512.475.9569
                                                          Scott Hudson (A)           512.471.4552
7.    Floor Manager/Floor 5                               Ruth Brady (P)             512.232.4727
                                                          Prati Rijal-Trimble (P)    512.471.1359
                                                          DeAnna Baker (A)           512.471.7961
* P=primary; A=alternate
                                                                                  12


N354 Summer 2019    Meadows-Parrish
                 13


N354 Summer 2019    Meadows-Parrish
                 14


N354 Summer 2019    Meadows-Parrish
                 15


N354 Summer 2019    Meadows-Parrish
                 16


N354 Summer 2019    Meadows-Parrish
                 17


N354 Summer 2019    Meadows-Parrish
Assembly Areas
                 18
