ALD 329          09540                     L. Turner                 Acquisition of Language and Literacies
Instructor: ​Laura Turner                                                    Semester: ​Spring 2020
Email: ​laura.turner@utexas.edu                                              Meeting Days: ​Wednesdays
Office: ​SZB 439A                                                            Time: ​9:00-12:00
Office Hours: ​Thursdays, 12:30-1:30 (or by appointment)                     Meeting Location: ​SZB 426
                                              Course Description
This course will provide an overview of theoretical and practical perspectives on the nature of language in
education, its use and usage. Students will explore principles of discourse, phonology, morphology,
syntax and semantics as they relate to second language acquisition. We will also cover language varieties,
social conventions and linguistic structures. The focus of the course is to prepare pre-service teachers to
best meet the ​linguistic and academic needs of bilingual English learner (EL) students in the K-12
classroom.
Topics include English structures and analysis, identification of bilingual EL students’ academic and
linguistic learning needs, and pedagogical strategies to promote language acquisition. Our beliefs about
the English language and its acquisition shape the kinds of opportunities we provide our bilingual EL
students and are therefore highly consequential to their academic trajectories. This course is structured to
support the student in designing, implementing and reflecting on the academic language development of
bilingual EL students in a variety of contexts.
                                                 Course Goals
By the end of the semester, the successful student will be able to:
     1. Discuss the complexities of the English language.
     2. Explain English language structures and patterns.
     3. Critically analyze the linguistic features of a bilingual EL student’s oral language sample.
     4. Understand language as a sociopolitical and historical construct.
     5. Appreciate varieties of the English language and its ongoing transformation.
     6. Identify the linguistic challenges facing bilingual EL students in the academic context.
     7. Design activities appropriate to bilingual EL students’ linguistic needs in the academic context.
     8. Identify attitudes towards, and modes of inquiry regarding language.
     9. Articulate theories of language (e.g. variation, phonology, social conventions, use/usage).
     10. Identify instructional strategies to address bilingual students’ academic & linguistic development.
                                               Required Reading
     ●   Freeman, D.E. and Freeman, Y.S. (2014). Essential linguistics Second Edition: What teachers
         need to know to teach ESL, reading, spelling, and grammar. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann​.
     ●   Course Readings available on Canvas
                                                    Grading
Critical Commentaries              (10%)            100-93=A                 79-77=C+
Tutoring (10h)                     (10%)            92-90=A-                 76-73=C
Group Presentation                 (10%)            89-87=B+                 72-70=C-
2 Midterms (15% each)              (30%)            86-83=B                  69-60=D
Linguistic Analysis                (40%)            82-80=B-                 Below 60=F
                                                                                                             1
Spring 2020                                     (09540)


ALD 329          09540                     L. Turner                 Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                                                    Canvas
Use of e-mail and ​Canvas​ are essential elements of this class. Successful completion of this course
requires that you record a language sample from your bilingual EL student for transcription and analysis.
Projects and assignments must be submitted electronically, posted to the class ​Canvas​ website. E-mail
will be used to communicate with the instructor and other class members. A ​Canvas​ Site has been
established for this course; the site contains a copy of this syllabus, project guidelines, readings which are
not in your textbooks, and general course information. Announcements, updates, and new documents will
be posted throughout the course; students are expected to check ​Canvas​ regularly. Students are
encouraged to post their own presentations to the group presentation folder on ​Canvas​ so others in the
class may have access to them. All students must post their weekly ​critical commentaries to ​Canvas​ by
midnight (12:00 a.m.) on Tuesdays​.
                                                  Attendance
Regular attendance and participation is mandatory. There are no unexcused absences. Unexcused class
absences will result in a reduction of the final grade. Each student is permitted one excused absence;
subsequent absences will result in a reduction of the final grade. More than three absences (including
excused and unexcused absences) will result in a failing grade for the class.
If you have to miss a class session due to an unforeseen emergency or the observance of a religious
holiday, talk to me before about your plans for keeping up with the coursework and compensating—not
eliminating—the absence. You are responsible for contacting a class member so that you are prepared for
the next class session. When you come to class, please sign in on the attendance sheet. Tardies will also
lower your final grade for this class. Excessive tardiness or early departures (three or more) also
constitutes an unexcused absence.
Religious Holy Days​: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
If you must be absent on a day when you are ​scheduled to present,​ it is imperative that you let Laura
know prior to class so that adjustments may be made. ​A letter-grade reduction will be given if
notification is not received prior to 12:00 noon on the day before the appointed date.
Class sessions will include short lectures, small and whole group discussions, virtual responses, and
student presentations. In order to accomplish the goals of the course, classes are designed for ​active
participation online and in-class​. Students are expected to come to class prepared to discuss the
assigned material. Your perspectives are appreciated, needed, and respected, and should be shared.
Students will respect the viewpoint of all class members. Students’ grade will depend in part on ideas and
understandings developed in class.
                                                                                                             2
Spring 2020                                     (09540)


ALD 329           09540                     L. Turner                Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                                         University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community. All students
are responsible for reading and understanding the University of Texas Standard of ​Academic Integrity​ ​and
definition of ​plagiarism​.​ By submitting an assignment to satisfy course requirements, you are indicating
that it is your own work. The failure to properly acknowledge use of another’s work is plagiarism.
References must be cited according to ​APA guidelines​. ​Plagiarism of any kind will result in a failing
grade for the assignment and/or the class.
                                        Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
at ​471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). ​Students are responsible to provide a copy of their letter
to the instructor ​at the start of the semester.
                                              Technology Etiquette
Students ​should not​ use cell phones during class time. Please turn off cell phones (or put on vibrate)
during class. Laptops should also remain closed unless instructed.
                                                Classroom Policies
Our classroom is a safe place to share and develop new ideas and gain understanding; respect of
colleagues’ questions is expected. This syllabus is a work-in-progress and dates and details are subject to
change. Any changes will be confirmed both in class and via class email. As mentioned earlier,
participation plays a critical role in understanding of the material and will contribute to one’s grade.
                                                  Writing Flag
ALD 329 carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience writing
in an academic discipline. In this class, you will write regularly throughout the semester, complete a
substantial writing project, receive feedback from your instructor and your peers to help you improve
your writing, and provide like feedback to your peers. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. A substantial portion of
your grade will come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications
objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by
the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
                                                                                                            3
Spring 2020                                      (09540)


ALD 329         09540                      L. Turner                 Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                                                ASSIGNMENTS
Organization and planning are essential characteristics of professionalism that will help you meet
assignment due dates and will influence the quality of your work. Late submissions will receive partial
credit. A student with an emergency situation preventing a timely submission should contact Laura
immediately.
1. ​  Critical Commentaries (10%): approx. 1 paragraph (max: 1/2 page) per reading
CCs are designed to help you organize, synthesize, and connect course readings—to easily locate and
identify reference materials for exams and the final project- as well as for reference in future coursework.
Critical commentaries should be written in paragraph form and include the following information:
             1. Title​ – Full citation of the reading (in APA format)
             2. Brief Summary​ – 2-3 sentence summary of key points and note any details, key concepts,
                 etc. which particularly struck you.
             3. Response – ​Your ​opinion of​ and ​reaction to​ the reading. Did the text trigger a connection
                 or reaction upon reading? Comment on, dialogue and interact with the text. Did you agree
                 / disagree? Why? Did you gain any new insights from the reading? Was it helpful? Why /
                 why not? How does it relate to other readings for this class or others? Does it relate to
                 your work tutoring your bilingual English learner student?
             4. Key Question/Critical Concept—     ​ At least one idea per week that either (a) requires
                 further clarification, or (b) you synthesized in a novel way and will share with your
                 colleagues.
             5. CCs must be posted to ​Canvas​ by 12:00 midnight on Tuesdays.​ ​For every 12 hours
                 that pass beyond the time they are due, 5 points will be deducted.
                 **While informal, please carefully edit for spelling, grammar, syntax and clarity.**
You are welcome to bring hard copies to class to facilitate discussion.
2.​  Tutoring (10 hours) (10%)
Several school and tutoring organizers will speak to our class at the start of the semester. Please either
sign up with them, or let Laura​ ​know ​where you will be volunteering prior to the 3​rd​ class meeting​. Begin
tutoring by ​Week 3​ and complete ​all required hours​ by ​Week 12​. ​All​ ​10 HOURS are REQUIRED to
receive CREDIT. ​Up to 3 hours may be classroom observations.
         a) A signature from your tutoring coordinator will be required on the ​Tutoring Sign-in sheet
             each time you tutor. Include your tutoring coordinator’s preferred contact (email/phone) on
             the form. ​Submit this form under the tutoring assignment on Canvas.
         b) You will also complete the ​Tutoring Log​ for each tutoring session in order to reflect on the
             experience and document how the time was spent. These entries will detail the work you
             conducted with your student that day, strategies you may have used, and any lingering
                                                                                                               4
Spring 2020                                      (09540)


ALD 329            09540                    L. Turner                 Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                questions you might have. ​Submit this form under the tutoring assignment on Canvas
                (with the sign-in sheet).
          c) At the end of the semester, you will complete a ​Tutoring Reflection Form​, also to be
                submitted on Canvas.
If possible, m​ eet your teacher​. ​Ask your coordinator to set up a time for you to briefly meet your
student’s teacher to better understand your student.
3.​   Group Presentations (10%)
During the first week of class students will divide into groups and choose a presentation topic. Each group
will present for around ​30 minutes​ during the designated class. Group presentations will touch on one key
aspect of the week’s readings,​ ​incorporating one or more of the English proficiency standards
(ELPS)​.​ Group members are encouraged to meet with Laura during office hours prior to the scheduled
presentation date to generate ideas and materials for the presentation. Presentations should be engaging,
connected to the class readings, interactive, collaborative, and informative. Consider interactive,
non-lecture formats for these presentations. Make sure to start on time and work out any technical issues
prior​ to presenting. Please see ​Canvas​ for the expanded Grading Rubric. P  ​ PT is allowed to support the
presentation, but should not be the focus of the learning experience​. Use your creativity to involve and
engage the class.
4.​   Midterms (30%)
The exam after ​Week 5 (15%) ​will consist of multiple choice, essay and short answer questions. The
exam after ​Week 13 (15%)​ will consist of a two-part writer’s workshop and peer review session.
5.​   Linguistic Analysis (40%)
Students will demonstrate their understanding of both (1) the distinct structure and features of oral
English, and (2) the linguistic development of bilingual EL students by analyzing a language sample from
a tutoring session with their student. Language samples will include approximately 10 minutes of
discussion around an academic or social topic. Claims made in the linguistic analyses must be supported
by ​references​ drawn from course readings as well as external texts.
Final projects will consist of 4 discrete sections:
     1. Introduction
A brief overview of your work with your student. Describe your student's academic and linguistic
background and include any interesting features of your time spent together.
                                                                       (Maximum: 3/4 page)
    2. Linguistic Analysis
A critical analysis of your student’s linguistic development as represented in the language sample:
             i.     Phonological development
            ii.     Morphological development
                                                                                                             5
Spring 2020                                      (09540)


ALD 329         09540                     L. Turner                Acquisition of Language and Literacies
          iii.   Syntactic development
          iv.    Semantic development
           v.    Pragmatic competence (e.g., discourse routines, social conventions)
          vi.    Free choice: anything else that strikes you as important--Analysis of additional features
                 not listed but studied this semester are welcome in this section.
(Maximum: 6 pages; min. 10 references)
   3.   Recommended Classroom Practices
            i.   Describe 2-3 recommended instructional strategies for working with your bilingual EL
                 student.
           ii.   Strategies should target improving content area development and comprehension based
                 on your work together.
                                                                    (1-2 pages; min. 2 references)
 ​ 4.   SOLOM Results and Discussion
    ●   Analyze the how and why of your participant’s SOLOM results.
    ●   How (well) does the SOLOM measure a learner’s use of: syntax, semantics, morphology,
        phonology, language use/usage? Which features of the bilingual EL student’s oral language
        prompted the rater to place him/her at each level in each domain? Does the overall rating reflect
        the bilingual EL student's abilities in the larger academic context? How well do ratings in the
        individual language ability areas reflect the overall assessment?
    ●   What questions did the SOLOM answer for you as a teacher? Were any areas of concern left
        unaddressed?
                                                                    (1-2 pages; min. 2 references)
Reference list for all three sections combined
        Canvas upload (Final): Linguistic Analysis
        Narrative (Sections 1-4 above)
        Copy of completed SOLOM, less bilingual EL student name
        Annotated Transcript of the language sample (scan or hard copy)
Style Guide​:
References in APA format (​www.apastyle.org​);
Appropriate use of headers and subheaders to organize the written text
Double-spaced, 12 pt. font
One-inch margins
Last name/page number(s) in footer
                               All materials must be uploaded electronically
                       to ​Canvas​ (narrative and appendices; SOLOM; Transcript)
                                  by Monday, May 11, 2020 by 11:59 p.m.
                                                                                                           6
Spring 2020                                     (09540)


ALD 329               09540                   L. Turner                Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                                                 Additional Details:
    Language Sample, Working with Your Bilingual EL Student, Linguistic Analysis Project
In the 2​nd​ or 3​rd​ week of your tutoring experience, you will record a ​language sample​ with your bilingual
student.
You will not be interviewing your student, rather you will be recording a regular tutoring session. You
will then transcribe this language sample, both your language and your student’s, and use this as the base
of your linguistic analysis.
Print out a copy of your ​transcript​ and bring this to class with you. You will use the language elicited
from the L2 learner to identify various linguistic features we examine in class. In class, we will workshop
our transcripts, looking for examples of:
                       Pragmatic competence
                       Semantic development
                       Phonological development
                       Morphological development
                       Syntactic development
As you work with your EL bilingual student throughout the semester, reflect on his/her language growth
and development. At the end of the semester, you will evaluate your student’s English proficiency based
on the SOLOM rubric. The ​SOLOM​ allows a teacher to observe a bilingual EL student’s oral English
skills in a natural context and identify the appropriate English language development stage through
observation.
                                                                                                               7
Spring 2020                                        (09540)


ALD 329        09540                   L. Turner               Acquisition of Language and Literacies
Week 1                                       Introduction & Overview
Jan. 22
                              Language as a tool: Manipulate it well!
    ●   Fillmore, L. W., & Snow, C.E. (2000). What teachers need to know about language.
    ●   Zeller, et al. (2010). From stranger to friend: The effect of service learning on pre-service
        teachers’ attitudes toward diverse populations.
            o   Language and Content: Expository writing and texts: Syllabus overview
            o   Language Sample: Linguistic Analysis Assignment
            o   Assign / Choose Groups
            o   Interest Survey / What is Standard English?
Week 2                           Language: Learning and Cognition                             Jan. 29
Critical Commentary #1
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014a). ​How Linguists Study Language: Ch.1​ (pp. 1-20)
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014b). ​First Language Acquisition: Ch.2 (​ pp. 21-51)
Week 3                            Language Policy and Bilingual EL Education
Feb. 5
                                Learning Language, Learning Content
Critical Commentary #2
    ●   Macias, R. (2014). ​Benefits of Bilingualism: In the eye of the beholder? I​ n R. Callahan &
        P.C. Gándara (Eds.) ​The Bilingual Advantage: Language, Literacy, and the Labor
        Market, ​Multilingual Matters: Clevedon, U.K.
    ●   Hakuta, K. (2011). Education language minority students and affirming their equal rights:
        Research and practical perspectives. ​Educational Researcher​, 40, 163-174.
Week 4                                  Language and Pedagogy: Why Bilingual EL Students?
Feb. 12
Critical Commentary #3
    ●   Goldenberg, C. (2008). Teaching English language learners: What the research
        does—and does not—say. ​American Educator, (Summer)​ , 8-44.
    ●   Garcia-Medina (2010), Table 3.1
    ●   SOLOM ​(review, no critical commentary)
    ●   ELPS (2014) Texas English Language Proficiency Standards ​(review, no critical
        commentary)
Group 1 Presents
Due:​ Identify bilingual EL student for language sample
Week 5            Language as part of Bilingual EL Students’ Integration                      Feb. 19
                               Social, academic and professional
                                                                                                    8
Spring 2020                                 (09540)


ALD 329        09540                   L. Turner             Acquisition of Language and Literacies
Critical Commentary #4
    ●   Fillmore, L.W. (2000) Loss of family languages: Should educators be concerned? ​Theory
        into Practice, 39​(4), pp. 203-210.
    ●   Suárez-Orozco et al (2008). Networks of relationships. In​ Learning a new land:
        Immigrant students in American society. Harvard University Press.
    ●   Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The standard language myth. In R. Lippi-Green, ​English with an
        accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, ​(pp. 53-62). New
        York, NY: Routledge.
Group 2 Presents
Week 6                                  ​MIDTERM 1                                         ​Feb. 26
Week 7                       Reading, Writing, & EL Bilingual Students                        Mar.
4
                                     Deriving Meaning from Text
Critical Commentary #5
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014c). ​Second and Written Language Acquisition: Ch.3​ (pp.
        52-83)
Group 3 Presents
Week 8               Programs and Instruction for Bilingual EL Students                    Mar. 11
                         ESL, Academic Content & Academic Achievement
Critical Commentary #6
    ●   Diaz-Rico, L.T. (2013). Content area instruction. ​The crosscultural, language and
        academic development handbook: A complete K-12 reference,​ (pp. 115-148). Needham
        Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
    ●   Fang, Z. (2008). Going beyond the Fab 5: Helping students cope with the unique
        linguistic challenges of expository reading in intermediate grades. ​Journal of Adolescent
        and Adult Literacy, 51(​ 6), pp. 476-487.
Group 4 Presents
Due:​ Bilingual EL Student Language Sample Completed
Due:​ Tutoring Log Post 1 on Padlet
(e.g., questions, doubts, challenges, positive experiences)
                                           Spring Break                                    Mar. 18
                                                                                                   9
Spring 2020                                 (09540)


ALD 329        09540                  L. Turner             Acquisition of Language and Literacies
Week 9                                                               Semantics and Pragmatics
Mar. 25
                                  Language Use & Conventions
Critical Commentary #7
    ●   Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010a). Pragmatics​.​ In
        Why TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, ​(pp. 71-79). Dubuque,
        IA: Kendall-Hunt.
    ●   Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010b). Semantics​.​ In
        Why TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, ​(pp. 81-88). Dubuque,
        IA: Kendall-Hunt.
Due:​ Language Sample Transcript
Week 10                     Phonology, Reading, & Bilingual EL Students                    Apr. 1
                               Sounds & Sound-Symbol Correspondence
Critical Commentary #8
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014d). ​English Phonology: Ch.4 (pp. 89-118).
    ●   Freeman & Freeman: (2014e). ​Implications from Phonology for Teaching a Second
        Language and for Teaching Reading: Ch.5​ (pp. 119-145).
    ●   Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The myth of non-accent. In R. Lippi-Green, ​English with an
        accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, ​(pp. 41-52). New
        York, NY: Routledge.
Week 11                    Morphology, Literacy, & Bilingual EL Students                      Apr.
8
Critical Commentary #9
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014). ​English Morphology:​ Ch.7 (pp. 180-208).
    ●   Freeman & Freeman (2014). ​Implications from Morphology for Teaching a Second
        Language and Teaching Reading:Ch.8. (​ pp. 209-229).
Due:​ Tutoring Log Post 2 on Padlet
(e.g., questions, doubts, challenges, positive experiences)
Week 12                            Syntax in the Classroom                                 Apr. 15
                        “Just because you can doesn't mean you should”:
                     Modal verbs and other hurdles for Bilingual EL Students
Critical Commentary #10
    ●   Freeman & Freeman: (2014). ​English Syntax:Ch.9​ (pp. 230-264).
    ●   Freeman & Freeman: (2014). ​Implications from Syntax for Teaching a Second Language
        and Teaching Reading:Ch.10. (​ pp. 265-287).
Week 13                                     ​MIDTERM 2                                    ​Apr. 22
                                                                                                 10
Spring 2020                                (09540)


ALD 329        09540                    L. Turner               Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                                              (Part I and II)
Week 14                  Assessment of Language and Bilingual Learners                       Apr. 29
    ●   *Cary, S. (2007). How do I assess a student’s English? In ​Working with English language
        learners, ​(p. 9-20).​ P
                               ​ ortsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
    ●   *​Gottleib, M. (2006). ​Ch.3 Assessing Oral Language and Literacy Development I​ n
        Assessing English language learners: Bridges from language proficiency to academic
        achievement, ​(pp. 41-61). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
    ●   *Zeller, et al. (2010). From stranger to friend: The effect of service learning on
        pre-service teachers’ attitudes. (revisit this article)
    ●   *​SOLOM
Week 15                     Language Variation & Standard English                             May 6
    ●   Wheeler, R. & Swords, R. (2010). ​Code switching lessons.​ Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
    ●   Martínez, R.A. (2010). “Spanglish” as a Literary Tool: Toward an Understanding of the
        Potential Role of Spanish-English Code-Switching in the Development of Academic
        Literacy. ​Research in the Teaching of English​, 124-149.
    ●   Delpit, L. (2002). ​The skin that we speak. N ​ ew York: The New Press.
    ●   Rosa, J. & Flores, N. (2017). Do you hear what I hear?: Raciolinguistic Ideologies and
        Culturally Sustaining Pedagogies. In Paris, D., & Alim, H. S. ​Culturally Sustaining
        Pedagogies Teaching and Learning for Justice in a Changing Word​. (pp. 175-190).
        Teachers College Press: New York.
                                          Week of May 6
                         Schedule Individual Conferences for Final Projects
          Second Part of May 6 class session and during office hours on Thursday, May 7
                                        Submit Tutoring Hours
                  1) Sign-in Sheet and Tutoring Log ​(scan and upload on ​Canvas​)
                           2) Final Reflection ​(scan and upload on ​Canvas​)
                            3) Last day to upload discussion board entries
                            Please Bring to the Individual Conference a
                                      (VERY) ROUGH DRAFT of
                 One (1) Linguistic Analysis Segment & Annotated Transcript
                                                                                                    11
Spring 2020                                  (09540)


ALD 329     09540           L. Turner              Acquisition of Language and Literacies
                             Course Schedule
Week 1:                      Introduction and Course Overview
Week 2:                      Language: Learning and Cognition
Week 3:                      Language Policy and Bilingual EL Education
Week 4:                      Language and Pedagogy: Why Bilingual EL Students?
Week 5:                      Language as Part of Bilingual EL Students’ Integration
Week 6:           MidTerm 1
Week 7:                      Reading, Writing & Bilingual EL Students
Week 8:                      Programs and Instruction for Bilingual EL Students
Week 9:                      Semantics & Pragmatics
Week 10:                     Phonology, Reading & Bilingual EL Students
Week 11:                     Morphology, Literacy, & Bilingual EL Students
Week 12:                     Syntax in the Classroom
Week 13:          MidTerm 2
Week 14:                     Assessment of Language and of Bilinguals
Week 15:                     Language Variation and Standard English
                                                                                       12
Spring 2020                      (09540)
