                             THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                           STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:SW n383T                                   Instructor: Starla Simmons, LCSW (she/her)
Unique Number: 88730                                     Email: starla.simmons@utexas.edu
Semester: Summer 2019                                    Office: 3.124D
Meeting time/place: Tues/Thurs                           Phone: 512-232-2703
                       1:30 pm to 4:00 pm                Office Hours: Tuesdays, 1:00 pm to 1:00 pm
                       SSW 2.122                                           Or by appointment
                                             Social Work Practice
                                                           II
  I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
  This course builds upon Social Work Practice I by deepening students’ knowledge of the generalist social
  work perspective in the application of theory and practice methods for effective and ethical service
  delivery to diverse individuals, families, groups, organizations and communities in conjunction with field
  education. Prerequisites: This course must be taken concurrently with Field Instruction II, except for those
  students having advanced standing status. It is a prerequisite for all second-year concentration courses.
  II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
  Upon completion of this course, students should be able to:
        1. Critically analyze professional values, ethical dilemmas and ethical decision making and their
            impact on service delivery, policy and practice;
        2. Identify, critique, apply and evaluate social work theories and methods from a strengths-based
            generalist perspective for effective service delivery to diverse individuals, families, groups,
            organizations and communities;
        3. Apply beginning practice skills in the development, leadership and evaluation of small groups in
            agency, organization and community settings;
        4. Identify aspects of human diversity within and between groups and the implications for this
            diversity in assessment, planning, intervention and evaluation;
        5. Demonstrate knowledge of leadership and advocacy skills, conflict management and Inter-
            professional collaboration at all levels of social work practice to promote social and economic
            justice;
        6. Apply a beginning level of skill in utilizing empirical knowledge to evaluate theoretical
            frameworks, intervention plans and practice effectiveness;
        7. Communicate effectively and professionally, both orally and in writing, assessment, intervention
            and evaluation plans for diverse client systems that enhance client strengths, capacities, assets
            and resources.
  III. EPAS COMPETENCIES
  The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on Social
  Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the UT SHSSW engages
  in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s Education Policies and
  Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
                                                          1


Using a common evaluation instrument - the Final Case Analysis assignment - this course measures the
implementation of knowledge, skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the
following competencies:
Competency 1: Demonstrate Ethical and Professional Behavior
          Outcome 1.1: Make ethical decisions by applying the standards of the NASW Code of Ethics,
          relevant laws and regulations, models for ethical decision-making, ethical conduct of research,
          and additional codes of ethics as appropriate to context.
          Outcome 1.2: Use reflection and self-regulation to manage personal values and maintain
          professionalism in practice situations.
          Outcome 1.3: Demonstrate professional demeanor in behavior; appearance; and oral, written,
          and electronic communication.
          Outcome 1.4: Use technology ethically and appropriately to facilitate practice outcomes
          Outcome 1.5: Use supervision and consultation to guide professional judgment and behavior.
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families & Groups
          Outcome 6.2: Use empathy, reflection, and interpersonal skills to effectively engage diverse
          clients and constituencies.
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families & Groups
          Outcome 7.1: Collect and organize data, and apply critical thinking to interpret information from
          clients and constituencies.
          Outcome 7.3: Develop mutually agreed-on intervention goals and objectives based on the critical
          assessment of strengths, needs, and challenges within clients and constituencies.
          Outcome 7.4: Select appropriate intervention strategies based on the assessment, research
          knowledge, and values and preferences of clients and constituencies.
Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families & Groups
          Outcome 8.1: Critically choose and implement interventions to achieve practice goals and
          enhance capacities of clients and constituencies.
          Outcome 8.3: Use inter-professional collaboration as appropriate to achieve beneficial practice
          outcomes.
          Outcome 8.4: Negotiate, mediate, and advocate with and on behalf of diverse clients and
          constituencies.
          Outcome 8.5: Facilitate effective transitions and endings that advance mutually agreed-on goals.
Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families & Groups
          Outcome 9.1: Select and use appropriate methods for evaluation of outcomes.
          Outcome 9.3: Critically analyze, monitor, and evaluate intervention and program processes and
          outcomes.
          Outcome 9.4: Apply evaluation findings to improve practice effectiveness at the micro, mezzo,
          and macro levels.
IV. TEACHING METHODS
I teach using a variety of methods with an emphasis on experiential learning for the purpose of building
skill and confidence. The generalist nature of the course content requires a didactic approach as well.
Therefore, PowerPoint lectures, role-plays, videos, class discussions, small group and dyad exercises, and
guest speakers will all be utilized. For success in this class, you must be willing to participate, take risks
and “stretch” out of you comfort zone. You are expected to ask questions to clarify expectations, provide
me with constructive feedback in a timely manner and meet with me individually as needed and/or when
requested.
Use of Canvas for this course: This class uses Canvas – a Web-based course management system with
password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu - for confidential communication such as posting
and submitting assignments. Readings that are not in the required text, assignment guidelines and
assignment grading rubrics are all posted to Canvas. Students can access Canvas Help 24/7 by calling 855-
308-2494. Students are expected to set notifications in Canvas so they receive announcements and
                                                        2


updates as soon as they are posted. If anything is getting in the way of your learning, let me know as soon
as possible so we can discuss it and problem solve together!
V. REQUIRED TEXT
        Walsh, J. (2013). Theories for Direct Social Work Practice. (3rd edition). California: Wordsworth
          Cengage Learning.
          Articles and Podcasts are assigned weekly to supplement the text. They can be found on Canvas
          with this link:
VI. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
A. Attendance and Participation                                                 (10 points)
Being a self-motivated, lifelong learner is essential to becoming a strong social work professional. It is also
important to practice new skills and learn to work effectively with other social work professionals.
Therefore, consistent attendance (you come every time, on time, and stay until dismissed), demonstrated
preparation (you complete the required readings before class) and regular participation (you share
insights, ask relevant questions, and contribute to exercises) are expectations of this course. I do not
excuse absences. It is up to you to decide whether missing class is worth the point deduction. I do ask
that you communicate in a timely manner your absence, tardy or early departure. Email communication is
preferred.
Students are expected to practice professional behavior in class. This includes, but may not be limited to,
paying attention to lectures and fellow students during discussions, showing respect for opinions that may
differ from your own, and communicating with the professor and others in a professional manner. We will
use some class time to discuss what constitutes a civil classroom. On occasion, you will be required to
complete a pop quiz or written exercise in class. These must be turned in before leaving for the day.
All electronic devices – including laptops - must be put away/silenced during class unless their use is
requested by the professor for a class exercise, or their use supports a documented disability.
Attendance & Participation points will be deducted in the following manner:
          Absence 1 will result in a loss of 0 points as long as you communicate with me in a timely and
          professional manner (-1 point if no timely, professional communication provided)
          Absence 2 will result in a loss of 2 points
          Absence 3 will result in a loss of 3 points
A pattern of absences, late arrivals or early departures (more than 3), or a pattern of poor preparation or
participation may result in disciplinary action.
                                                        3


B. Learning Profile and Reflection: (15 points)
   Students will answer in self-assessment questions that reflect their social work goals, learning styles,
   understanding of social justice. Separate questionnaire sheet can be found in Canvas.
   C. Theory Group Project (25 points)
   To study theory in-depth and practice task group skills, you and your group will develop a creative class
   presentation about a particular theory and its application to practice. Students will choose from four
   theories: Family Systems Theory; Crisis Theory; Relational Cultural Theory; and Cognitive Theory. Groups
   will be decided in class. Guidelines with grading rubric and due date can be found in Canvas.
   D. Video Role Play Project (20pt)
   This assignment is designed to help students improve their interviewing and intervention skills, as well as
   improve their self-awareness and ability to give and receive feedback. Guidelines with grading rubric and
   due dates can be found in Canvas. This project has two parts:
             1) Video & Feedback Participation (5 points): Pair up with another student to do a role-play or
                 real play. This role play/real play will demonstrate the work phase and allow you to practice
                 an intervention. Students will then show a 5-minute clip of the video to a small group from
                 the class, and exchange feedback with members of the group.
   E. Final Case Analysis (30 points)
   To help you consolidate your professional knowledge and skills acquired over Practice Class, and to
   support the school’s CSWE accreditation process, you will study a fictional case and answer a set of
   questions about the case. The case and questions will test your competency in the areas of ethics &
   professionalism, and engagement, assessment, intervention and evaluation of individuals, groups &
   families.
   VII. COURSE GRADING
    This table summarizes how you will demonstrate your learning and how each assignment is weighted:
      Assignments                                                  Points possible         % of Total Grade
         A. Participation                                         10                     10
         B.   Learning Profile and Reflection                     15                     15
         C.   Video Role Play                                     20                     20
         D. Group Theory Presentation                             25                     25
         E.   Final Case Analysis                                 30                     30
      Total:                                                      100                    100
                                                           4


The following graduate grading scale will be used to determine your final letter grade for the course. The
student who earns a high “A” for this course is one who consistently submits excellent quality work
over the entire semester.
          94. 0 and Above                                         A
          90.0 to 93.999                                          A-
          87.0 to 89.999                                          B+
          84.0 to 86.999                                          B
          80.0 to 83.999                                          B-
          77.0 to 79.999                                          C+
          74.0 to 76.999                                          C
          70.0 to 73.999                                          C-        (Class failed/no credit)
          67.0 to 69.999                                          D+
          64.0 to 66.999                                          D
          60.0 to 63.999                                          D-
          Below 60.0                                              F
Students who were admitted to the MSSW program on a conditional basis are not able to take an
incomplete for this course if the conditions for admission are still in place.
VIII. CLASS POLICIES
Social work students must adhere to the Student Standards for Professional Conduct of the UT School of
Social Work and the NASW Code of Ethics and assume responsibility for their own conduct.
          Find the MSSW Handbook at http://www.utexas.edu/ssw/current/forms/
          Find the MSSW Graduate Guide to Field at http://www.utexas.edu/ssw/field/forms/
A. Professional Conduct in Class: The professor expects students to act as professionals in class. This
means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and
show respect for one another’s opinions. We will not, nor should we, always agree with one another. In
this environment we should be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometime we will not agree
with the ideas expressed by others. However, the professor does require that students engage one
another with respect and professionalism.
B. Student Privacy & Confidentiality: Class discussions or role plays can on occasion bring up strong
emotions or raise issues of a personal nature. For student privacy, it is recommended that students not
discuss matters of a highly sensitive nature in class. If you need to talk, come see me after class. Your
privacy and confidentiality will be protected unless the matter must be reviewed by the School of Social
Work or must be reported by law (please refer to the MSSW Handbook and Title IX requirements). I will
connect you with resources in the community if your personal needs exceed what can be provided by me
or by UT services.
C. Client Privacy & Confidentiality: If class work prompts you to reflect on past or current client contact,
and sharing information about that contact is necessary for the learning process, it is your professional
obligation to protect the client’s privacy and confidentiality as much as possible by sharing judiciously and
anonymously (this applies to information shared about staff at your field agency as well).
D. Classroom Civility: A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious
and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from
each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work deals with complex
and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible
to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating
to challenging issues.
                                                        5


Personal Pronoun Preference: Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect
to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation,
gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun.
Please advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my
records.
E. Unanticipated Distress: Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to course
readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the instructor.
The instructor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments
and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If
counseling is needed, students can contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
F. Grading Policies
If you are confused by a grade or the feedback you receive on an assignment, please make an
appointment to meet with me. I enjoy talking face to face with students about how they can improve and
may give some credit back on the assignment.
Assignments are all due to Canvas on Wednesday by 5:00pm (except presentations and videos due by class
time). Assignments turned in after due date are considered late. Students will lose 5% of the assignment
point value per calendar day that an assignment remains un-submitted. On subsequent days, papers must be
submitted to Canvas by noon to avoid the additional 5% penalty. If you anticipate a problem turning in an
assignment on time, please contact me in advance. You have one free late day per semester to be used at
your discretion, but you must indicate in Canvas that you are using your “pass” when you submit the
assignment or it the pass will not be applied.
IX. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
   A. THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin
   are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member
   of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and
   respect toward peers and community.
   B. PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT & CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects students to act as
   professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in
   the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of
   diverse individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as
   ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual
   orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive
   engagement and mutual respect. Social Work deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues
   may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom
   experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this
   environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with
   the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another
   with civility, respect and professionalism.
   C. UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to
   course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the
   instructor. The instructor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course
   assignments and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support
   is
                                                          6


desired. If counseling is needed, students can contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
     D. POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are not
     private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will
     exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such
     forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted,
     linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential
     harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
          Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms of
  electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived
  by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to
  minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training.
  Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
  and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional
  image.
          Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
  obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should
  not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the
  identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must
  critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional
  relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas
  Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
  Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as
  well as the University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the
  university community, and the broader area communities.
     E. POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
     dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or
     dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity
     of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the
     student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of Students
     (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/).
     F. USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams,
     quizzes, and homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the
     class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against
     the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the
     instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic
     dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things,
     uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or
     future students.
     G. DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations
     must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities
     area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for
     users who are deaf or hard of hearing). Present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the
     semester so that needed accommodations can be discussed. The student should remind the
     professor of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
     information, visit http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
     H. RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending absence
     at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must miss a
     class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, the
     professor will
                                                         7


give the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
  I. TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the
  University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from
  discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty, instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their
  supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
  violence, or sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of University
  resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Deputy
  for the SHSSW, Professor Tanya Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report
  incidents or to obtain information. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX
  may also be found at https://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-
  sexualharassment.pdf
  J. CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
  https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You may also find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu
  on the school’s website.
  K. CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal
  matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on education supervision, and is
  protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights & Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such,
  sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted.
  Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedures for
  review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work
  education.
  L. USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as an official
  mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email for
  university and course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible to keep the
  university informed about changes to their e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly
  and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
  communications, some of which may be time- sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and
  instructions for updating their e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
  M. SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
  involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present
  some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's
  responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or community
  safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
  N. BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about someone who is acting
  differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns about
  another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the
  Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
  (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
  visithttp://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
  O. EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are
  required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is
  made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
       • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
            nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
       • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of
            class.
                                                       8


          • In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
          • Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions to do so by the Austin Fire
               Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
               office.
  IV. Course Schedule
WK      DATE:          TOPIC:                                      Readings                          Assignment
                                                                                                     Due
 1    Thursday,        Syllabus Review In Class Reading:
      6/6
                       Professional Use Dana A. Schneider, D &. Grady, M. (2015) Conscious
                       of Self           and Unconscious Use of Self: The Evolution of a
                                         Process
 2    6/11             Anti-Oppression In Canvas:
                       Social Work
                       Practice               1. Ishizuka, K. & Husain, A. (2015). Article
                                              2. Maurer, K. (2016). The invisibility of
                                                   whiteness in clinical practice:
                       Multicultural
                       Therapeutic
                       Practices
 3     6/13            Advocacy Skills   In Canvas:                                                    Learning
                                            1. Hardina, D. (2014) “Dialogue in Community             Assessment
                       Policy,              Organizing Practice”                                          Due
                       Legislation, &
                       Organizing           2. Community Organizing Handout
                       Social Work          Website review:
                       Grand Challenges     http://grandchallengesforsocialwork.org/grand-
                                            challenges-initiative/
 4     6/18            Integrating
                       Theory into           Walsh Chapter 1, 2
                       Practice
                                            In Canvas: Groups Handout
                       Person-Centered
                       Theory
                       Group Work
 5     6/20             Trauma Informed Walsh, Chapter 5
                       Care vs. Healing In Canvas:
                       Centered Care        1. McCormick, A., Scheyd, K., & Terrazas, S.
                                                 (2018). Trauma-informed care and LGBTQ
                                                 youth
                                            2. Healing Centered Engagement by Dr.
                                                 Shawn Ginwright
 6     Tuesday         Video Role Play     none                                                       Video Role
       6/25            Reviews                                                                      Play Reflection
                                                        9


  7    6/27            Video Role Play    none                                              Video Role
                      Reviews
  8    7/2            Mindfulness         1.   Summers and Viven (2018). Ecotherapy: A
                      Ecotherapy &             Forgotten Ecosystem Service Review
                      Environmental
                      Justice
  9    7/4                NO CLASS        NO CLASS
  10   7/9            Solution Focused    Walsh Chapters 10/11
                      Therapy &           In Canvas: Solution Focused Interview Guide
                      Motivational
                      Interviewing
  11   7/11           Crisis Theory       Walsh Chapters 13                               All Group
                      Group                                                               Project
                      Presentation                                                        Handouts Due
  12   7/16           Relational-         Walsh Chapter 5
                      Cultural Theory
                      Group
                      Presentation
  13   7/18           Narrative Theory    Walsh Chapter 12
                      Group
                      Presentation
  14   7/23           Cognitive Theory    Walsh Chapter 8
                      Group
                      Presentation
  15   7/25            Evaluation                                                         Final Case
                                                                                          Analysis Due
                      Professional Self
                      Care
  16   7/30           Endings,            None
                      Transitions, and
                      Celebrations
All readings, assignment guidelines, grading rubrics and other essential information will be on the
Canvas website. Check Canvas regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
Changes to the schedule may be made at Professor Simmons’ discretion and as circumstances
require. It is your responsibility to note these changes when announced. Professor Simmons will
make every effort to announce changes with as much advanced notice as possible
IV. Bibliography
 Comstock, L. D., Hammer, R. T., Strentzsch, J., Cannon, K., Parsons, J. & Salazar, G. (2008).
 Relational- cultural Theory: A framework for bridging relational, multicultural, and social justice
 competencies. Journal of counseling and development, 86.
 Cokley, K., & Garba, R. (2018). Speaking Truth to Power: How Black/African Psychology Changed the
 Discipline of Psychology. Journal of Black Psychology, 44(8), 695–721.
 Congress, E. (1997, 2005). Using the culturagram to assess and empower culturally diverse families.
 In Congress, E. (Eds.), Multicultural perspectives in working with families. New York: Springer Press,
 3-16.
 Corey, G., Corey, C. & Corey, M.S. (2010). Groups: Process and practice. Belmont, CA:
                                                      10


Brooks/Cole, CENGAGE Learning.
Davis, R. D. & Jansen, G. G. (March 1998). Making meaning of Alcoholics Anonymous for social
workers: Myths, Metaphors and Realities. Social Work, 43(2), 169-182.
Nemeth, D. G. (2015). Ecopsychology: Advances from the intersection of psychology and
environmental protection [2 volumes]. Westport: ABC-CLIO.
Fairfax, C. N. (2017). African philosophy: The center of african-centered social work. Journal of
Human Behavior in the Social Environment, 27(1-2), 7-14. doi:10.1080/10911359.2016.1252599
Hardina, D. (2014). The use of dialogue in community organization practice: Using theory, values,
and skills to guide group decision-making. Journal of Community Practice, 22(3), 365-384.
Ishizuka, K. & Husain, A. (2015). Anti-oppressive practices. In Social Worker’s Desk Reference
(3rd ed. pp.413-426). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Kabat-Zinn, J. (2005). Excerpt from Coming to Our Senses: Healing Ourselves and the World
Through Mindfulness. Published by Hyperion; January 2005; ISBN 0-7868-6756-6).
Kelley, P. & Smith, M. (2015). Narrative therapy. In Social Worker’s Desk Reference (3rd ed. pp.
287-292).New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Lankton, S.R. (2015). The use of therapeutic metaphor in social work. In Social Worker’s Desk
Reference(3rd ed. pp. 629-639). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Iacono, G. (2018). An affirmative mindfulness approach for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
queer youth mental health. Clinical Social Work Journal, 1-11.
Lee, E., & Bhuyan, R. (2013). Negotiating within whiteness in cross-cultural clinical
encounters. Social Service Review, 87(1), 98-130. doi:10.1086/669919
Maurer, K. (2016). The invisibility of whiteness in clinical practice: Case commentary on "becoming
visible: The case of colette". Clinical Social Work Journal, 44(4), 351. doi:10.1007/s10615-016-0598-x
McCormick, A., Scheyd, K., & Terrazas, S. (2018). Trauma-informed care and LGBTQ youth:
Considerations for advancing practice with youth with trauma experiences. Families in Society: The
Journal of Contemporary Social Services, 99(2), 160-169. doi:10.1177/1044389418768550
Messing, J. T., Mohr, R., & Durfee, A. (2015). Intimate partner violence and women's experiences of
grief. Child & Family Social Work, 20(1), 30-39. doi:10.1111/cfs.12051
Mizrahi, T. (2015). Community organizing principles and practice guidelines. In Social Worker’s
Desk Reference (3rd ed. pp. 894-906). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
National Association of Social Workers. (1997). National association of social workers code of
ethics.Washington, D.C.: NASW Press
Rosenzweig, J.M. & Sundborg, S.A. (2015). The neurobiology of toxic stress. In Social Worker’s
                                                   11


 Desk Reference (3rd ed. pp. 292-301). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
 Schneider, D. & Grady, M. (2015) Conscious and Unconscious Use of Self: The Evolution of a Process,
 Psychoanalytic Social Work, 22:1, 52-70
 Singer, J. B. (Host). (2007, October 24). Family psychoeducation: An interview with Carol
 Anderson. [Episode 27]. Social Work Podcast. Podcast retrieved from
 http://socialworkpodcast.blogspot.com/2007/10/family-psychoeducation-interview-with.html
 Singer, J. B. (Host). (2007, February 12). Existential therapy [Episode 7]. Social Work Podcast.
 Podcast retrieved Month Day, Year, from http://www.socialworkpodcast.com/2007/02/existential-
 therapy.html
 Steelman, S. M. (2016). Externalizing identities: An integration of narrative therapy and queer
 theory. Journal of Family Psychotherapy, 27(1), 79-84.
 Thomas Joseph Blakely, Gregory M. Dziadosz; Application of Attachment Theory in Clinical Social
 Work, Health & Social Work, Volume 40, Issue 4, 1 November 2015, Pages 283–289, https://doi-
 org.ezproxy.lib.utexas.edu/10.1093/hsw/hlv059
 Toseland & Rivas. (1998). Group Work Practice. Massachusetts: A Viacom Company.
 Vonk, M.E. (2015). The assessment and treatment of posttraumatic stress disorder. In Social
 Worker’s Desk Reference (3rd ed. pp. 601-607). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
 Vonk, M.E. & Early, T.J. (2015). Cognitive-behavioral therapy. In Social Worker’s Desk Reference
 (3rd ed. pp. 257-263). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
 Walsh, J. (2013). Theories for Direct Social Work Practice. (3rd edition). California: Wodsworth
 Cengage Learning.
 Walters, H.B. (2008). An introduction to use of self in field placement. The New Social Worker
 online.Retrieved from
 http://www.socialworker.com/home/Feature_Articles/Field_Placement/An_Introduction_to_U
 s e_of_Self_in_Field_Placement/ 8/1/3
https://medium.com/@ginwright/the-future-of-healing-shifting-from-trauma-informed-care-
to-healing-centered-engagement-634f557ce69c
                                                   12
