                                   Audience Development and Engagement
                                              (06185 | 06305 | 06630)
                                                        Fall 2019
  Class Meets: Tuesdays | 12:30 – 3:30 | BMC 4.208 classroom AND CMA 6.154 lab
  Instructor: Prof. Erin Reilly                                Office: BMC 4.368
  Email: ebreilly@utexas.edu                                   Office hours: 1-2 pm Mon (BMC 4.368)
  Phone: 207-251-1617                                          AND 4-5 pm Thurs (CMA 6.154)
                                                               OR by appointment
  TA: Jeongmin Ham                                             Office: BMC 4th floor
  Email: jham112@utexas.edu                                    Office hours: By appointment
  Undergraduate Learning Assistant: Joshua Ramirez             Office: CMA 6.154
  Email: joshramirez@utexas.edu                                Office hours: Monday 2:30-5:30 PM
                                                               Tuesday 4:00-6:00 PM
                                                               Wednesday 6:00-9:00 PM
                                                               Thursday 10:00 AM-12:00PM
 This course is part of the Undergraduate Learning Assistant (ULA) program this semester. Your ULA, Joshua
 Ramirez, was selected because he has expertise that can help you be successful in the course. Think of your ULA as
 an approachable, near-peer mentor whose purpose is to help you learn during and outside of class. Joshua will
 often be the first person you contact if you have questions about demo / lab assignments. I encourage you to take
 advantage of his office hours.
 ULAs do not grade any assignments and cannot answer questions about your grades. For questions about grades,
 please contact TA, Jeongmin Ham or Professor Erin Reilly.
                                             Course Description
Course Description:
Traditionally, audiences for content were broken up into four simple quadrants – male, female, young and old – but
now it’s possible to develop much more nuanced audience models based on fan behaviors and motivations. Rather
than the “blunt instrument” of who is accessing the content, content producers and advertisers can now gain a
better understanding of why people are accessing that content and customize their plans accordingly. Further, fans
are far more than just consumers. They make it possible for stories, artists, and teams to persist and flourish over
time. Content creators, digital strategists and marketers should pay closer attention to what fans want and need and
offer them more and better opportunities to deepen their engagement and extend it from their core passions into
other, related content and communities.
In this course, students will be introduced to the latest thinking on better understanding audiences and their
motivations, new approaches and tools for engaging audiences in different content strategies and what metrics can
be used to measure their engagement in ways that prove valuable to content creators, marketers and audiences.
  What will I learn?
                                                                1


Main skills and attitudes to be developed:
   •    Positive attitude
   •    Team collaboration
   •    Thinking skills (develop observation skills, divergent thinking and identifying patterns)
   •    Self-management
Learning Outcomes
     1.  Expose students to real-world challenges facing the media industries
     2.  Introduce students to new metrics and measurements to leverage engagement
     3.  Encourage students to test out multiple research methods to measure and collect data on engagement
     4.  Construct personalized audience profiles and fan journeys
     5.  Learn how to turn this into content strategies to activate an audience
How will I learn?
    •    Writing Assignments                                          •   Pair Share Activities
    •    Guest Lectures                                               •   Final Team Projects
    •    Classroom Discussions
Pre-requisites for the course:
N/A
How to succeed in this course:
My role is to be a “guide on the side”… to help you acquire the skills needed to succeed as a strategist /
engagement expert.
Your role is to show up, be present, have a willingness to learn, do good work and accept constructive feedback
from myself and your peers.
                        Overall, let’s have some fun …we’re talking about our passions after all!
                                          Course Requirements
Required Materials
   •    Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green. Spreadable Media: Creating Meaning and Value in a Networked
        Culture (New York: New York University Press, 2013)
I may periodically post additional required readings to the class website at Canvas. These readings will be short
articles in mainstream publications, such as newspapers and magazines, that help shed contemporary light on
issues discussed in this course.
Required Devices
Computer, ability to record and edit videos.
Classroom expectations
Class attendance
Attendance is required at all class, presentation, client and team meetings. We may also have a significant number
of meetings that are off site and/or outside the scheduled class time. There will be no excused absences. Failure to
attend any of these meetings will affect your grade and could reduce your final grade by as much as two letter
grades. Attendance means showing up to the class or meeting on time. Habitual lateness will affect your grade.
                                                                2


Class participation
Teamwork: This course is primarily structured around teamwork. You will self-assign yourself to a pair and a group,
and the bulk of your work in the course will be carried out and evaluated based on these teams. Teams will consist
of varying personalities, skills and interests and you must find a way to manage these differences. The ability to
cooperate, to communicate and to work effectively is essential to creating successful strategies and creative briefs,
both in this class and in the real world. Once students have been assigned to teams, I will not adjust the
membership of these teams. Although I don’t anticipate any problems, if issues do arise I expect you to resolve
them yourselves, just as you would in a real-world job situation.
Deadlines: This class simulates the real world, and in the real world, deadlines are non-negotiable. All assignments
must be handed in on time. Late assignments or projects will not be accepted and you will not earn any points (i.e.
you will receive a grade of 0) for that assignment. The usual litany of excuses (I slept through my alarm, I missed the
bus, I have a cold, my grandmother died) won’t work. In the real world, failure to meet a deadline could result in
you losing your job. Now is the time to practice time management and adherence to deadlines.
Time management: This course is very demanding on your time. Your teammates in this class will judge you on
how much, and the quality of, work you contribute to your class project. Do not lose track of what is most
important.
Communication: The primary way I will communicate with you outside of class is through e-mail. You are
responsible for making sure you get any messages from me and you are responsible for the content of those
announcements. I may notify you via e-mail about a change in meeting times or assignment deadlines. Failure to
check your e-mail does not excuse you from meeting the responsibilities outlined in the message. At a minimum,
you should check your e-mail once every day.
Plagiarism: Everything you produce in this class must be your original work. If you have help from anyone outside
this class it will be considered a breach of UT’s policy on Scholastic Integrity and will be dealt with accordingly.
Assignments
1. Auto-Ethnography | 5% (Individual Project)
     Write a short five-page auto-ethnography describing their own history as a fan of sports, music, a popular
     media franchise or anything else. It’s best to choose one genre of fanship to focus on. You should explore
     whether or not you think of yourself as a fan, what kinds of fan practices you engage with, how you define
     a fan, how you became invested in the fanship that have been part of your life, and how your feelings
     about being a fan might have adjusted over time. (NOTE: As you learn the Leveraging Engagement
     framework, you will return to this assignment week after week so the more detail you can offer, the
     better.)
2. Learning a Fandom | 5% (Individual Project)
     PART 1. Find, read and discuss three articles -- 1) Fan scholarship from an academic journal, 2) Industry
     coverage, like an article from Variety, and 3) Fan Participation / Production such as social platforms, blogs or
     social media thread. All three should relate to your fandom of choice.
     PART 2. Share your 3 articles and outline the key points about each reading and how this ties to the Leveraging
     Engagement model. I’m looking more for insight into the fandom rather than summary of article content.
     Consider the following questions in your response:
     •   What is unique about this fandom?
     •   What surprised you the most?
                                                               3


   •    How did the different sources interpret, influence and inform how to study this fandom in particular, and
        fandom in general?
3. Project #1: Leveraging Engagement Research Plan & Analysis | 30% (Teams of 3)
      Client(s) will come in and offer a brief identifying their core offering, who they currently are targeting and
      what they have to offer. Your goal is to break into teams of 3 and conduct research to better understand
      who their audience is, why they’re motivated to engage with the brand, what context is best suited for that
      engagement.
      Part of this project will include developing tools and conducting research using the three methods.
      Ethnography Activities
      Reflect on the sample interview tools, and design your own Interview tool related to the fans your team
      chooses to study.
      Survey
      Review the sample surveys to design your own survey. Make sure to include a screener, a section on
      Leveraging Engagement, and build in Qualtrics to make use of blocking different sections necessary to
      analyze.
      Data Analytics
      Review the 4 types of data analytics. Choose 1 and design the tool collecting information on your fandom.
      After data collection, your team will need to analyze the data and write an audience profile report shaping a
      profile(s) of who the audience is, why they are motivated to engage in client(s) brand and what is the right
      engagement strategy for reaching them.
4. Case Studies – The Good, the Not So Bad and the Ugly | 15% (Teams of 3)
   Identify three different engagement strategies that a major brand / story world executed. Each student will
   come to class with 3 examples noted by this project title. In groups of 3, students will discuss:
      - why the campaign managers chose this direction
      - why was this campaign’s direction successful or unsuccessful
      - what are some ways you can see how they tried to use the fan motivators, how did it not work?
   Using one of the problematic campaigns from your group as the foundation, REMIX it into a new campaign that
   would be more successful. Identify the motivators and situational triggers outlining the key takeaways to
   improving the brand campaign. The pitch can be in the form of images and a short summary of the experience
   you'd want to offer. Consider the following questions in your response:
       • What is the new campaign?
       • Are you targeting a certain mindset in the fandom?
       • What activates your fandom in relation to access, audience, agenda and attractors?
       • In what ways does applying the campaign chosen work for your fandom?
       • What could go wrong?
5. Day in the Life (Pair Share Activity IN CLASS) | 10% (Teams of 2)
   The goal of this pair share assignment is to work as a team to identify either yours or your partner’s fandom
   written in the Auto-Ethnography writing assignment. Be creative in depicting a day in the life of the fan,
   highlighting his/her interaction with the industry. Together, use a timeline tool, such as
   https://www.officetimeline.com/, to brainstorm a 24 hour period, showing how many times and in what
   context the fan interacts with the industry. Visually display this and share with the class via Blackboard. Make
   sure to consider Who, What, When, Where and Why throughout the 24 hours and answer the following
   question: “What levers does this industry have to attract, engage and transact with this fan?” Include with the
                                                              4


    Timeline Visualization a written 1 page summary of the fan’s day offering insight into the fan’s engagement
    mindset and concrete examples of actions to take based on how the fan is motivated to engage with media.
6. Build a Think & Do Facilitator’s Guide – TEAM FINAL PROJECT | 30% (Teams of 5)
     Your final Team Project is based on the knowledge and understanding you’ll accumulate throughout this
     course. As a team, you will complete and showcase the following steps in building an Experience Designer’s
     Facilitation Guide:
         1. Conduct research on the problem,
         2. Analyze the audience,
         3. Identify some specific mindsets that have at least some commonalities in motivation,
         4. Develop a full day ideation session to engage the client on problem and audience, and
         5. Present the facilitation with a hands-on activity as example for the class to participate in.
     Work in Teams. Break out the roles and responsibilities up front to make sure the different parts of the
     strategy is complete. Each part requires the input from the other so it’s important that you share weekly with
     each other and get feedback from the rest in your team.
     Use Client Brief to develop Think & Do Facilitator’s Guide. This should be a well-thought out ideation
     experience with one of the activities implemented with class as example.
     Points to consider in the design:
         • Weeks 2-5 provided you with all the steps and tools for research, measuring and identifying your
               audience’s mindsets to define personas.
         • Weeks 6-9 provided case study examples and techniques for ideation. This will be useful in ensuring all
               the detail your team will be assessed on is included in your final output.
         • Your facilitator’s guide / presentation / final activity should include visual, audio and written material.
         • It should portray a deep understanding of the property’s brand and its relationship to the audience.
         • Build the Think & Do ideation session on a pain point where the property could do better to involve
               their audience.
         • Be specific on different actions that will embrace the audience but also offer nuances within the
               ideation that will target different sub-sets of the fandom.
Grading for this Course
The following table represents how you will demonstrate your learning and how we will assess the degree to
which you have done so.
 Assignments                                                        Points possible            Percent of Total Grade
  1. A u t o - E t h n o g r a p h y                                            20                         5
  2. L e a r n i n g a F a n d o m                                              20                         5
  3. Case Studies – The Good, the Not So Bad and the Ugly                20 – The Good                     15
                                                                         20 – Not so Bad
                                                                          20 – The Ugly
                                                                              60 total
  4. Leveraging Engagement                                             50 – Research Plan                  30
  Research Plan (5) / Tools Designed (10) / Analysis (15)              30 – Tools Designed
                                                                          100 – Analysis
                                                                             180 total
                                                                  5


    5. Day in the Life / Pair Share Assignment                                     50                            10
    6. Final Team Think & Do Facilitator’s Guide and Proposed          50 - Design & Conduct                     30
       Ideation                                                                 research
                                                                          100 - Offer Analysis
                                                                      50 - Develop Facilitation
                                                                                Strategy
                                                                    100 - Present Engagement
                                                                           Strategy (Ideation
                                                                              Techniques)
                                                                                  300 total
    7. In-Class Activities / Discussions                                           15                            5
7. 8. Extra Credit –Attend Imagine Moody MeetUp (2 Wednesday
                                                     nd
                                                                                    2                          Extra
8.     of every month | 6-8PM | @CMA 6.154)
    9. Submit to D3 Pitch Competition and Attend                                    2                          Extra
        Event October 27 (12-6 PM)
                                                                                  645+                         100%
   Course Schedule: A Weekly Breakdown
       All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
       https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
       Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
       note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
       much advanced notice as possible).
           Week              Topics/Daily Activities          Readings, Viewings &             Deliverable/ Due Dates
                                                                   Homework
           1–       Introduction                        Readings:
           9/3       • Review Syllabus                    • A Brief History of Media
                     • Discuss Projects                     Fandom
                     • Course Expectations                • Spreadable Media: What
                                                            Constitutes Meaningful
                                                            Participation?
                    ER Lecture:
                    Turning Audiences into Fans         Watch:
                                                          • Henry Jenkins / TED talk on
                    Activities:                             Participatory Culture
                     1. Group Intros w Favorite Toy
                        (learn about Association)       Homework:
                     2. Auto-Ethnography                  • Complete Auto-
                                                            Ethnography
           2–       ER Lecture:                         Readings:                           Auto-Ethnography DUE!
           9/10     Leveraging Engagement Framework       • Ivan Askwith:
                                                            Reconceptualizing TV as an
                    Activity: Why You’re a Fan?             Engagement Medium
                                                          • Erin Reilly: Fan Favorites
                    Real-World Clients:                   • Fans. Passions. Brands.
                                                            Global Football Study 2014
                                                                  6


      Present Client Brief (these will be
      used for entire class)
                                          Homework:
      Introduce Project #1 (Discover /      • Learning a Fandom (located
      Define):                                in Assignments)
       • Break into 6 Teams (about 5
         people each)
       • Review Requirements
3–    Ethnography: Fan Behavior Tools     Readings:                      Learning a Fandom DUE!
9/17                                        • Desperately Seeking
      Guest Lecture:                          Methodologies – New
      Ana Aguilar, PhD Candidate / Erin’s     Directions in Fan Studies
      RA for CxC Study                        Research
                                            • Netnography Chapter 4: The
      Activity:                               Method of Netnography by
       • Coding in dScout                     Robert Kozinets
      ** Note: Professor Reilly out of    Project #1:
      town **                               • Design Interview tools
                                            • Conduct Ethnography (10
                                              people)
4–    Survey: Fan Behavior Tools          Project #1:                    Project #1 Check-In:
9/24                                        • Design survey tool         Ethnography
      Guest Lecture:                        • Conduct Survey (30 people)
      Mark Scheckner
      IPSOS Media Development Division    Watch:
                                            • Crash Course in NLP
                                            • Social Network Analysis
5–    ER Lecture:                         Readings:                      Project #1 Check-In: Survey
10/1  Creating Personas …Making sense       • Kids are Emotional
      of data analysis                        Schedulers
      Guest Lecture:                      Project #1:
       • Josh Barbour (basic social           • Collect and Analyze
         network analysis)                         Data
       • Evan (SPSS workshop, R…)
6–    Guest Lecture:                      Readings:                      Project #1 Check-In: Data
10/8  Matt Ochab, VP of Brand               • The Attention Economy      Analysis
      Engagement, Image Metrics             • Crowdfunding Bible
      Activity:
      Workshop Personas
7–    Research Plans Review               Final Project:                 Project #1 DUE!
10/15  • Students present Audience          • Refine question, Identify  Final Analysis / Audience
         Personas to Clients                  participants needed in the Persona Presentations to
                                              room and perfect place to  Clients
      Introduce Final Project (Develop &      ideate.
      Deliver):
       • Review Requirements
                                                    7


  8–        ER Lecture:                       Final Project:                   Case Studies – The Good,
  10/22     What is a Think & Do? (The 5 Ps)    • Begin to Sketch out Ideation the Not So Bad and the Ugly
                                                  Techniques                   DUE!
            Activities:
            Exploring Ideation Techniques
  9–        Workshop Final Project            Final Project:
  10/29                                         • Sketch out Ideation
            Activities:                           Techniques related to
             • Day in the Life (as example)       answering your client’s
             • Brainstorm other Ideations         problem
  10 –      Workshop Final Project                                             Ideation Techniques Due
  11/5      for feedback
            (1 hour each per Team)
  11 –      Workshop Final Project            Final Project:                   Ideation Techniques Due
  11/12     for feedback                        • Finalize your Facilitator’s
            (1 hour each per Team)                Guide.
                                                • Create Assets for Session
  12 –      Finalize your T&D Guide and       Final Project:
  11/19     Proposed Ideation                   • Make Video Brief
  13 –      HOLD Office Hours
  11/26     Final Project Team Reviews
  14 –      Final Team Project Presentations                                   Evaluations!
  12/3
** All of these weeks are subject to change to maximize your learning and personalize it to the group. **
                                                        8


                                                     Policies
Classroom Policies
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also
encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I
am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
Grading Policies
Writing Assignments
You will be required to write three papers, the Auto-Ethnography (due Week 1), Learning a Fandom (due Week 2)
and the Case Study (due Week 8).
In-class Activities
There will be several in-class activities and exercises meant to lay the foundation for understanding different
methods for designing, measuring and implementing engagement strategies. Some of these activities are graded,
others are for credit. Failure to participate in any of the activities (or to participate with lackluster enthusiasm and
professionalism) will knock your final grade down a letter.
Final Team Project –Engagement Campaigns
You will carry out engagement campaigns as the final project. You will be placed in groups of three students at the
beginning of the semester, and this will be your group for the semester. You and your teammates will work as an
engagement strategy team. You will pitch your campaign at the end of the semester indicated in the syllabus.
Attendance and Professionalism
Attendance at all classes and meetings is required. It is also assumed that students will be active participants in
class. Simply being present in the room is not sufficient; you must also be engaged and involved scholars.
Participation – not just attendance – is integral to a successful, enjoyable class and to you earning a high grade.
Active participation means contributing to the discussion, listening to what your colleagues have to say and
engaging with the readings and in-class activities. It means showing up on time, not checking Facebook or email on
your computer, not texting on your phone. NOTE that if you do not participate in class discussions, you will not earn
full points for attendance even if you come to every class.
Peer Evaluations
You will be asked to provide an assessment of your and your teammates' contributions to the
Final project. They will be taken into account in final assignment of grades.
Grading System:
This class will be graded using the plus/minus grading system, as outlined by the university’s provost office
(http://www.utexas.edu/provost/planning/plus-minus/). Advertising and PR majors are required to have a
minimum grade of C in all communication courses and in all required and elective courses in order to continue in
the program.
NOTES on Grading:
    • Late work is not accepted.
    • I will NOT be rounding up percentage grades or points. So if you earn an 89.6% that translates into a B+ and
        will not be rounded up to 90% (an A-).
                                                                9


    •    Any questions or comments about a grade must be presented in writing within seven (7) days after the grade
         is announced or posted.
    •    When I grade your work, you start with zero points. You earn points based on the quality of the work and the
         accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not start with 100 points and then lose them
         based on mistakes you make. Your final points represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the
         number of points “taken away” for errors or omissions.
 Absences
 The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating circumstances due
 to an emergency. You will be given attendance/participation credit for any session that you miss that is
 documented to the teaching team in writing by a medical doctor’s statement, or an official statement from a UT
 faculty member about an ensemble or other organization’s off-campus commitment. NO OTHER ABSENCES WILL BE
 EXCUSED.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
    •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
    •    You have a right to respect.
    •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
    •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
    •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
    •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
         environment.
    •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated,
         excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
    • You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching
         team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
    • You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your
         experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your
         energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
    • You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
    • You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these
         standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
     Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
     differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities.
     Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to
     address you by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please
     advise me of this preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of
     The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
     academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that
     are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you
     will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
                                                                  10


     You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the            University Honor Code
     which can be found at the following web address:
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop
     deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q
     drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
     Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently.
     If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
     possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There
     are also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
     This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
     that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to
     share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me
     know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you
     discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions.
     If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986
     (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
     available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
     support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
     depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
     http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
     year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s
     classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for
     more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please
     visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
     If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
                                                                11


      Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
      right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
      Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
      assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions.
      UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its
      forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
              1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
              2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
                    become involved in a Title IX investigation.
              3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
      Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
      Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a
      Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion,
      or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be
      sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
      remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
      information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
      titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a
fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
  •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
      nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
  •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
  •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
      unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
      Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
  •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
      www.utexas.edu/emergency
                                                                 12
