                                                   German 507: First Year German II
                                                              Unique: 81635
                                                     Department of Germanic Studies
                                                       University of Texas at Austin
                                                              SUMMER 2019
     Instructor: Diane Beer                                       E-mail: diane.beer@utexas.edu
     Class Day/Time: MTWTH/8.30-11.30, F/8.30-10.00               Classroom: RLM 5.126
     Office Hours: Mondays 12.00-13.00                            Office Location: 374 Burdine Hall
     About the Course:
     German 507, a second-semester German course, continues instruction begun in German 506. (Note: If you have prior
     knowledge of German and did not take GER 506, you must take a placement test before taking classes at UT.) By the end
     of German 507, students will be familiar with most basic structures of the German language and will have developed basic
     cultural knowledge about the German-speaking world. As vocabulary and grammar sophistication grow, students will become
     increasingly proficient at expressing their thoughts, feelings, and opinions on a variety of subjects related to everyday life.
     To this aim, each lesson centers on linguistic, communicative, and cultural goals.
     The functional communicative approach that we take in this course - and in the larger German program at UT - focuses on
     learning to use German language forms, i.e., grammar and vocabulary, in meaningful contexts in a variety of real-life
     situations and across spoken and written genres. To help students develop their ability to communicate effectively in German,
     they are expected to come prepared for class, use German, and actively participate in pair and group activities. Students
     should expect to spend two hours studying for each class period in order to prepare effectively for class meetings and to
     keep up with the pace of the class. Students who are not able to make this commitment over the entire span of the upcoming
     semester should not take this course.
     Required Course Materials:
     1. Textbook: Christine Anton, Tobias Barske, Jane Grabowski, & Megan McKinstry. Sag mal. An Introduction to German
           Language and Culture. Vista Higher Learning. 2nd EDITION!
     2. Sag mal Basic Supersite
     3. Sag mal WebSAM (Student Activities Manual)
     The textbook and access codes to the online materials can be purchased as a bundle [ISBN: 9781618577078] at the
     COOP bookstore. Please double check that you purchase the right edition. If you order these materials from other sources
     and/or if you purchase the wrong edition, you are responsible for possible delays in shipping of materials and additional
     costs.
     Assessment:
     Your progress in the class will be assessed during the semester across the following categories:
         Participation and Preparation: 10%                                    4 Chapter Tests:      30%
         Daily Homework:                  15%                                  Quizzes:              15%
         3 Writing Tasks:                 15%                                  Oral Exam:            15%
Participation and Preparation (10%)
Daily attendance and active participation in class are necessary and expected components of your language learning experience
and will be assessed weekly (please see criteria below). You are allowed up to 3 absences for illnesses, doctor’s visits, family
matters, job interviews, etc. Beginning with the 4th absence, your course average will drop dramatically (a 1% deduction off of
your final grade per missed day). Coming late to class can be disruptive. Every two times you arrive late to class will count as
                                                                    1


one full day absence. Family emergencies that can be substantiated to the satisfaction of the language program director or
serious illnesses verified by a doctor’s note may be treated as exceptions.
The following criteria are used to determine your participation grade (using a 10-point system):
10 always well-prepared (i.e., does assigned readings and written work before class; fully participates in online discussions);
           is attentive and volunteers often; tries to use German with classmates and instructor; makes the most of each activity;
           shows real resourcefulness and imagination in using the language; responds to and engages classmates in a respectful
           manner; remains critical and open-minded toward target and native culture.
8 usually well-prepared; is attentive and volunteers occasionally; tries to use German with classmates and instructor; makes
           the most of each activity; completes exercises with some imagination and resourcefulness; makes some effort to engage
           fellow students; shows some development of cultural sensitivity.
5 adequately prepared and attentive (often waits to be called upon); occasionally needs to be reminded to use German with
           instructor and classmates; responds and completes exercises with minimal imagination; does not engage classmates
           beyond the minimum requirements for an assignment.
3 is unprepared; makes little effort to participate or complete exercises; rarely tries to use German with instructor or
           classmates.
0 makes no contribution to class whatsoever; is not on task.
Daily Homework (15%)
Daily homework provides regular occasions to practice your German and is therefore key to your language development. Most
of the homework is done online through Sag mal’s accompanying Supersite (VHL portal: www.vhlcentral.com). The exercises
target reading, listening, writing and speaking abilities. On the Supersite, you get immediate feedback on exercises. Since you
can do these online exercises repeatedly throughout the semester, they also serve as excellent study tools for quizzes and tests.
Homework must be done by midnight on the due date indicated by your instructor, however I strongly recommend doing some
portions of the homework on a daily basis instead of ‘pulling an all-nighter’ just before the deadline. Language learning is far
more effective if it becomes a daily habit. Homework turned in late will be penalized 5% for every day late. Your instructor will
provide you with registration instructions to get you started. Should you experience any technical difficulties, it is your
responsibility to contact VHL’s technical support immediately at http://support.vhlcentral.com, or tel. 800-248-2813. Their staff
is able to trouble-shoot computer difficulties much better when they are contacted soon after issues occur.
Writing Tasks (15%)
Three writing tasks over the course of the semester give you the opportunity to strengthen your writing abilities in German in
meaningful and creative ways. Here, the focus is not only on being able to use certain linguistic forms correctly, but also on
developing writing that shows an ability to create a cohesive text and an awareness of audience within an identifiable genre. Your
texts will be assessed according to your ability to address general task requirements, engage with content material, and use
appropriately complex and accurate language.
With our writing-process approach, you will turn in two versions of the assignment. First drafts will be graded by your instructor
and returned with extensive feedback to help you revise your work. With the second draft, you can improve the final essay grade
up to two half-grade points. A very good revision can improve a grade from a ‘B’ to an ‘A-’; a satisfactory revision can improve
a grade from a ‘B’ to a ‘B+’; a weak revision, however, will not improve a grade. Please note: The rewrite is considered part of
this task and is therefore obligatory. If you do not turn in a second draft that shows you have attended to corrections noted in
your first draft, your essay grade will go down an entire letter grade. Writing tasks are due on the date indicated on the syllabus.
For each calendar day that a paper is submitted late, the grade for the paper will be deducted 10% points.
4 Written Chapter Tests (30%)
Each of the four tests covers material from one chapter. However, since language learning is cumulative, note that each exam
inherently covers all previously learned material. The exams test your knowledge of and ability to use German language forms
(i.e., grammar and vocabulary) introduced in the chapters. Listening and reading comprehension, as well as writing abilities will
also be assessed. If you arrive late for a test, you must still finish the test by the end of the class period. If you miss a test without
having obtained permission from the instructor in advance, you will not receive any credit for the test. Documented medical or
                                                                     2


family emergencies, religious holidays, and military service that can be substantiated to the satisfaction of the coordinator will be
treated as exceptions.
Quizzes - Kurzschreiben (15%)
To ensure regular studying from the textbook and other instructional materials, there will be four short in-class writing
assignments (“Kurzschreiben”) scheduled across the four chapters targeting key vocabulary and grammar. Please note that no
make-ups will be given for missed quizzes. Also, please be aware your instructor may give “pop” quizzes in class or assign
“take-home” quizzes to be done outside of class (format open). These quizzes will count towards your overall quiz grade.
Oral Exam (15%)
The oral exam is designed to assess dialogic speaking abilities developed over the course of the semester. With partners,
students will prepare and act out short role plays for topics related to the chapters studied. Your instructor will provide information
for you at a later date on the format and content of the exam. The exam will be administered during the last week of classes.
Grading Scale:
The following grading scale will be used to determine your final course grade:
              A       93-100 %              B       83-86.9 %              C       73-76.9 %              D       63-66.9 %
              A-      90-92.9 %             B-      80-82.9 %              C-      70-72.9 %              D-      60-62.9 %
              B+      87-89.9 %             C+      77-79.9 %              D+      67-69.9 %              F      below 59.9 %
Please note: There are no incompletes given in German 507. A grade of C or better is required to enroll in German 612 (i.e., a
C- is not a passing grade).
Placement Exams:
If you are new to UT and have taken German before, or if you have acquired German in any other context (e.g., family, extensive
stay in a German-speaking country, etc.), you must take the placement exam/credit by examination test offered by UT’s Center
for Teaching and Learning to ensure that you are attending the appropriate course and that you can claim credit for courses.
See the schedule and register immediately at: http://ctl.utexas.edu/programs-and-services/student-testing-services/.
Errors and mistakes
Errors and mistakes are inevitable. Your instructor fosters an atmosphere where mistakes will be treated respectfully.
Language learning requires risk taking, and it is important for you to feel safe and relaxed, so that you can speak up in front of
the class without any anxiety, even if you are not certain whether your contribution is 100% correct. Please do not hesitate to
contact your instructor if there is anything in the classroom that prevents you from speaking in class.
Your Next Course:
When you complete GER 507 with a grade of C or higher, you are eligible to take GER 612.
Advising, Upper-Division German, Majoring and Minoring:
For        information        about        majoring         or       minoring       in       German,         please         go       to
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/germanic/undergraduate/Advising.php.
Study Abroad in Würzburg, Germany:
The Department of Germanic Studies offers a number of study abroad opportunities including a summer program (the German
and European Studies Summer Program in Würzburg) that specifically targets language students like you. We offer two language
options:
1) GER 612 for students who completed GER 506 and 507 (or GER 604) before the start of the program. This fulfills your UT
      language requirement!
2) GER 330C, an upper-division Composition and Conversation course for students who have successfully completed GER 612.
In addition, you can enroll in courses in literature, art history, economics, and politics in Germany, taught in English. Up to 9 UT
                                                                    3


credits can be earned. The program also includes a rich cultural excursion program that includes a 5-day trip to Berlin.
Throughout the 10-week program, students are accompanied by a UT-Austin faculty member. For more information, please see
our web site (www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/germanic/StudyAbroad/Wuerzburg.php), or contact Dr. Peter Hess (tel. 512-232-
6352, phess@austin.utexas.edu).
Academic Integrity:
Please keep in mind that language learning is a long-term process and necessarily involves making mistakes. Your instructor is
there to help you along the way, but ultimately the effort must come from you to make the experience worthwhile.
                                                     University of Texas Honor Code
             The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
              opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through
                              integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
1. Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code. Any work submitted by a student
      in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work, unless the instructor explicitly allows collaboration.
2. You are encouraged to study together and to discuss information and concepts covered in lecture and the sections with
      other students. You can give “consulting” help to or receive “consulting” help from such students.
3. Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student and the student who gave material to be
      copied will both automatically receive a zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended to
      include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
4. During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not permitted during the examinations, nor may
      you compare papers, copy from others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during the examinations will
      result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
5. Using online translation packages (e.g., Google Translate) is not permissible. Unlike dictionaries and grammar references,
      such programs simply provide ONE translation, rather than allowing you to choose among various words/tenses, etc. to
      come up with the best word or phrase on your own. Moreover, translation programs very often produce inaccurate, incorrect
      translations, and are easy to identify. Students will learn far more by doing their own work and will avoid risking serious
      academic consequences.
Students who do not comply with University rules on scholastic integrity are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and
the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, visit the Student
Judicial Services website at deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Students with Disabilities:
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community
Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259, http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Accommodations for Religious Holidays:
By UT Austin policy, students must notify their instructor of pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance
of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious
holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students:
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility
to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may
be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at: http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
                                                                     4


The class will use the course management site Canvas, accessible to each enrolled student through his/her UT Direct account.
E-mail reminders and updates will be sent through this site.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL):
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone
your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean
of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Title IX and Sexual Harassment
The University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from discriminatory conduct
based on gender. As required by Title IX, the University encourages any student or non-student who thinks that he or she has
been subjected to sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence) or sexual misconduct by another student,
member of the faculty or staff, or campus visitor or contractor, to immediately report the incident to any of the individuals persons
or offices listed below.
  Institutional Title IX Coordinator                               Deputy Title IX Coordinator for Students
  University Compliance Services                                   Student Emergency Services
  2.206 UT Administration Building (UTA)                           Office of the Dean of Students
  512-232-3992                                                     4.104 Student Services Building (SSB)
                                                                   512-471-5017
Students may also report incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual violence) or sexual misconduct to
any university Responsible Employee, who is then required to promptly notify any of the above Title IX coordinators of the
reported incident. Complaints or allegations of student-on-student sex discrimination, sexual harassment (including sexual
violence) or sexual misconduct will be handled by the Office of the Dean of Students. Cases of sexual violence may also be
reported to the University of Texas Police Department, the City of Austin Police Department and other local law enforcement
authorities. The Title IX Coordinators can assist individuals with contacting these law enforcement agencies.
Emergency Evacuation Policy:
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated
or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
• Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be
      the one you used when you entered the building.
• Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
• In the event of an evacuation, follow your instructor’s instructions.
Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or
the Fire Prevention Services office.
SB11
Of particular relevance to this class is one of the responsibilities of LTC owners: Texas Penal Code, Section 46.035(a-1) requires
that concealed weapons not be visible and be on or about the owner’s person. The nature of the language classroom is one in
which you very possibly will move around and out of your seat quite frequently. Licensed carriers are solely responsible for
ensuring that any concealed weapon remain on or about their persons at all times—including group work, work at the
blackboard, or making presentations in front of the class.
                                                                    5


                                   Kalender für Deutsch 507 – Sommer II 2019
All dates and assignments are tentative and can be modified by the instructor.
                                             Im Unterricht                                     Zu Hause
                     Datum                   (prepare in textbook for this date)    (assignments besides daily online
                                                                                              homework)
            Mo          15.7.                Willkommen, Kennenlernen
                                             Wiederholung: Kapitel 1-4
                                                          KAPITEL 5
                                             Lektion 5A: Feste feiern
                                             Kommunikation
            Di          16.7.                Fotoroman, Kultur: Das Oktoberfest
                                             Strukturen: Perfekt (Teil 1)
            Mi          17.7.                Strukturen: Akkusativpronomen,
                                             Dativpronomen
 1. Woche                                    Wiederholung
                                             Einführung in die 1. Schreibaufgabe
            Do          18.7.                Lektion 5B: Kleidung
                                             Kommunikation
                                                            Quiz 1
                                             Fotoroman, Kultur: Deutsche
                                             Modewelt
            Fr          19.7.                Strukturen: Perfekt (Teil 2), Wissen
                                             vs. Kennen
                                             Strukturen: Wechsel-Präpositionen
            Mo          22.7.                Rollenspiel
                                             Wiederholung
                                                            TEST 1
            Di          23.7.                             KAPITEL 6
                                             Lektion 6A: Zu Hause
                                             Kommunikation, Fotoroman                        Schreiben #1
                                             Einführung in die 2. Schreibaufgabe
                                             (E-mail)
 2. Woche   Mi          24.7.                Kultur: Fribourg
                                             Strukturen: Präteritum, Da- und Wo-
                                             Komposita
            Do          25.7.                Strukturen: Koordinierende
                                             Konjunktionen, Video
                                             Wiederholung
            Fr          26.7.                Lektion 6B: Hausarbeit
                                             Kommunikation, Fotoroman
                                                            Quiz #2
            Mo          29.7.                Kultur: Haushaltsgeräte
                                             Strukturen: Perfekt vs Präteritum
            Di          30.7.                Strukturen: Trennbare Verben im
                                             Perfekt, Rollenspiel
 3. Woche   Mi          31.7.                Wiederholung
                                                            TEST 2
            Do          1.8.                               KAPITEL 7
                                             Lektion 7A: Jahreszeiten
                                                           6


                        Kommunikation
                        Fotoroman; Kultur: Windenergie
                        Einführung in die 3. Schreibaufgabe
           Fr   2.8.    Strukturen: Trennbare und
                        untrennbare Verben
                        im Präteritum
                        Strukturen: Lokale Präpositionen
                        Wiederholung, Video
                        Lektion 7B: Reisen                    Schreiben #2
           Mo   5.8.
                        Kommunikation
                                       Quiz #3
           Di   6.8.    Fotoroman; Kultur: Flughafen
                        Frankfurt
                        Kultur: Flughafen Frankfurt
4. Woche   Mi   7.8.    Strukturen: Infinitivsätze,
                        Temporalangaben
                        Rollenspiele
           Do   8.8.    Strukturen: Unbestimmte Pronomen,
                        Wiederholung
           Fr   9.8.                    TEST 3
                                      KAPITEL 8
                        Lektion 8A: Auto und Rad fahren
                        Kommunikation
           Mo   12.8.   Fotoroman
                        Kultur: Die erste Autofahrt
                                                              Schreiben #3
                        Strukturen: Plusquamperfekt,
                        Komparativ & Superlativ
           Di   13.8.   Wiederholung, Video
                        Lektion 8B: Technik & Medien
                        Kommunikation
5. Woche   Mi   14.8.                  Quiz #4
                        Fotoroman; Kultur: Max-Planck-
                        Gesellschaft
           Do   15.8.   Strukturen: Genitiv,
                        Demonstrativpronomen
           Fr   16.8.   Rollenspiel, Wiederholung
                                        TEST 4
           Mo   19.8.             Mündliche Prüfung
6. Woche
                                     7
