                             Africa/Indian Ocean World
                                         HIS 350L
                    Venue and Time: T 3:30 pm-6:30 pm, MEZ 2.122
              Instructor: Toyin Falola, Email: toyinfalola@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description:
        This course explores the connected histories of the geographical regions and
economic communities that share the littoral space of the Indian Ocean. Historians have
described the Indian Ocean World in relation to varied conceptions of time, space, and
cultural location. Economic historians have identified it as a sophisticated and durable
system of long-distance exchange that connects Africa and China and all points in
between. Historical scholarship set in the intersection between economic and cultural
history looks at this vast oceanic region as an area of social and cultural diversity rooted
in civilizations such as the ‘Irano-Arabic,’ ‘Hindu,’ and ‘Chinese.’ But such definitions
based on rise and fall of civilizations marginalize the significant role of East African
societies in the making of the Indian Ocean World. Therefore, recent historiography
describes the Indian Ocean as an interregional arena of economy and culture, which
                                                                                           1


stands somewhere between the generalities of the ‘world system’ and the specificities of
particular regions. Through an engagement with such historiographical shifts, this course
explores the connected histories of Africa in the Indian Ocean World from the early
modern to the modern period. Focusing on the histories of trade, labor, and ideas, it will
explore the multiple connections that pre-colonial African societies shared with the
Middle East, South Asia, and Southeast Asia. It further looks at how European
intervention in the commercial networks of the Indian Ocean World from the last decade
of the fifteenth century transformed the trade relations between the littoral societies of
East Africa and South Asia. However, old trading communities not only survived but
found new ways of engaging with commercial activities. This course explores such
changes in the Indian Ocean World through thematic discussions on trading communities,
labor migration, and shared cultural heritage. Finally, it explores how Africa’s
interactions with the Indian Ocean communities changed due to European colonial
impositions and during the struggles for decolonization.
Course Objectives:
    1) Oceanic histories, by default, are transnational in nature. One of the primary
        objectives of this course is to help the students think beyond the national models
        of historical writing and explore the historical connections between different
        world regions. It will help students to think about mobility, borders, and spatial
        imagination associated with the ideas of space and place.
    2) The course will also encourage students to engage with transnational and global
        histories moving beyond the agendas of area studies. Students will identify key
        themes in African and South Asian history, which demands an examination of the
        transregional economic, political, social, and cultural agents. The selected
        readings will encourage students to explore the imbricated nature of the
        economic, social, and cultural histories of the field.
    3) As the course explores the history of connected geographies, rise and fall of
        economic communities, making and unmaking of boundaries, and the mobility of
        people and disseminations of ideas in the longue durée of historical formation in
        the Indian Ocean World, students will become familiar with multiple forms
                                                                                         2


        historical writing. In doing so, the course will introduce the intersections between
        different categories of historical analysis.
    4) Students will learn how to analyze primary source documents and apply this to
        their written work. Students will learn how to analyze secondary sources,
        including films and literature, and apply this to their written work.
Course Materials:
All will be provided by the Instructor
Grading Components:
Attendance: 15%
Community project: 10%
Bibliographical project: 15%
Primary source analysis: 20%
Final paper: 40%
Attendance Policy:
        The class attendance will be counted based on a total of 12 weeks. 15 points of
the final grade will come from class attendance. For each absence, students will lose 1.25
points out of the total 15 points.
Community Project:
        As part of the community project, students will research on cuisines, clothes,
music, and works of literature that tell us a story of historical connection between
different regions across the Indian Ocean. Students will write an essay (word limit 500)
based on their research. It’s due on the third week of class. The assignment should be
typed in Times New Roman, double space.
Bibliographical project:
        As the course progresses, each student will prepare a thematic bibliography on a
topic of their own choice. This bibliography of secondary readings is meant to help the
students develop their final essay. Students are welcome to discuss the bibliography in
class or with the instructors during office hours. The bibliography should be prepared
                                                                                           3


according to Chicago Style Sheet. Students will submit the bibliography on October 30
in class.
Primary Source Analysis:
        Students will find five primary sources that fit a particular topic/theme discussed
in the class. They can be acquired from digital archives or from a local
archive/museum/library, etc. First, students must pick a theme to address. Then, students
should narrow their topic through a process of secondary and primary research. Details of
this process will be discussed in class. The final product will be an analytical essay,
which uses the primary and secondary sources to support a student-generated thesis. All
submissions should be at least 5 pages long (double-spaced, size 12, and Times New
Roman font). Students will submit this essay on November 20 in class.
Final Paper:
        Students will submit the final long-essay (10-12 pages, double-spaced, size 12,
and Times New Roman font) on December 10. The essay should be a continuation of the
primary source analysis essay. The essay should have a clearly stated thesis and a
synthetic analysis of the secondary literature on the chosen topic. The bibliographical
project and the primary source analysis essay will help the students towards this end. The
final essay should exhibit students’ understanding of historiography as we as their critical
thinking. Students are encouraged to draw ideas from the class discussions.
Course Schedule:
                        Introduction to the Indian Ocean World
September 4: Introduction
Reading:
Edward A. Alpers, The Indian Ocean in World History, New York: Oxford University
        Press, 2014. (Chapter 1 & 2) (Available on canvas)
Film Screening: Caravans of Gold
                                                                                          4


September 11: Community Project
      Part I: Connected Histories and the Material World of the Indian Ocean
September 18: Economic Communities of the Indian Ocean World (1)
Reading:
Edward A. Alpers, The Indian Ocean in World History, New York: Oxford University
       Press, 2014. (Chapter 3, 4, & 5) (Available on canvas)
Film screening: Lost Kingdoms of Africa: Great Zimbabwe
Community Project due (submission in class)
September 25: Economic Communities of the Indian Ocean World (2)
Reading:
Edward A. Alpers. “Gujarat and the Trade of East Africa, c. 1500-1800.” The
       International Journal of African Historical Studies 9, no. 1 (1976): 22-44.
Thomas Vernet, “East African Travelers and Traders in the Indian Ocean: Swahili Ships,
       Swahili Mobilities ca. 1500–1800.” in Trade, Circulation, and Flow in the Indian
       Ocean World, Palgrave Macmillan, New York, 2015.
Film screening: Maritime History of India
October 2: Commodities and Interaction: Stories of Cotton (1)
Reading:
Pedro Machano and Sarah Fee, “Introduction: The Ocean’s Many Cloth Pathways,” in
       Pedro Machado, Sarah Fee, and Gwyn Campbell, eds. Textile Trades, Consumer
       Cultures, and the Material Worlds of the Indian Ocean: An Ocean of Cloth.
       Springer, 2018. (Available on canvas)
MacKenzie Moon Ryan, “Converging Trade and New Technologies: The Emergence of
       Kanga Textiles on the Swahili Coast in the Late Nineteenth Century,” in Pedro
       Machado, Sarah Fee, and Gwyn Campbell, eds. Textile Trades, Consumer
       Cultures, and the Material Worlds of the Indian Ocean: An Ocean of Cloth.
       Springer, 2018. (Available on canvas)
Film screening: The Story of India-Spice Routes and Silk Roads
October 9: Commodities and Interaction: Stories of Cotton (2)
Reading:
Gwyn Campbell, “The Decline of the Malagasy Textile Industry, c.1800-1895,” in Pedro
                                                                                      5


       Machado, Sarah Fee, and Gwyn Campbell, eds. Textile Trades, Consumer
       Cultures, and the Material Worlds of the Indian Ocean: An Ocean of Cloth.
       Springer, 2018. (Available on canvas)
Julia Verne, “Contemporary Geographies of Zanzibari Fashion.” in Pedro Machado,
       Sarah Fee, and Gwyn Campbell, eds. Textile Trades, Consumer Cultures, and the
       Material Worlds of the Indian Ocean: An Ocean of Cloth. Springer, 2018.
       (Available on canvas)
              Part II: Labor and Migration in the Indian Ocean World
October 16: African Slaves in the Indian Ocean World (1)
Reading:
Gwyn Campbell ed. The Structure of Slavery in Indian Ocean Africa and Asia, London:
       Frank Cass, 2004. (Introduction and page 16-51) (Available through Canvas)
October 23: African Slaves in the Indian Ocean World (2)
Reading:
Robert Harms, Bernard K. Freamon, David W. Blight ed. Indian Ocean Slavery in the
       Age of Abolition, New Haven: Yale University Press, 2013. (Chapter 2 and 3)
       (Available through Canvas)
Film screening: The Untold Story of Arab Slave Trade of Africans
Discussion on how to prepare a bibliography
October 30: Indian Indentured Experience: East Africa and African Islands
Reading:
Marina Carter. “Strategies of Labor Mobilization in Colonial India: The Recruitment of
       Indentured Workers for Mauritius,” The Journal of Peasant Studies, 19, no. 3-4
       (1992): 229-245.
Radhika Viyas Mongia, “Race, Nationality, Mobility: A History of the Passport,” Public
       Culture 11, no. 3 (1999): 527-555.
Film screening: Coolies: How Britain Re-Invented Slavery
Bibliographic project due in class.
November 6: Indian Indentured Experiences: South Africa
Reading:
Ashwin Desai and Goolam Vahed. Inside Indian Indenture: A South African Story. Cape
                                                                                       6


       Town: HSRC Press, 2010. (Chapter 1 and 2) (Available on Canvas)
Goolam Vahed and Ashwin Desai. “Indian Indenture: Speaking Across the Oceans,” Man
       In India 92, no. 2 (2012): 195-213. (Available on Canvas)
Film Screening: Stealing a Nation
Discussion on how to select primary source
                         Part III: Cultures of the Indian Ocean
November 13: Islam Across the Ocean
Reading:
Goolam Vahed, “Constructions of Community and Identity Among Indians in Colonial
       Natal, 1860–1910: The Role of the Muharram festival,” The Journal of African
       History 43, no. 1 (2002): 77-93. (Available online)
Green, Nile. “Islam for the indentured Indian: a Muslim missionary in colonial South
       Africa,” Bulletin of the School of Oriental and African Studies 71, no. 3 (2008):
       529-553. (Available online)
Film screening: From Africa to India: Sidi Music in the Indian Ocean Diaspora
November 20: Dissemination of Culture: India in Africa
Reading:
John C. Hawley, India in Africa, Africa in India: Indian Ocean Cosmopolitanism,
       Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008. (Chapter 4 and 5) (Available
       through Canvas)
Film screening: Queen of Katwe
Primary source analysis paper due (submission in class)
November 27: Dissemination of Culture: Africa and India
Reading:
John C. Hawley, India in Africa, Africa in India: Indian Ocean Cosmopolitanism,
       Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008. (Chapter 8 and 9) (Available
       through Canvas)
Film screening: Idi Amin Asian Expulsion
                                                                                         7


December 4: Literary Histories of the Indian Ocean World
Reading:
Gaurav Desai, Commerce with the Universe: Africa, India, and the Afrasian
       Imagination, New York: Columbia University Press, 2013. (Chapter 1 and 2)
       (Available online on UT library)
Film screening: The Indian Ocean - Retrieving History To Build A Future
Discussion of research drafts
December 10:
The final paper is due by 12:00 noon December 10.
(Submission via email to the instructor)
                                                                                 8
