Contemporary Moral Problems - PHL 304
Summer 2020
MTWTHF 1:00 - 2:30PM, Zoom
Instructor: Nicole Smith (pronouns: she/her)
Office hours: Wednesdays 2:30 - 3:30PM & by appointment
Email: nasmith@austin.utexas.edu
                                                                     A chapel for inmates
                                                                      at Halden prison in
                                                                            Norway.
Chances are you’ve confronted an ethical choice recently: Should I pay someone to write my
essay or do it myself? Should I refuse the plastic straw or not worry about it? What, if anything,
should I do about homelessness? Should I donate blood or can it wait until next time? Should I
report the harassment I witnessed or pretend it didn’t happen? By contrast, there are many
other ethical questions that you may have never explicitly considered, but that nonetheless
apply to you, such as: Should I give up a healthy organ to a dying stranger? Is it wrong to use
non-human animals as a food source? Is it permissible to buy clothes that contribute to child
labor and unsafe working conditions? A further set of questions in ethics concerns institutions
and policies: what moral (and legal) constraints or permissions should exist with respect to
decisions related to both the beginning of life (e.g., the ethics of abortion) and the end of life
(e.g., the ethics of euthanasia)? Is the system of punishment and incarceration justified? This
course will introduce you to several contemporary moral problems and provide you with the
skills necessary for critically evaluating proposed responses to those problems.
Required textbook
There is no required textbook for this course. All readings will be made available on
Canvas.
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                                1


Course requirements and grading policies
25% – participation
40% – 4 quizzes
35% – take-home essay
Participation
You will be given the opportunity to earn one participation point each class period. You
must attend the Zoom session to earn the participation credit. There is a scale provided
in the assignment category to help you determine what your grade will be given the
points you received.
Quizzes
There will be four quizzes. You should plan to attend the Zoom session on the day of
the quiz. The quizzes will consist of multiple choice and essay questions. Their purpose
is to ensure that you are understanding the material and to practice your philosophical
writing in preparation for the essay.
Essay
There will be a take-home essay due at the end of the course. You will be able to
choose from one of the topics we covered in the course, but there will be a specific
prompt and set of guidelines you will need to follow in completing the assignment.
More information will be provided on Canvas.
Policies
Final grade scale policy
                               100% to 94% = A               93% to 90% = A-
 89% to 88% = B+               87% to 84% = B                83% to 80% = B-
 79% to 78% = C+               77% to 74% = C                73% to 70% = C-
 69% to 68% = D+               67% to 64% = D                63% to 60% = D-
 59% and below = F
Late policy
I will permit makeups only for medical reasons, jury duty, family emergencies, or related
documented emergencies, and for observance of a religious holiday (for more
information see: <http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/>). I will
do my best not to schedule assignments that interfere with religious observance, but if
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                     2


such a conflict arises please let me know as soon as possible so that we can make
arrangements for you to make up the relevant assignment. Documentation for all other
excuses will be required.
Students with disabilities
Reasonable accommodation will be made for students with verifiable disabilities.
Information about disability services is located here on the following webpage:
<http://www.utexas.edu/disability/>. If you are a student with a disability, please
contact Services for Students with Disabilities and inform me of any pertinent
information early on in the semester, so that I may provide you with proper
accommodations.
Academic integrity
Absolutely no plagiarism will be tolerated. This means that your ideas and writing must
be your own. For more information on the university’s official policy on academic
honesty use the following link: <http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
acint_student.php>.
Course flag
This course carries the Ethics flag. It is designed to equip you with the skills necessary
for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. You will be introduced
to theories, concepts, and methods that will enable you to apply ethical reasoning to
real-life situations. You will be required to think critically about various ethical
viewpoints, and, most importantly, to reevaluate your own ethical opinions.
Content alert
We cover topics that touch on death and violence (including sexual violence), which
can be emotionally demanding and even triggering. Often we will be applying “cold”
analytic thought and reasoning to issues that may very well be relevant to you
personally. I welcome you to address any questions or concerns you might have about
this at the beginning of the semester.
Course Schedule
(The required reading should be completed before class on the day it is assigned).
 Introductory week
 Week 1: June 4th - 5th
 Thursday: No readings.
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                        3


 Friday:
 Required reading: Sebo & Schlottmann “Moral theory,” pp. 27 - 35 (Canvas - Files).
 Topic: Moral status and industrial agriculture
 Week 2: June 8th - 12th
 Monday:
 Required reading: Schlottmann & Sebo “Moral theory,” pp. 35 - 45 (Canvas - Files).
 Tuesday: Discussion (re-read previous)
 Wednesday:
 Required reading: Schlottmann & Sebo “Moral status” (Canvas - Files).
 Thursday: Discussion (re-read previous)
 Friday: Quiz day
 Required reading: Schlottmann & Sebo “Industrial agriculture” (Canvas - Files).
 Topic: Food ethics and animal liberation
 Week 3: June 15th - 19th
 Monday: Guest lecture by a PETA representative (People for the Ethical Treatment of
 Animals).
 Tuesday: Discussion (no required reading).
 Wednesday:
 Required reading: Schlottmann & Sebo “The ethics of food consumption” (Canvas - Files).
 Thursday: Discussion (re-read previous).
 Friday: Quiz day
 Required reading: Aph Ko “Why Animal Liberation Requires an Epistemological
 Revolution” (Canvas - Files).
 Topic: Moral status and reproduction
 Week 4: June 22nd - 26th
 Monday:
 Required reading: Amy Berg “Abortion and Miscarriage” (Canvas - Files).
 Tuesday: Discussion (re-read previous)
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                      4


 Wednesday:
 Required reading: Required reading: Seline Szkupinski Quiroga “Blood Is Thicker than Water:
 Policing Donor Insemination and the Reproduction of Whiteness” (Canvas - Files).
 Thursday: Discussion (re-read previous)
 Friday: Quiz day
 No required reading.
 Topic: Liberalism and the incarceration system
 Week 4: June 29th - July 3rd
 Monday:
 Required reading: Aziza Ahmed “Think Again: Prostitution” (Canvas - Pages).
 Tuesday: Discussion (re-read previous).
 Wednesday:
 Required reading: Michelle Alexander “The Color of Justice” (Canvas - Files).
 Thursday: Discussion (re-read previous).
 Friday: Quiz day
 Required reading: Danielle Jefferis “Immigration Detention and Abolition” (Canvas - Pages).
 Prison and police abolition and “allyship”
 Week 5: July 6th - 10th
 Monday:
 Required reading: The Abolitionist Toolkit, Part 2 & 3 (Canvas - Pages).
 Recommended viewing: <https://www.haymarketbooks.org/blogs/128-ruth-wilson-gilmore-
 on-covid-19-decarceration-and-abolition>
 Tuesday:
 Required reading: M. “A Critique of Ally Politics” (Canvas - Pages).
 Wednesday:
 Required reading: Delio Vasquez “The Poor Person’s Defense of Riots: Practical Looting,
 Rational Riots, and the Shortcomings of Black Liberalism” (Canvas - Pages).
 Thursday: Last day — wrapping up with a Zoom activity.
 Friday: No classes - final essay due.
*The instructor reserves the right to change the course schedule with appropriate notification to students.
CONTEMPORARY MORAL PROBLEMS - SMITH                                                                         5
