                                          Introduction to Asian American Studies
                                                    T, Th 2:00pm – 3:30pm
                                                           GSB 2.126
                                           AAS 301 (32045)           AMS 315 (31040)
                                                          Dr. Eric Tang
                                                      erictang@utexas.edu
                         Office Hours: Tuesdays, 11:30am – 1:00pm and by appointment. BUR 564
Teaching Assistants:
Hee-won Kim
Ses628@gmail.com
Office Hours: Mondays, 12:00-3:00pm. BUR 562
Jae Kwon
Jae.kwon@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Tuesdays and Wednesdays at 10:00am-11:30 am and by appointment. BUR 562
Course Description:
This course offers students an introduction to the main political events and processes that define the Asian experience in
the United States, from the mid-19th century to the present. In so doing, it will also trace important theoretical concepts of
race as they relate to the formation of a distinct Asian American political, cultural and social identity. The class covers
four broad historical periods: First Waves: Asian immigration during the nineteenth century; Watershed: World War II
and ‘silent’ decade of the 1950s; New Waves: post-1965 immigration and the rise of the Asian American Movement; The
Global era: 1985 – present. Across each of these epochs, the course will examine some recurring, cross-cutting themes
such as: the relationship between Western “intervention” and migration; the gendering of Asian Americans, anti-Asian
violence; labor and the ethnic economy; war.
Course Requirements:
Weekly Quizzes:                   20%
Midterm:                          20%
Research Assignment:              20%
Participation:                    15%
Final:                            25%
                                                   COURSE GUIDELINES
Weekly Quizzes: Each Thursday, beginning the second week of class, there will be a short quiz on the reading
assignments and related themes for that week. These quizzes are designed to test your comprehension of fundamental
concepts and may take a variety of forms, from multiple choice to short answers. Note: With advanced notice, take home
quizzes, short response assignments and small creative projects may be substituted for a weekly quiz. Your lowest
quiz/response grade will be dropped.
Midterm and Final: Students will take an in-class midterm and final exam to assess their progress in the course. These
exams will include multiple choice, short answer and short essay questions related to class readings, discussions,
screenings and other classroom materials. The final will be non-cumulative, but will require students to draw from
knowledge gained in the first half of the course. Key term lists will be provided before each exam.
Research Assignment: Students will be required to research a specific issue/question related to the course. For example:
“How does President Donald Trump’s ‘Muslim Ban’ resonate with the history of Asian exclusion from the United
States?” The research product can take on several forms. Details on this assignment forthcoming.
Tang, Intro. Asian American Studies Syllabus:                                                                                 1


Attendance: Attendance is mandatory. Only two unexcused absences are allowed; a third unexcused absence results in a
10% automatic deduction from your final grade. Every additional unexcused absence results in a further deduction of 3%
of your final grade.
Participation: Class Participation is a grade that must be earned. For a high grade, you must be an active participant. This
means consistently asking and answering questions, and listening attentively and respectfully to the instructor and to your
classmates. This also means keeping up with class readings, screenings and assignments and coming to class prepared to
engage.
Cultural Diversity Flag: This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity
courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American cultural experience. You
should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of U.S. cultural groups that have experienced persistent marginalization.
                                                    COURSE POLICIES:
Electronics: Students are not permitted to use laptops, tablets or phones during class lectures unless they have received an
accommodation. All of the lecture slides (powerpoint) will be posted to Canvas.
Incompletes: Students are not permitted to take an Incomplete for this course, except in the case of a documented health
or family emergency discussed in advance with the professor. If you feel you are falling behind in your work, it is your
responsibility to meet with the professor and formulate a plan of action well in advance of the end of the semester so that
you can complete the course successfully.
Services for Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Students with physical or learning disabilities should provide the
professor with a letter requesting reasonable academic accommodation, and work directly with the professor to determine
what accommodations are needed. This letter can be obtained from Services for Students with Disabilities, located in the
Student Services Building. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY,
or visit their website at: www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
The University of Texas Honor Code: The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic
dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses
without the prior permission of the instructor. By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must
adhere to them. Scholastic dishonest damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands
of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on scholastic
dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services website at deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs.
Religious Holidays: Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a work
assignment or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the
work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that you must
notify your instructor at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a
religious holy day.
Tang, Intro. Asian American Studies Syllabus:                                                                               2


                                 COURSE READINGS AND LECTURE SCHEDULE:
Required Texts. (available at the Coop)
Erika Lee, The Making of Asian America: A History
John Okada, No-No Boy
Additional articles and book excerpts will be posted to Canvas as pdfs.
Recommended texts:
Jean Yu-wen Shen and Thomas C. Chen ed., Asian American Studies Now: A Critical Reader.
Karen L. Ishizuka, Serve the People: Making Asia America in the Long Sixties
Course Schedule
Week 1: Introduction to the Course
1/22: Course overview.
1/24: The racial formation of Asian Americans
        Lee, Introduction
        Omi and Winant, excerpt from Racial Formation in the United States (pdf on Canvas)
Week 2: Chinese Immigration and Exclusion
1/29: Lee, Chapters 1-2
1/31: Lee, Chapters 3 -4
Week 3: Early Japanese and Korean Immigration: Labor, Repression and Resistance
2/5: Japanese Immigration (Happy lunar new year!)
        Lee, Chapter 5
        “Ozawa v. United States” from The American Journal of International Law (pdf on Canvas)
2/7: Korean Immigration.
        Lee, Chapter 6
Week 4: Gendered Routes
2/12: Gary Okihiro, “Re-centering Women” from Margins and Mainstreams (pdf on Canvas)
2/14: Lili M. Kim, “Redefining Boundaries of Traditional Gender Roles” (pdf on Canvas)
Week 5: South Asian Immigration
2/19: Lee, Chapter 7
2/21: Vijay Prashad, excerpt from The Karma of Brown Folk (pdf on Canvas)
Week 6: Filipino Migration and US Empire
2/26: Lee, Chapter 8
2/28: Stanley Karnow, excerpt from In Our Image: America’s Empire in the Philippines (pdf on Canvas)
Week 7: Undocumented Immigration of Asian Americans
3/5:    Lee, Chapter 9
3/7:    Midterm Exam
Week 8: World War II and Japanese American Internment
3/12: Lee, Chapter 10
        Okada, No No Boy (first half)
3/14: - Lee, Chapter 11
     - Okada, No No Boy (second half)
Tang, Intro. Asian American Studies Syllabus:                                                        3


SPRING BREAK
Week 9: The Cold War and the “Model Minority”
View Documentary Film: Amy Chen, “The Chinatown Files”
3/26: Lee, Chapter 12
3/28 Robert Lee, “The Cold War Roots of the ‘Model Minority’” (pdf on Canvas)
Week 10: Post-1965 Immigration and Globalization
4/2    Lee, Chapter 13
4/4    Helen Zia, “Detroit Blues” (pdf on Canvas)
Week 11: The Asian American Movement
4/9:   Karen L. Ishizuka, excerpt from Serve the People: Making Asia America in the Long Sixties (pdf on Canvas)
4/11: Glenn Omatsu, “The Four Prisons and the Movements of Liberation” (pdf on Canvas)
Week 12. Refugees and the Legacies of War
4/16: Lee, Chapter 14
4/18: Lee, Chapter 15
Week 13: Asian Americans in postindustrial urban America
View Documentary film: “Eating Welfare”
4/23: Lisa Lowe, “Work, Immigration, Gender: Asian ‘American’ Women” (pdf on Canvas)
4/25: Eric Tang, “Collateral Damage: Southeast Asian Poverty in the United States” (pdf on Canvas)
Week 14. Asian Americans and the 21st Century
4/30: Lee, Chapter 16
5/2    Lee, Chapter 17 and Epilogue
Week 15: Course wrap up.
5/7    Summation.
5/9    Final Exam (non-cumulative)
Tang, Intro. Asian American Studies Syllabus:                                                                    4
