Design of New Communities
ARC327R, ARC386M, CRP386, LAR388
Professor Simon Atkinson
Fall 2019
Mondays 6:30 pm to 9:30 pm
BAT 101
Office: Sutton 3.130B
Office Hours: By appointment
simonatkinson@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description
This graduate seminar examines the search to establish new sustainable communities, - environments that are livable,
humane, accessible, compact, integrated, resourceful, and with low carbon footprint. As such, designed
neighborhoods should also offer delight, be supportive of children, and built to last. The seminar therefore looks at the
ideals, theories, and principles that people have held in the belief that a designed community is preferable to random
incremental growth, commonly referred to as sprawl, or spec housing. These experiments act as models of “ideal”
layout and design.
Focus throughout is placed upon a close examination of case studies, the final assignment being a design proposal
based on insights from the studied housing and communities. Emphasis will be placed on designed projects within
London, and its wider region. A voluntary field visit to London takes place September 14 – 20th. Scholarships may be
available to cover travel costs.
The seminar is structured in three sections, each reviewed against an economic, social, and political context:
1. Early Model Settlements. This section considers the basic ideas towards the formation of designed new
communities in non-urban and urban settings from early origins. Early 19th century concepts are explored as a basis
to a thorough examination of the garden city and garden suburb movements, and opposing deterministic propositions
of architects. This leads to contrasting views of 20th century ideals ranging from inner city housing to planned suburbs
and new towns.
2. Late 20th Century Settlements. An examination of more recent theories and designed case studies related to the
urban edge condition, and designed urban infill projects, plus ways that cities have approached rapid growth and
expansion. An examination and critique of the work of the group broadly referred to as the “New Urbanists” is
undertaken.
                                                                                                                        1


3. New Housing and New Communities.
The twenty first century has seen rapid urbanization combined with a re-examination of the prospects of the inner city,
often involving difficult, vulnerable, and brownfield sites. The Urban Land Institute Hines Competition has also focused
on inner city communities. Examination of these, and the previous case studies, aims to promote understanding of
pedestrian and bike systems, new transit, sustainable housing, and urban ecologies, innovations in energy, water, and
waste, and move towards the resilient city.
By offering a critique of previous attempts at settlement design, theories and principles are devised for possible
approaches towards the design of communities in new city contexts. Recent built case studies are considered,
particularly with regard to sustainable design practice. New designed communities in cities such as Stockholm,
Malmø, Amsterdam, Freiburg, Vancouver, London, and New York provide insight and principles for ways ahead. A
central feature of this part of the seminar will be a design case study undertaken by students for the design of a
new community.
Expected Learning Outcomes
A knowledge of the evolution of designed settlements, and the principles that have shaped them.
Insight regarding values with particular reference to:
           • design related to context;
           • design and community;
           • landscape, architecture and settlement design aesthetics;
           • critical sustainable design practice;
           • knowledge of contemporary housing design case studies.
           *an introduction to design skills applied to the design of a new community
Course Requirements
Students are expected to have read background notes and readings in Canvas prior to the seminar.
Class meetings will take the form of a careful presentation of selected case studies requiring thoughtful discussion as
the means to eliciting key principles informing settlement design. Participants will be expected to produce to scale
drawings and critical argument in examining a range of planned and designed settlement, as well as making their own
proposals for future settlements.
Assignments
There are four assignments to meet the requirements of this graduate seminar.
1. Course notes, readings, and seminar discussions.
2. A 20th century case study: fact sheet; to-scale plans; photographs and review of a designed settlement. A review of
           a previous Hines competition entry.
3. Case study of a recent designed community: a built design from the last twenty-five years, - drawn plans and base
           information leading to a review of it's basic philosophy, and a design critique. Here we will, in particular,
           examine critical components leading to the success of a community such as green and recreation space;
           cycling and walking environments; development of alternative energy and water collection systems.
4. Design of a new community: this is a group design for a new framework for urban form related to transit.
1. Attendance, readings, and seminar discussion: 10%
2. 20th century case study: 25%
3. Contemporary case study: 25%
4. A designed community: 40%
                                                                                                                         2


Grading Policy
A+ Exceptional (the university computer does not accept beyond an A, but I will notify anyone in this category)
A Work is inventive, appropriate, shows verbal and visual ability, is conceptually vigorous, and insightful
A- As above, but with scope for further development
B+ Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student pursues ideas
and suggestions presented in class and completes all work. Demonstrates potential for excellence.
B Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued, and successfully completed.
B- Strong, well researched and thorough work, diligently pursued. One or more assignments or projects requiring
further development.
C Assignments and/or projects are not pursued with dedication or vigor. Assignments or projects are incomplete in
one or more areas.
F Unacceptable work
X Offered where there are clear personal circumstances indicating that it would be inappropriate to offer a final grade
at that time.
Attendance
You are expected to attend each class session. A student with two non-excused absences may be asked to leave the
class.
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Policy Statement
The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with
disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-6441 TTY.
Academic Integrity Statement
Strict standards of academic honesty will be enforced according to the University policy on academic integrity. All
written work handed in by you is considered to be your own original work, prepared without unauthorized assistance. I
expect that a student’s name on any assignment means that you have neither given nor received unauthorized aid.
Readings
Comparative New Community Design. Journal of the American Planning Association. David Godschalk. Nov. 1967.
Cities of Tomorrow. Peter Hall. 1988.
Design Quality in New Housing. Matthew Cousins. Taylor & Francis. 2009.
From Garden Cities to New Towns: Campaigning for Town and Country Planning 1899-1946. Dennis Hardy. 1991.
From Garden City to Green City: The Legacy of Ebenezer Howard. Kelprit Parsons and David Schuyler. 2002.
Garden Cities of Tomorrow. Ebenezer Howard. 1902.
Garden City: Past, Present and Future. Steven Ward. 1992.
Housing Design Handbook. David Levitt. Routledge. 2009.
New Urban Housing. Hilary French. 2006
Paradise Planned: The Garden Suburb and the Modern City. Robert A.M. Stern, David Fishman and Jacob Tilove.
2013.
Sociable Cities. Peter Hall & Colin Ward. 1998.
The Faber Book of Utopias. Selected Chapters. John Carey. 1999.
The Limitless City: A Primer on the Urban Sprawl Debate. Oliver Gillham. 2002.
                                                                                                                        3


The Next American Metropolis. Peter Calthorpe. 1993.
The Origins of Modern Town Planning. L. Benevolo. 1967.
The Urban Housing Handbook. E. Firley and C. Stahl. Wiley. 2009.
Visionaries and Planners: The Garden City Movement and the Modern Community. Stanley Binder. 1990.
Seven Rules for Sustainable Communities, Patrick Condon, Island Press. 2010.
                                                                                                   4
