                                           Course Syllabus
                                   JPN611D Intermediate Japanese
                                              Summer '19
Class #79660
Instructor
         Name:           Midori Tanaka
         E-mail:         midori@austin.utexas.edu
         Office Hours: TBA
Prerequisite
•You must have finished JPN610D or equivalent with a grade of at least C.
•Students who studied Japanese previously with materials/textbooks other than "Yookoso" or at
the other institutions should consult the instructor immediately to receive further instructions.
•Those who wish to advance to the next class JPN317C in the future must take this course by
letter grade option (with at least a C grade).
I. Course Objectives
•To improve the following four skills in the Japanese language as well as to increase general
knowledge of the Japanese people and their culture.
1) Listening: the ability to understand a larger range of every day conversation.
2) Speaking: the ability to handle an increasing number of everyday situations, focusing on the
     topics of travel, home, transportation, and health.
3) Reading: the ability to read more complex reading materials including semi-authentic
     materials.
4) Writing: the ability to write and type more complex descriptions of things pertaining to you
     while correctly using the Japanese writing system.
II. Course Materials
1) YOOKOSO: Continuing with Contemporary Japanese, Vol. Two By Yasuhiko Toosaku (©
     2006, 3rd Edition)
2) Homework assignments on Canvas
3) Audio material for both textbook & workbook http://laits.utexas.edu/itsaud/ and
     http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072408162/student_view0/
4) Course handouts on Canvas
5) Optional-Workbook/Laboratory Manual for YOOKOSO: Continuing with Contemporary
     Japanese (© 2006, 3rd Edition) for further listening practice
6) You should be able to access the Textbook and Workbook/Lab in the PCL
7) JOSHU http://lanic.utexas.edu/japanese
8) Visit the publisher’s site http://highered.mcgraw-hill.com/sites/0072408162/student_view0/
9) Follow us on Japanese Program http://www.laits.utexas.edu/japanese/ ,
   http://www.facebook.com/pages/Japanese-Program-UT-Austin/209417159118042 ,
•Some handouts, links, etc. may be tagged as 412K/412L instead of 610D.
                                                   1


III. Course Structure
•You are required to attend all classes.
•Be prepare for classes according to the schedule. Do not do your homework in class.
•Read your e-mails daily since important announcements might be sent.
1) Lecture class
•Come prepared. Read appropriate textbook pages and do the grammar exercises and activities
before class.
•Brief grammar explanations and grammar exercises will be given, and you will practice
activities, which are related to the new grammatical structures.
•Reading and some writing practice will be given.
•Japanese culture related to the topic will be discussed.
•Administrative announcements will be given.
2) Speaking Activity class
•Come prepared. Dialogues and activities in the textbook will be focused and followed by
communicative practice based upon/related to the dialogues.
•The sessions will be entirely in Japanese. Questions, which require explanations (in English),
should be asked in lecture classes.
IV. Grading Policy
     Your final course grade is determined in the following way:       A  92+
                                                                       A- 89~91.99
     1) Attendance & Class Participation                     0%        B+ 86~88.99
     2) Homework (Joshu 8%, Gram 10%, Kanji 6%)             24%        B  82~85.99
     3) Quizzes (36-4=32)                                   16%        B- 79~81.99    C- 69~71.99
     4) Chapter tests (4)                                   40%        C+ 76~78.99    D+ 66~68.99
     5) Oral Performance tests (2)                          20%        C  72~75.99    D  62~65.99
                                                          100%                        D- 59~61.99
                                                                                      F  0~58.99
•Letter grades will be determined according to the above scale. There will be NO grading on a
curve.
V. Course Requirements
1) Attendance & Participation
•You are required to attend all classes and to prepare for the class according to the schedule;
however, you will not be penalized for your absences. Come to class on time, and do not disturb
the class by coming late or leaving before the end of the class. Each day’s class may be divided
into three sessions (the first session approx.10-10:50, the second session approx. 11:00-11:50,
the third session approx.12:00-12:50).
•There will absolutely no make-up for missed course requirements such as quizzes, tests, etc.
listed below. You are allowed to turn in an assignment earlier with a note (only in the
classroom); Do not simply leave any assignment at your instructor’s room or mailbox. However,
you are not allowed to take quizzes and tests neither earlier nor later than the scheduled time.
•Read your e-mails daily; important announcements will be sent by your instructor.
•The student must notify the instructor at least 14 days prior to the classes scheduled of dates
s/he will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
                                                  2


•Your instructor will abide by the above-mentioned rules very strictly and reserves the right to
judge whether to allow work to be made up or not in unexpected circumstances such as family
emergencies.
•No food, No gum, No texting, No phone use, No Internet use, etc. in class. If you would like to
do something other than studying Japanese together, please leave the classroom.
•Please turn off your cellular phones etc. and do not place them on your desk. Put them in your
bag and do not use them during the class.
•You are not allowed to use any recording devices (e.g. voice recorder, camera. etc.) during class.
•Do not wear outfits nor carry accessories, which include Japanese (& Chinese) characters when
you take quizzes and tests.
2) Homework - NO late homework
<Joshu online homework> due 9:15am
•Joshu online homework links are on Canvas. Assignments are due at 9:15am of the due
date. See the schedule. Submission method is described at the end of the class schedule.
•A score which is less than 0.5(50%) will receive 0 point. The second decimal place will be
rounded off. (e.g. 0.95 will be 1, 0.94 will be 0.9)
•The four lowest scores will be dropped.
<Hand-written homework- kanji practices & grammar exercises> due 10:00am
•All the hand written homework assignments are uploaded on Canvas. The due is at the
beginning of the 1st session of each day (10:00 am). You are encouraged to turn in homework in
order to check your understanding of the material even when you are late to submit. If you need
to submit an assignment earlier than the scheduled date, you must attach a written note which
explains which assignment of what date you are turning in earlier.
•Write scripts neatly and legibly. Use only pencil (and erase carefully). Write your name on
each homework sheet. If there are more than 2 pages, staple them on the upper left corner. Your
instructor is not responsible for missing pages when pages are not stapled together.
•The homework will be graded. Late, incomplete, or sloppily done homework may be accepted
but will not be counted for credit.
 (Kanji practice homework)
•Visit Canvas so you get kanji homework material. Practice writing words with kanji (and add
hurigana and English meanings if you like) in the Kanji HW list (or Kanji Quiz list), using the
given practice sheets and following the instructions. Write big letters neatly. Turn in practice
sheets (and do no turn in the corresponding workbook pages).
•The lowest score will be dropped.
 (Grammar exercise homework)
•Please printout the questionnaire hardcopies and write the answers directly. Do not write your
answers in your notebook papers etc.
•The three lowest scores will be dropped.
※You must do all your homework assignments on your own. Unauthorized collaboration on
assignment and/or copying someone's assignment and turning it in as your own will be
considered as cheating and will result in a severe penalty. Allowing other students to use your
assignment is also considered as scholastic dishonesty.
                                                   3


3) Quizzes -- NO make-up / early quizzes
•There are four different types of quizzes, which are described below. See the schedule for the
content of each quiz. The quizzes will be given at the beginning of class (normally at 10:00am
and/or 12:00pm), so come to class on time.
•The four lowest grades will be dropped from your total quiz grade. Use this to make up
emergency absences such as family emergencies, sickness, and so on.
(V)-Vocabulary Quizzes
• Your instructor will read each word twice. Your task is to write the word using appropriate
kana (Do not use kanji.) and its English equivalent found in the list.
(G)-Grammar Quizzes
•Grammar quizzes will mainly test your understanding of the new grammatical structures.
(KR)-Kanji reading
•You will be asked to write hurigana for each kanji compound word and match it with its
English meaning. Study the kanji Quiz list on Canvas.
(KW)-Kanji writing
•You will be asked to write kanji for each reading (hurigana). Study the kanji Quiz list on
Canvas.
4) Written Exam -- NO make-up / early chapter tests
• At the end of each chapter, there will be a written exam. Each exam will include everything
that has been covered in that chapter.
•Study '"Linguistic Notes," and "Culture Notes," etc. in the textbook. (We will not cover all of
them in the class; however, students are expected to read them.)
•The listening section will be conducted first. You will not be able to make up a missed listening
section. Please arrive in time.
5) Oral Performance Test -- NO make-up / early oral performance
•At the end of chapters 1 & 2 and 3 & 4, there will be an oral performance exam (e.g. interview
& role play) based upon the material that you have practiced in class. Study handouts will be on
Canvas. The test will be graded on the basis of communicative skills as well as accuracy,
structure, vocabulary, pronunciation, and fluency.
•You need to sign up for oral performance tests in advance. Without signing in, you cannot take
the OP tests. There will be no makeup if you missed your scheduled time slot, so come on time
(preferably at least 5 minutes early).
※You cannot keep any of the oral performances and written tests. Make sure to return them to
your instructor by the end of the class. If they are not returned in class on the same day, you will
not receive any credit for the exam. Please go to your instructor's office if you need to look at
them further.
※If suspicious behavior is observed (especially during quizzes and exams), your instructor may
record it by videotaping or taking photos.
                                                  4


VI. Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
•The University of Texas guidelines on scholastic dishonesty apply to all requirements in this
class.
  e.g. Copying other students’ homework/exam answers.
        Showing your homework/exam answers to other students.
        Working homework together.
        Having someone else write a paper for you or correct your compositions.
        Find answers using the internet.
•Visit the Student Judicial Service web site for more information.
       http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
•Students who violate university rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failing the course and dismissal from the University.
University policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
VII. Studying Japanese
•In learning a foreign language, it is important to study every day.
•Actively participate in class. Use Japanese whenever possible, and do not be afraid of making
mistakes.
•Spend as much time as possible studying with audio.
•Develop a systematic way of organizing the large amount of materials that you will be
responsible. Language learning requires constant review of previously learned material. You
may want to make vocabulary cards or lists according to word groups. Find your own learning
and organizational style and continue reviewing on a daily basis.
VIII. Honor Code
•The core values of the University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
•http://www.utexas.edu/welcome/mission.html
IX. For Students with Disabilities
•Any student with a documented medical condition which requires academic accommodations
should contact the Service for Students with Disabilities in the Office of the Dean of Students at
471-6259 or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations.
•http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
X. Campus Safety
•For more information, visit https://besafe.utexas.edu
XI. Be Vocal
•Be Vocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm.
•For more information, visit https://www.wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal/
XII. Campus Carry
•For more information, visit https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/
                                                   5


XIII. Emergency Preparedness
•Emergency preparedness means we are all ready to act for our own safety and the safety of
others during a crisis. It takes an effort by all of us to create and sustain an effective emergency
preparedness system. Your support is important to achieving the best possible outcomes during a
crisis event.
•If you require assistance when evacuating, please inform your needs to your instructor in
writing during the first week of the semester. The information will forward to the Fire
Prevention Services office.
•If you have an emergency either on or off campus, please call 911 to report the situation.
•Please call 512-471-4441 for non-emergency situation such as crime prevention, criminal
investigation, etc.
•Please review documents outlining emergency terms (e.g., the difference between “shelter-in-
place” and “lockdown”). The documents are uploaded on Canvas.
•If you have concerns regarding the attitude or actions of students, staff, or other faculty, please
call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL: 512-232-5050)
•The outdoor warning system (siren sounds) tests take place at around 11:50am on the first
Wednesday of every month. The tests last only one minute, and you do not need to take any
special actions during a test. Monthly tests will begin with the announcement, “This is a test.” If
you hear the sirens, and do not hear, “This is a test,” this means there is an emergency.
•For further information, please visit the Emergency Preparedness site below and review
emergency protocols. http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/
                                                     6
