                        Executive MBA Program: Acc 381N– Fall 2019
                                    Financial Statement Analysis
Professor                            Dr. Patrick Badolato, CPA
Office Hours                         TBD. CBA 4M.252.
Phone                                (512) 471-7920
E-Mail                               patrick.badolato@mccombs.utexas.edu
                                     Please post all non-personal questions on our Discussion Board
Course Summary: This Financial Statement Analysis course focuses on using an array of financial
information to best determine the why behind past and current performance. To achieve this we combine
quantitative and qualitative factors to understand drivers of performance and to tell the story of the firm.
With a solid understanding of the past and current conditions, we move towards motivating sound
forecasts and briefly discuss well-supported inputs to valuation models.
What you should expect:
Historically this has been a challenging class that requires a commitment. It is not challenging as you
must memorize complex formulas that you could easily look up, but as it will challenge perspectives and
require critical thinking and the synthesis of information. This is also a class that actively shuns
memorization of terms and formulas and the regurgitation of anything. We will not waste your time (and
your educational investment) with memorizing items such as ratios or formulas or emphasizing jargon
and catchphrases over thoughtful analysis. Instead we will focus on more useful ways of approaching
various issues. Therefore, you may hear many “Yes, but…” questions: “Yes, but in your own words.”
“Yes, but why? “Yes, that is the general economic argument, but how has it played out in this scenario?”
“Yes, that is the change, but what drove that change? …We will get dirty trying to best understand
various firms and how to best use financial information. You need to be involved in these discussions.
How to do well and get the most out of the experience:
This class is also one that has a straightforward plan for success as directly affirmed by former students.
Students who truly commit to all of the following usually end up with solid grades: (1) consistently
preparing for class, using the materials provided and asking questions when needed; (2) being active
learners within the classroom and (3) thoughtfully reviewing the material (with peers) after class.
Individuals who do not do or want to do the work, check out during class or miss class, believe they
know everything, maintain a closed mind or refuse to be thoughtful usually find this class to be dreadful.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                            Fall 2019
                                    A Broader Background of the Course
Our objectives include:
     •   Increase our understanding of financial filings (including financial statements, managers’ commentaries,
         footnotes and other sources of financial information) in order to:
              o Understand how firms operate and create value—we put considerable emphasis on understanding
                  how financial information helps us understand and guide operating decisions.
              o Concisely articulate the firm’s past—without this, valuation and forecasting could be misguided,
                  so we must be able to tell the story of the firm.
              o Increase our understanding and ability to use tools to analyze information presented in financial
                  statements. Understand the benefits and limitations of financial information provided in financial
                  filings and the motivation for and process of making adjustments to this information—we will
                  adjust, change and challenge ratios, metrics and formulas to ensure they work in specific real-
                  world situations.
              o Use our understanding of the firm and its financials to make informed predictions about future
                  performance—we will stress how understanding financial information provides us with an
                  excellent framework for considering the future.
              o Motivate, understand, construct and implement various inputs in valuation models—we will very
                  briefly note the mechanics of valuation while stressing the more useful and challenging steps of
                  motivating inputs to valuation. Valuation is not only a mindless mechanical exercise.
The course will be taught using a combination of examples, discussion questions, cases and homework problems.
We will learn new concepts using various firms’ historical and current financial data. To achieve these objectives,
during the semester we will learn a framework for business analysis and valuation, including these steps:
     (1) Business Strategy Analysis: The purpose of business strategy analysis is to assess the profit potential of
         the firm at a qualitative level. This involves an understanding of the firm’s strategy and its industry and
         considering how these affect and are affected by the firm’s financial performance.
         On Canvas, these are Topics 1-3 (Only Topics 1 and 2 are covered in our class).
     (2) Financial Analysis: The purpose of financial analysis is to assess the firm’s historical financial
         performance in the context of its goals and strategies. Tools used for financial analysis include ratio
         analysis, cash flow analysis, and common-size financial statements. Ratio Analysis is not computing
         ratios (i.e., division), but carefully using and changing ratios to provide us with information.
         On Canvas, this is Topic 4.
     (3) Accounting Analysis: The purpose of accounting analysis is to develop an understanding of whether a
         firm’s accounting captures its true underlying economic condition(s). This involves understanding
         accounting transactions, identifying accounting flexibility, evaluating the appropriateness of accounting
         policies and estimates, and at times, altering financial statements to enhance decision making.
         On Canvas, these are Topics 5-10 (Only Topics 5, 9 and 10 are covered in our class).
     (4) Valuation/Prospective Analysis: The purpose of valuation/prospective analysis is to forecast the firm’s
         future financial performance and determine a potential valuation of the firm—our best assessment of
         intrinsic value. To do this we will learn the mechanics and intricacies of forecasting financial statements
         and we will (very briefly) note the components and usage of valuation models.
     (5) On Canvas, these are Topics 11-12 (Only Topic 11 is covered in our class).
We will review (and learn) accounting concepts as this knowledge is critical to making decisions with financial
information. However, the primary objective of the course is not to improve our understanding of Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (US GAAP or IFRS); the goal is to improve our ability to interpret and use
financial statements in a variety of settings including a primary focus on credit and equity analyses and
supplemental coverage of corporate finance, planning and control. This is not a journal entry class; in fact, we
will likely not see any journal entries during the entire semester (unless specifically requested by students).


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                             Fall 2019
                                     Structure, Materials and Logistics
Course Structure
    •    The class format involves coverage of the main areas and tools noted above. In addition, there will be a
         considerable amount of discussions/cases that focus on specific firms and specific financial issues. These
         cases will involve a careful analysis of the financials, the opportunity to dig deeper to support (or
         challenge) information that is presented, and the consideration of the benefits and limitations of various
         tools, metrics and ratios.
    •    The course will be taught using a combination of examples, discussion questions, cases and homework
         problems. We will learn new concepts using various firms’ historical and current financial data.
    •    A tentative schedule of class meetings is attached to the end of this document. This schedule may be
         revised and all updates will be posted on Canvas or discussed in class.
Materials
    • Required: Cases, slides and other materials created by the professor and available on Canvas.
         Students are required to access Canvas, read takeaways, exam questions, case feedback
         commentaries and other class materials and post any unanswered questions directly to Canvas.
         There is no substitute for the vast amount of information that will be on Canvas.
              o To ensure the highest dissemination of information and to maintain a fair
                  playing field, all non-personal questions must be asked on the Discussion
                  Board and not emailed to me.
    •    Required: It is required that you read, used and retained the materials and information from an
         financial accounting class. Our course builds off these.
    •    Recommended Text: The textbook for the course is Financial Reporting, Financial Statement Analysis
         and Valuation: A Strategic Perspective by Wahlen, Baginski and Bradshaw, eighth edition. ISBN: 978-
         1285190907
              o   The textbook is recommended for students who have not had sufficient exposure to the material
                  we cover in class. The class moves fast and assumes you mastered material from prior classes.
                  We do not have slides from, cover or read from the text; it provides background reading.
              o Suggested Texts:
                          Accounting for Value by Stephen Penman; Ben Graham’s The Intelligent Investor;
                          Michael Lewis’s The Big Short; Pat Dorsey’s The Little Book that Builds Wealth and
                          Michael Shearn’s The Investment Checklist: The Art of In-Depth Research. James
                          Marshall’s The Three Little Pigs. Business and economic-focused podcasts including
                          Freakonomics, Planet Money and Masters in Business. This is not a comprehensive list
                          and I am open to your suggestions and will post more on Canvas. That being said, it is
                          worth emphasizing that quality (thoughtful use of the materials we use in class) will be
                          far more useful than quantity without thoughtfulness or mindfulness.
    •    Throughout the course we will be examining publicly available material including corporate press
         releases, corporate filings (10K’s, etc.), analyst reports, and articles from the business press. When
         appropriate, these and other supplemental information (or links to these documents) will be provided via
         the Canvas. You will be responsible for downloading and printing these articles and using links posted on
         Canvas. UT Box links expire 30 days after posting—please download the files you need in a timely
         fashion.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                    Fall 2019
                       Assignments and Grading Information (page 1 of 5)
Disclaimer: The following contains extensive details about each part of the class and expectations.
If this seems excessively specific and elaborate, I apologize in advance. This is only included as a
small percent of individuals (in your program) have truly struggled with these areas.
Course Requirements and Grading
We will determine the final distribution of letter grades at the end of the semester. This means that
numerical scores on specific assignments do not correspond to a particular letter grade prior to the end
of the semester. Final grades are determined by summing up all pieces, then ranking all students and
then following the class distribution provided by the respective Program(s). Some areas of the
distribution may be very tight. This means that it is mathematically unavoidable that some students
with similar grades do not get the exact same final letter grades. Ultimately, someone must fall at each
“break point,” which means that someone gets the lowest of one grade (for example, the lowest A-) and
someone else, with similar grades, gets the highest of the next letter grade (for example, the highest B+).
The class’s distribution dictates the percentage of each of the letter grades. That is, you and your
classmates’ performance, more than I, determine your final letter grade. Students may not ask for
exclusive extra credit or grade changes at the end of the semester. This is unprofessional and requesting
specific treatment violates our University’s academic goals.
The letter grades will be determined by the guidelines set out by the TEMBA Program. Numerical
points will be accumulated as follows:
Description of Requirements
Exam (44%)
There will be one exam. The exam will be during the last scheduled class. This is cumulative exam
covering all classes. The exam will involve the lessons from class applied to a set of financial
information from one or a small number of publicly traded firms. Please notify me within 72 hours of
the exam date being set if you have a conflict with the exam date. Outside of this 72 hour window, there
are no makeup exams, except for SSD accommodations. Please check here for the exam date:
https://registrar.utexas.edu/students/exams
The exam is primarily built around class discussions and cases and involves your analysis of an actual
company’s (or companies) financial information. This exam is not one for which you should try to cram.
You prepare for the exam by doing the work day to day in this class and then by relaxing the week
before the exam. Cramming is not useful and a class for which you can cram is a good example of a
class not worth taking. Please do not interpret “no cramming” as “no need to work.” The work is done
on the cases, in class and in your reviews week by week. Also, the cases provide a general idea of the
exam questions (although the time to complete and grading differs between the cases and the exams) and
other types or examples of questions are posted on Canvas.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                             Fall 2019
                         Assignments and Grading Information (page 2 of 5)
Cases (40%)
The primary objective of the Cases is to help you gain exposure to the material before attending class. The fancy
term for this is the “flipped classroom,” but this is simply old-fashioned education from your rather old-school
professor that helps ensure you can master the material by getting exposure and taking direct ownership. This is
not a class in which I lecture at you all semester long and you passively take notes, so case preparation before
class is essential. As these cases are not simply mechanical or term/theory regurgitation, you will likely encounter
ambiguity and have questions as you complete the cases—this is by design. Unless clearly noted otherwise, all
Cases are due before class.
There are numerous cases required by all students and associated each of the classes. Details are provided
on Canvas. Cases cannot be submitted late. Cases must be submitted on Canvas in the respective link. All
assignments should be submitted electronically through Canvas using a program that is compatible with Microsoft
Office. Students are responsible for uploading the final version, checking and re-checking any issue with
formatting or other errors before submission. While the specific scenario differs, it is common for some students
to have an occasional health/family/work emergency and instead of investigating each one or trying to apply
subjective judgment, we allow one case to be dropped for any student with no questions asked or documentation
needed. That being said, of course, students should still work on each case as each is excellent practice for any
student who is trying to improve their skills at Financial Statement Analysis.
Case Guidelines
Cases must be written in a professional manner. This means; write in complete sentences and paragraphs and
ensure that your answer and support is clear to your reader; use spellcheck (of course, these need to be typed);
report financial numbers in a professional way (e.g. the numbers are aligned and do not have seven decimal
places); and clearly label/number each of your responses (e.g. 1-5). You must provide support for all answers that
ask for it. Assignments that do not hit all of these criteria for professionalism or are not professional in another
way will get a 25% penalty for the first occurrence and then 50% or less credit thereafter. Assignments that are
late, but before class, will get a 25% penalty for the first occurrence and then 50% or less credit thereafter.
Assignments that are turned in after the class begins are not accepted.
Cases, Group Work, Collaboration and File Sharing.
Group work and collaboration are common in academia and the business world. Group work and collaboration do
not mean that individuals should plagiarize the work of others, misrepresent attribution, avoid doing any
meaningful work, or misreport information in any way.
In this class, unless otherwise noted, students must submit their own document for every Case completed
outside of class. In an effort to facilitate useful collaboration, unless noted otherwise, students are encouraged to
work in a group of up to three people on the Cases. The goal of allowing groups is to enable students to actively
share ideas, but still be involved—active discussions are the primary reason for allowing collaboration. Group
work means you are encouraged to discuss the questions and answers, not rely on or copy the work of others; that
is, each student needs his or her own submission, in which he or she adds value. As reiterated below, directly
sharing files or copying answer (including copied answers with minor edits) across group members and/or other
groups or individuals is a violation of these policies and will not be accepted. At the minimum, a violation results
in a 0 for the case for all individuals involved in the violation. Specific examples are noted below.
Groups of four or more are not allowed and must split into smaller groups. There is a cap to group sizes as large
groups remove the benefit from actively discussing the material.
Complete and honest attribution is required. Students must list the other people who they worked with on the
case. If a name is missing or does not match up, all members get a 25% penalty for the first transgression, a 50%
penalty for the second occurrence, and a 100% deduction thereafter.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                      Fall 2019
                       Assignments and Grading Information (page 3 of 5)
A non-exhaustive list of acceptable and unacceptable submissions:
 1. Acceptable: Three students work together in a breakout room and discuss the Case. Each student is
     actively engaged in the discussion. Later they write up their answers and have some shared themes.
     Each student directly acknowledges the collaboration of all three individuals.
 2. Acceptable: Two students chat via a video call regarding a Case. Both students are actively
     engaged in the discussion. The students write up their answers as they discuss and have some
     shared themes, but also take different approaches on many of the questions. Both students directly
     acknowledge the collaboration.
 3. Unacceptable for both students: Student A asks Student B for Student B’s work. Student B
     emails/post the file to a shared folder. Student A makes minor edits and submits the case and tries
     to make it look like collaboration. Both students note each other’s name on the submission. For
     example:
 a. The most informative metric regarding profitability for this company is operating margin. The main
     reason for this is that there are a variety of expenses, other than cost of sales, which are essential for
     this company’s sustained operating success, including as Research and Development, Selling and
     Marketing expenses. These expenses are critical as innovation and customer acquisition and
     retention are critical in this industry. During this period, the company’s operating margin decreased
     as it both lowered its prices in light of increased competition and began to spend more on R&D and
     Selling and Marketing expenses, which increased to 10% and 12% of Revenue, respectively.
 b. Operating Margin is the most informative metric regarding profitability for this company. This is
     because a few expenses other than cost of sales are essential for this company’s sustained operating
     success, including as Research and Development (R&D), Selling and Marketing (S&M) expenses.
     These expenses are critical as customer acquisition/retention and innovation are critical in this
     company’s operating environment. During this period, the company’s operating margin decreased
     for two main reasons. First, the company decreased its prices in light of increased competition.
     Second, the company began to spend more on S&M and R&D expenses, which are currently 12%
     and 10% of Revenue, which is an increase from 11% and 8%, respectively.
 4. Unacceptable for both students: Student A asks for Student C’s work. Student C has already
     worked with two other students and completed the Case, but sends the file to Student A anyway.
     Student A makes numerous edits and submits the case. Student A notes that he worked alone.
 5. Unacceptable for all students: Student A asks for Student C’s work. Student C has already worked
     with Student B and completed the Case, but sends the file to Student A anyway. Student A makes
     edits and submits the case. Student A notes that he worked with Student C, Student B notes that she
     worked with Student C, Student C notes that he worked with Students A and B.
    If this appears complex, the simple solution is business professionalism: work alone or if you
 choose to work together as group, do so as an actual group and have direct, honest and complete
                                   communication across all group members.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                            Fall 2019
                         Assignments and Grading Information (page 4 of 5)
Class participation and leadership (16%)
Much of class is conducted in a discussion setting during which we will analyze specific firms and
discuss which metrics are important, the reasons for our approach, and the implications of our choices.
The assignments are geared to prepare you to participate in and learn from these discussions.
Accordingly, your completion of the assignments and your participation in our discussions are vital. If
you are not involved in the discussion on your own, you should prepare for cold calling. At times, I will
only be a facilitator of your discussions with each other. After most classes, I will make class notes, with
particular attention to the quality of comments or questions, not the quantity. You do not need to be
correct to participate: insightful questions and thoughtful answers are also important and I encourage
students to answer, even when they are unsure. Moreover, a strong, smart and vibrant academic
community is a part of why you and your classmates are here at the University of Texas.
Consistent with what is noted above and in light of the expectations of this program and surely your
jobs, you are clearly expected, but not forcibly required, to attend all classes. As your absence can
detract from the learning experience of others, if you will miss part of or a whole class, you should post
to our Discussion Board before (or after) class when this occurs. The post can include an apology to
your classmates, if sincere, and can include whatever information you believe is both personally and
professionally prudent. If, for any reason, you are uncomfortable posting the circumstance to the class,
you may email me. That being said, you do not need to apologize to me—you and your classmates, not
I, lose out from your absence. If you miss class you should obtain the slides, talk to your colleagues
(classmates) about the course materials and discussions and post any unresolved issues to the Discussion
Board.
Here’s a general idea of how I plan to grade your class participation over the course of the semester:
• Outstanding Contributor: Consistent and sustained contributions to large-group discussions reflect thorough
      preparation. Ideas offered are usually substantive, provide good insights and sometimes change the direction
      of the class for the better. Arguments, when presented, are generally well-substantiated and often persuasive.
      If this person were not a member of the class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished
      significantly. In addition to exceptional large-group discussion contributions, also actively participates in
      small-group discussions.
• Good Contributor: Consistent contributions to large-group discussions reflect satisfactory preparation. Ideas
      offered are usually substantive, generally provide useful insights, and occasionally offer a new direction for
      the discussion. Arguments, if presented, are reasonably well-substantiated. If this person were not a member
      of the class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished. In addition, also offers
      comments in small-group discussions.
• Marginal Contributor: Generally routine contributions to large-group discussions reflect preparation. Ideas
      offered are occasionally substantive but seldom provide clear insights or new directions for the discussion.
      Arguments may be occasionally presented that are interesting, but are generally not well-substantiated. If
      this person were not a member of the class, the quality of the large-group discussions would be diminished
      only slightly. In addition, also offers consistent comments in small-group discussions.
• Non-participant (around 0-2 percentage points out of 10%): This person has maintained good attendance,
      but has said little or nothing in class apart from the small group discussions; hence there is no adequate basis
      for evaluation. If this person were not a member of the class, the quality of the discussions would be
      unchanged.
• Low attendance (0 percentage points out of 10%). This person has missed numerous classes or if present,
      contributions to discussions reflect inadequate preparation. Ideas offered are rarely substantive, provide few,
      if any, insights and never offer a constructive direction. At best, contributions are obscure, confused, and
      indicate a lack of familiarity with the fact of the issues under discussion.
• Disruptive Contributor (negative points): Comments demonstrate disrespect for others in the academic
      community. Student does not participate in small group discussions. If this person were not a member of
      class, valuable airtime would be saved.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                    Fall 2019
                       Assignments and Grading Information (page 5 of 5)
        o Disruption includes consistently arriving late, leaving or packing up early, side conversations,
            or using a cell phone during class or other disruptive behaviors. I hope no one achieves this
            grade as this represents a major lack of professionalism and respect for our University. A
            student in this category may not pass the class, regardless of the other grades.
Our class will also make use of Discussion Board. This is the forum for outside-of-class questions
related to assignments, our class coverage and any related current events. In addition, as the Discussion
Board is an important way to share information and knowledge across the class, each student must post a
constructive question or comment or respond a class-related post at least once during the semester.
Moreover, constructive Discussion Board involvement can help enhance your Class Participation and
Leadership grade, but the primary driver of performance is the classroom experience. (Logistical
questions such as “Where is the Excel file?” are always welcomed, but cannot enhance your grade.)
Grading Disputes
My TA/grader and I make every effort to grade all of your work fairly and accurately, but grading errors
can occur. If you believe there is an error, you may request a re-grading of the assignment. Be aware,
however, that grading errors can occur in both directions - errors can make grades too high as well as too
low. Therefore, if you request a re-grading, your entire assignment will be re-graded, and all grading
errors will be corrected. By requesting a re-grade, you accept the possibility that your grade may go
either up or down. To request a re-grade, you must submit a written request to me within 72 hours from
the time in which the assignment’s grade was released to students (whether or not you were present in
class on that day or checking email). The request must be accompanied by the original, if I do not retain
it, and must state the area of dispute, your recommendation for change in grade, an explanation or
justification for your recommendation and any limitations to this recommendation. Moreover, the
request, should articulate (in person or in writing) how the submission compared to the discussion from
the class (and/or any posted materials). The re-grade request must refer to the guidelines established in
this syllabus and Canvas and not involve any misrepresentation or unprofessionalism.
Case Feedback
Informal discussions about how a student can perform better are allowed, but a student must articulate
(in person or in writing) the specifics of how their submission compared to the discussion from the class
(and any posted materials). The request must also include a direct discussion of any expectations noted
in this syllabus or on Canvas.
Formal or informal requests that do not abide by these policies will be considered unprofessional,
may not be addressed and can lead to a meaningfully lower grade.
The same policies apply to emails/notes about grades or other subjects that misrepresent facts,
avoid personal responsibility, do not answer pertinent questions, or are unprofessional in their
language, subject or approach.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                             Fall 2019
                     Academic Integrity and University Policies (page 1 of 2)
Cheating involves copying work across groups, cheating on the exam, plagiarizing your assignments and other
things as well. Don’t cheat as (1) it is wrong; (2) the costs far outweigh the benefits: you don’t want to get
kicked out in a short-sighted attempt to make a B a B+; and (3) there is a very good chance that your cheating
will be revealed and we will all be extremely disappointed.
                                            Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both
students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement
on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course,
I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you
have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the Statement
on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me
for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty
harms the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Copyright and Intellectual Property
The course packet and other materials are the intellectual property of your professor and are given to you, for free,
on an individual basis only. You may not, in anyway, share, distribute or post electronic, hardcopy or other
versions of the class materials with other people or on websites or other avenues of social media without explicit
permission from me. Posting or sharing materials, or even snippets of materials, will be considered a violation of
our University’s Academic policies for all parties involved and may lead to a failing grade in this class. This
includes all websites, file sharing folders, apps and social media; the only exception is that you may post class-
related material to our class’s Canvas Discussion Board during the semester.
Recording Class:
Recording all or any part of class without explicit written permission from the professor is strictly prohibited.
Violations will constitute a violation of the academic integrity policies of our University and may lead to a failing
grade in this class and legal prosecution. If you need to record the class, please email me to seek permission at
least a week in advance and include details about the date, topics, individuals involved and a clear explanation of
the reasons for this need.
Privacy in Canvas:
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. If applicable, please be aware that I will use a merged
Canvas site for all sections, if there is more than one, of a course that I teach. This will allow students in other
sections to see that you are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not
actually learn your email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any
concerns, please contact the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 for help removing your name from view of other
students.


Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                                         Fall 2019
                     Academic Integrity and University Policies (page 2 of 2)
                                          Additional Important Notifications
                                               Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
                                                  Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
                                          Students with Personal Challenges
If you face any personal challenges that may affect your coursework or need advice or assistance for any serious
health or personal matter, please reach out to the Student Emergency Services. Information can be found here:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                    Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
    • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling
         outside.
    • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    • Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first week
         of class.
    • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
    • Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
         University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
    • Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
    • Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
         http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.


 Financial Statement Analysis: Dr. Patrick Badolato                            Fall 2019
Draft of the Schedule (Schedule may be amended; updates will be on Canvas. This is only a draft!)
     Case and class details are provided on Canvas; see each specific class page for the official
                               assignments and schedule. This is only a draft!


                                                                           ACC 381N – 2ND HALF
                                                                        MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING
                                                                                    FALL 2019
Instructor                               John McGuire
Office Hours                             Before and after Class in Rowling Hall, or by appointment
Phone                                    512 796 3964 (cell), but e-mail is the best method to reach me
E-Mail                                   john.mcguire@mccombs.utexas.edu
Course Web Page                          Canvas
Course Objectives
Managerial Accounting equips managers with accounting information and tools they need to plan and control, and
evaluate personnel and operations of the firm. This course provides a framework for a better understanding of
when and why managers need specific types of accounting information to facilitate their decisions and influence
the decisions of their employees. In this class we will discuss two general topics: performance management
information systems and management control systems. These two general topics are briefly described below and
in more detail in the class schedule provided separately.
Performance Management Information Systems:
Performance management information systems provide information about the benefits and costs of the goods and
services sold by the firm to help facilitate the short-term operational and long-term strategic decisions of
managers. We will discuss and apply principles which will guide our evaluation and design of performance
management information systems. Thus, we will learn techniques to enhance the usefulness of accounting and
other information for these decisions. Moreover, we will apply these techniques to facilitate short-term operational
and long-term strategic decisions.
Managerial Control Systems:
The other half of the course covers the use of accounting information in the control and coordination of individuals
and organizational units. During this half of the course, we will explicitly recognize that individuals respond to
methods used to evaluate and reward their performance. The purpose of the second half of the course is to
identify systems that have widespread use, examine the motivation and theoretical underpinnings for their use,
and identify how and when the misuse of these systems leads to dysfunctional outcomes for the firm. In doing so,
we will consider both financial and non-financial measures of performance.
The former CFO of Cisco Systems, Larry Carter, said “From a management and fiduciary role, I do not want to
lose control, but we also want to continue to move at a rapid pace. The traditional answer to growth is more
controls but the bureaucracy then slows you down. How do you stay at the pace of a start up?”
Our goal in this course will be to establish a firm understanding of proven measurement techniques while also
addressing Carter’s concern: knowing what we need to know for decision-making and control without excessively
constraining the organization.
Leadership and this Course
The Texas MBA program is designed to develop influential business leaders. The MBA Program has identified
four fundamental and broad pillars of leadership: knowledge and understanding, communication and
collaboration, responsibility and integrity, and a worldview of business and society. By helping ensure you and
the people you lead have the appropriate information and the right incentives to make value-increasing decisions,
this course enhances your knowledge and understanding of how to manage and lead an organization. In doing
so, this course highlights how accounting information works together with the integrity and personal
responsibilities of team members to overcome a fundamental difficulty of collaborative decision making (i.e., team
members often do not have the same incentives and objectives). You will be put into small groups often to work
on calculations, and during case discussions when we are trying to figure out “what should we do?” This will


further enhance your collaboration and communication skills. Finally, you will apply this knowledge by developing
and communicating solutions to “real world” cases that span across a multitude of industries.
Materials
Teaching materials include a mix of case studies, articles, and textbook chapters.
Case studies and articles - can be found on our Canvas site under the appropriate class day (we have six
classes). The class schedule for this course is posted on Canvas.
Textbook: Hilton Platt Managerial Accounting: Creating Value in a Dynamic Business Environment, 11th Edition,
by McGraw-Hill.
Additional material - Additional teaching materials, class notes, homework solutions, etc., can be found on Canvas
under the appropriate class day.
Course Requirements and Grading
Your course grade for the 2nd half will be determined based on your individual performance on quizzes and the
final exam as follows:
Pre Class Quizzes           9% (Three quizzes at 3% each)
After Class Quizzes       25% (Five quizzes at 5% each)
Final Exam                66% Friday, December 6, 2019
                         100%
The MBA Programs Committee approved the following target grade distribution for all Core and Flex Core
courses: A (4.00) 25%, A- (3.67) 20%, B+ (3.33) 15%, B (3.00) 35%, B- or below (2.67 or lower) 5%. The
combined average grade point average is approximately 3.42. This course uses that target distribution as a
guideline for establishing final grades.
There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing “extra credit” work after the end of, or during, the
semester. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances and according to university policy. A
passing grade in a graduate course is a C or above. A grade of C- or below is a failing grade.
Description of Requirements
Final Exam
The final exam will be at 8am on Friday, December 6, 2019. The exam is closed-book, closed-computer, and
closed-notes.
The exam will embrace all course content as covered in the assigned chapters from the textbook, homework
problems from the textbook, the case studies, articles, class notes, and class discussions. I will post a practice
exam. Medical emergencies and family emergencies are the only valid reasons for missing the exam, both of
which require verification from the office of the Dean of Students.
Quizzes
Quizzes are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is permitted.
There are three on-line pre class quizzes due at 7am on our class days Friday October 18 (2 nd class), Saturday
October 19 (3rd class) and Friday November 15 (5th class). Each of these quizzes is worth 3% of your grade. The
intent of these quizzes is to pressure-test that you’ve read the assigned articles and cases prior to our class
discussion.
There are five on-line after class quizzes, typically due the following Wednesday evening after class. Each of
these quizzes is worth 5% of your grade. The intent of these quizzes is to assess your understanding of the
material covered in the prior class. This includes assigned reading from the textbook, articles and cases; and
lecture notes and class discussion.


The on-line after class quiz schedule is as follows:
         Class 1 Friday, October 4th: Quiz due Wednesday October 9th @ 11pm.
         Class 2 Friday October 18th: Quiz due Wednesday October 23rd @ 11pm.
         Class 3 Saturday October 19th: Quiz due Wednesday October 30th @ 11pm.
         Class 4 Saturday November 2nd: Quiz due Wednesday November 6th @ 11pm.
         Class 5 Friday November 15th: Quiz due Wednesday November 20th @ 11pm.
Phones and Laptops during Final Exam
Obviously, for scholastic dishonesty reasons laptops, tablets, phones, etc. may NOT be used during the final
exam. The exam will have problems that will require calculators. You may use your financial calculator for the
exam. You may NOT use any calculator that stores text, which of course includes cell phones, programmable
calculators, tablets, and computers.
“Homework”
Homework problems will help you confirm your understanding of the key topics (these problems are not collected
nor graded, but solutions will be provided on Canvas). The homework problems are listed on the course
schedule.
The purpose of the homework is to allow you to master the material. Although often intuitive in class, you will not
really “get” these concepts and calculations unless you navigate them on your own. Trying to solve the
homework problems will be a good way to reinforce your knowledge of the material and to prepare for the after
class quizzes and the final exam. If you need help with a homework problem after looking at the solution on
Canvas, please feel free to see or e-mail me.
Grading Questions or Appeals
If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the quizzes or exams, or if you feel you need to bring to my
attention other facts or circumstances that might affect the grade for any quiz or exam, you will have three weeks
from the date the grade is posted on Canvas to take such action and have the matter resolved. Please do not
wait until the end of the semester, once you realize you may need additional points, to take this action
(unfortunately by then it will likely be too late).
Use of Class Materials
The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments are
copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal law and may
result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without
the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's Student Honor Code and an
act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things,
uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
students.
Electronic Class Recordings are Prohibited
With the exception of the students who are permitted to do so as part of a reasonable accommodation received
by Services for Students with Disabilities, students may not electronically record class. This prohibition includes
the use of audio and video recordings. The prohibition does not include the use of laptops for the purpose of
typing notes, which is permitted.
E-mail and Canvas
I will frequently communicate with the class with announcements and guidance via email. I will use the e-mail
addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas. If you need to update your email address with the University go to
your UT Direct page and, under personal info/all my addresses, change your email address. Before each class, I
will post our “partially complete” class notes on Canvas. I will send out a class-wide e-mail notifying you when I
post the class notes so you can print them out and bring them to class if you prefer to take notes on a paper copy.
After each class, I will publish the “completed” class notes. So, there’s no reason for extended pauses during
class for students to take detailed notes.


Any outside-of-class announcements that I make (e.g., corrections or clarifications of items discussed in class,
syllabus changes, assignment changes, etc.) will be sent to you via e-mail through Canvas. It is possible that
substantial content will be posted on Canvas or sent via e-mail. It is your responsibility to regularly check your e-
mail and the class Canvas site.
McCombs Classroom Professionalism Policy
The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the McCombs community. The collective class
reputation and the value of the Texas MBA experience hinges on this.
You should treat the Texas MBA classroom as you would a corporate boardroom.
Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and every class session. Students
are expected to be professional in all respects.
The Texas MBA classroom experience is enhanced when:
    Students arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and finish at the scheduled time.
     On time arrival shows respect for both fellow students and faculty and it enhances learning by reducing
     avoidable distractions.
    Students display their name cards. This permits fellow students and faculty to learn names, enhancing
     opportunities for community building and evaluation of in-class contributions.
    Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning in the Texas MBA program takes place
     during classroom discussions. When students are not prepared, they cannot contribute to the overall learning
     process. This affects not only the individual, but their peers who count on them, as well.
    Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and debate are encouraged.
     Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.
    Students do not confuse the classroom for the cafeteria. The classroom (boardroom) is not the place to
     eat your breakfast tacos, wraps, sweet potato fries, or otherwise set up for a picnic. Please plan accordingly.
     Recognizing that back-to-back classes sometimes take place over the lunch hour, energy bars and similar
     snacks are permitted. Please be respectful of your fellow students and faculty in your choices.
    Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment improves when disruptions are
     limited.
    Students attend the class section to which they are registered. Learning is enhanced when class sizes are
     optimized. Limits are set to ensure a quality experience. When section hopping takes place some classes
     become too large and it becomes difficult to contribute. When they are too small, the breadth of experience and
     opinion suffers.
    Technology is used to enhance the class experience. When students are surfing the web, responding to e-
     mail, instant messaging each other, and otherwise not devoting their full attention to the topic at hand they are
     doing themselves and their peers a major disservice. Those around them face additional distraction. Fellow
     students cannot benefit from the insights of the students who are not engaged. Faculty office hours are spent
     going over class material with students who chose not to pay attention, rather than truly adding value by helping
     students who want a better understanding of the material or want to explore the issues in more depth. Students
     with real needs may not be able to obtain adequate help if faculty time is spent repeating what was said in
     class. There are often cases where learning is enhanced by the use of technology in class. Faculty will let you
     know when it is appropriate.
    Phones and wireless devices are turned off. We’ve all heard the annoying ringing in the middle of a meeting.
     Not only is it not professional, it cuts off the flow of discussion when the search for the offender begins. When
     a true need to communicate with someone outside of class exists (e.g., for some medical need) please inform
     the professor prior to class.
Remember, you are competing for the best faculty McCombs has to offer. Your professionalism and activity in class
contributes to your success in attracting the best faculty to this program.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably


expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with
any concerns.
Academic Dishonesty
I have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts damage the reputation of the school and the degree
and demean the honest efforts of the majority of students. The minimum penalty for an act of academic dishonesty
will be a zero for that assignment or exam.
The responsibilities for both students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are described on on the final
pages of this syllabus. As the instructor for this course, I agree to observe all the faculty responsibilities described
therein. As a Texas MBA student, you agree to observe all of the student responsibilities of the Honor Code. If the
application of the Honor System to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to
ask me for clarification.
As specific guidance for this course, you should consider the writing of all examinations to be an individual effort.
Group preparation for examinations is acceptable and encouraged.
Students with Disabilities
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) is housed in the Office of the Dean of
Students, located on the fourth floor of the Student Services Building. Information on how to register,
downloadable forms, including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request letters, and releases of
information are available at https://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/about/. Please do not hesitate to contact SSD at
(512) 471-6259, Videophone: (512) 410-6644 or via e-mail (ssd@austin.utexas.edu) if you have any questions.
Honor Code Purpose
Academic honor, trust and integrity are fundamental to The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of
Business community. They contribute directly to the quality of your education and reach far beyond the campus to
your overall standing within the business community. The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of
Business Honor System promotes academic honor, trust and integrity throughout the Graduate School of
Business. The Honor System relies upon The University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct (Chapter 11 of
the Institutional Rules on Student Service and Activities) for enforcement, but promotes ideals that are higher than
merely enforceable standards. Every student is responsible for understanding and abiding by the provisions of the
Honor System and the University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct. The University expects all students to
obey the law, show respect for other members of the university community, perform contractual obligations,
maintain absolute integrity and the highest standard of individual honor in scholastic work, and observe the
highest standards of conduct. Ignorance of the Honor System or The University of Texas Student Standards of
Conduct is not an acceptable excuse for violations under any circumstances.
The effectiveness of the Honor System results solely from the wholehearted and uncompromising support of each
member of the McCombs School of Business community. Each member must abide by the Honor System and
must be intolerant of any violations. The system is only as effective as you make it.
Faculty Involvement in the Honor System
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business Faculty's commitment to the Honor System is
critical to its success. It is imperative that faculty make their expectations clear to all students. They must also
respond to accusations of cheating or other misconduct by students in a timely, discrete and fair manner. We urge
faculty members to promote awareness of the importance of integrity through in-class discussions and
assignments throughout the semester.


Expectations Under the Honor System
Standards
If a student is uncertain about the standards of conduct in a particular setting, he or she should ask the relevant
faculty member for clarification to ensure his or her conduct falls within the expected scope of honor, trust and
integrity as promoted by the Honor System. This applies to all tests, papers and group and individual work.
Questions about appropriate behavior during the job search should be addressed to a professional member of the
Career Management Office. Below are some of the specific examples of violations of the Honor System.
Lying
Lying is any deliberate attempt to deceive another by stating an untruth, or by any direct form of communication to
include the telling of a partial truth. Lying includes the use or omission of any information with the intent to deceive
or mislead. Examples of lying include, but are not limited to, providing a false excuse for why a test was missed or
presenting false information to a recruiter.
Stealing
Stealing is wrongfully taking, obtaining, withholding, defacing or destroying any person's money, personal
property, article or service, under any circumstances. Examples of stealing include, but are not limited to,
removing course material from the library or hiding it from others, removing material from another person's mail
folder, securing for one's self unattended items such as calculators, books, book bags or other personal property.
Another form of stealing is the duplication of copyrighted material beyond the reasonable bounds of "fair use."
Defacing (e.g., "marking up" or highlighting) library books is also considered stealing, because, through a willful
act, the value of another's property is decreased. (See the appendix for a detailed explanation of "fair use.")
Cheating
Cheating is wrongfully and unfairly acting out of self-interest for personal gain by seeking or accepting an
unauthorized advantage over one's peers. Examples include, but are not limited to, obtaining questions or
answers to tests or quizzes, and getting assistance on case write-ups or other projects beyond what is authorized
by the assigning instructor. It is also cheating to accept the benefit(s) of another person's theft(s) even if not
actively sought. For instance, if one continues to be attentive to an overhead conversation about a test or case
write-up even if initial exposure to such information was accidental and beyond the control of the student in
question, one is also cheating. If a student overhears a conversation or any information that any faculty member
might reasonably wish to withhold from the student, the student should inform the faculty member(s) of the
information and circumstance under which it was overheard.
Actions Required for Responding to Suspected and Known Violations
As stated, everyone must abide by the Honor System and be intolerant of violations. If you suspect a violation has
occurred, you should first speak to the suspected violator in an attempt to determine if an infraction has taken
place. If, after doing so, you still believe that a violation has occurred, you must tell the suspected violator that he
or she must report himself or herself to the course professor or Associate Dean of the McCombs School of
Business. If the individual fails to report himself or herself within 48 hours, it then becomes your obligation to
report the infraction to the course professor or the Associate Dean of the McCombs School of Business.
Remember that although you are not required by regulation to take any action, our Honor System is only as
effective as you make it. If you remain silent when you suspect or know of a violation, you are approving of such
dishonorable conduct as the community standard. You are thereby precipitating a repetition of such violations .
The Honor Pledge
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business requires each enrolled student to adopt the
Honor System. The Honor Pledge best describes the conduct promoted by the Honor System. It is as follows:


"I affirm that I belong to the honorable community of The University of Texas at Austin Graduate School of
Business. I will not lie, cheat or steal, nor will I tolerate those who do."
"I pledge my full support to the Honor System. I agree to be bound at all times by the Honor System and
understand that any violation may result in my dismissal from the McCombs School of Business."
The following pages provide specific guidance about the Standard of Academic Integrity at the University
of Texas at Austin. Please read it carefully and feel free to ask me any questions you might have.
Excerpts from the University of Texas at Austin Office of the Dean of Students website
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
The Standard of Academic Integrity
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is highly valued and seriously regarded at The
University of Texas at Austin, as emphasized in the standards of conduct. More specifically, you and other students are
expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work" undertaken at the
University (Sec. 11-801, Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities). This is a very basic expectation that is further
reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic
endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
         acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
         complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing
          them;
         follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic discipline; and
         avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on
Student Services and Activities.
What is Scholastic Dishonesty?
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines scholastic dishonesty—basically, all conduct
that violates this standard, including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
         Cheating
         Plagiarism
         Unauthorized Collaboration
         Collusion
         Falsifying Academic Records
         Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended deadline for an
          assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
         Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity (e.g., multiple submissions—
          submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses without authorization to do so)
Several types of scholastic dishonesty—unauthorized collaboration, plagiarism, and multiple submissions—are discussed in
more detail on this Web site to correct common misperceptions about these particular offenses and suggest ways to avoid
committing them.
For the University's official definition of scholastic dishonesty, see Section 11-802, Institutional Rules on Student Services and
Activities.
Unauthorized Collaboration
If you work with another person on an assignment for credit without the instructor's permission to do so, you are
engaging in unauthorized collaboration.


        This common form of academic dishonesty can occur with all types of scholastic work—papers, homework, tests
         (take-home or in-class), lab reports, computer programming projects, or any other assignments to be submitted for
         credit.
        For the University's official definitions of unauthorized collaboration and the related offense of collusion, see Sections
         11-802(c)(6) & 11-802(e), Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities.
Some students mistakenly assume that they can work together on an assignment as long as the instructor has not
expressly prohibited collaborative efforts.
        Actually, students are expected to complete assignments independently unless the course instructor indicates
         otherwise. So working together on assignments is not permitted unless the instructor specifically approves of any
         such collaboration.
Unfortunately, students who engage in unauthorized collaboration tend to justify doing so through various
rationalizations. For example, some argue that they contributed to the work, and others maintain that working
together on an assignment "helped them learn better."
        The instructor—not the student—determines the purpose of a particular assignment and the acceptable method for
         completing it. Unless working together on an assignment has been specifically authorized, always assume it is not
         allowed.
        Many educators do value group assignments and other collaborative efforts, recognizing their potential for developing
         and enhancing specific learning skills. And course requirements in some classes do consist primarily of group
         assignments. But the expectation of individual work is the prevailing norm in many classes, consistent with the
         presumption of original work that remains a fundamental tenet of scholarship in the American educational system.
Some students incorrectly assume that the degree of any permissible collaboration is basically the same for all
classes.
        The extent of any permissible collaboration can vary widely from one class to the next, even from one project to the
         next within the same class.
        Be sure to distinguish between collaboration that is authorized for a particular assignment and unauthorized
         collaboration that is undertaken for the sake of expedience or convenience to benefit you and/or another student. By
         failing to make this key distinction, you are much more likely to engage in unauthorized collaboration. To avoid any
         such outcome, always seek clarification from the instructor.
Unauthorized collaboration can also occur in conjunction with group projects.
        How so? If the degree or type of collaboration exceeds the parameters expressly approved by the instructor. An
         instructor may allow (or even expect) students to work together on one stage of a group project but require
         independent work on other phases. Any such distinctions should be strictly observed.
Providing another student unauthorized assistance on an assignment is also a violation, even without the prospect of
benefiting yourself.
        If an instructor did not authorize students to work together on a particular assignment and you help a student
         complete that assignment, you are providing unauthorized assistance and, in effect, facilitating an act of academic
         dishonesty. Equally important, you can be held accountable for doing so.
        For similar reasons, you should not allow another student access to your drafted or completed assignments unless
         the instructor has permitted those materials to be shared in that manner.
Plagiarism
Plagiarism is another serious violation of academic integrity. In simplest terms, this occurs if you represent as your
own work any material that was obtained from another source, regardless how or where you acquired it.
        Plagiarism can occur with all types of media—scholarly or non-academic, published or unpublished—written
         publications, Internet sources, oral presentations, illustrations, computer code, scientific data or analyses, music, art,
         and other forms of expression. (See Section 11-802(d) of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for
         the University's official definition of plagiarism.)


          Borrowed material from written works can include entire papers, one or more paragraphs, single phrases, or any
           other excerpts from a variety of sources such as books, journal articles, magazines, downloaded Internet documents,
           purchased papers from commercial writing services, papers obtained from other students (including homework
           assignments), etc.
          As a general rule, the use of any borrowed material results in plagiarism if the original source is not properly
           acknowledged. So you can be held accountable for plagiarizing material in either a final submission of an assignment
           or a draft that is being submitted to an instructor for review, comments, and/or approval.
Using verbatim material (e.g., exact words) without proper attribution (or credit) constitutes the most blatant form of
plagiarism. However, other types of material can be plagiarized as well, such as ideas drawn from an original source
or even its structure (e.g., sentence construction or line of argument).
          Improper or insufficient paraphrasing often accounts for this type of plagiarism. (See additional information on
           paraphrasing.)
Plagiarism can be committed intentionally or unintentionally.
          Strictly speaking, any use of material from another source without proper attribution constitutes plagiarism, regardless
           why that occurred, and any such conduct violates accepted standards of academic integrity.
          Some students deliberately plagiarize, often rationalizing this misconduct with a variety of excuses: falling behind and
           succumbing to the pressures of meeting deadlines; feeling overworked and wishing to reduce their workloads;
           compensating for actual (or perceived) academic or language deficiencies; and/or justifying plagiarism on other
           grounds.
          But some students commit plagiarism without intending to do so, often stumbling into negligent plagiarism as a result
           of sloppy notetaking, insufficient paraphrasing, and/or ineffective proofreading. Those problems, however, neither
           justify nor excuse this breach of academic standards. By misunderstanding the meaning of plagiarism and/or failing to
           cite sources accurately, you are much more likely to commit this violation. Avoiding that outcome requires, at a
           minimum, a clear understanding of plagiarism and the appropriate techniques for scholarly attribution. (See related
           information on paraphrasing; notetaking and proofreading; and acknowledging and citing sources.)
By merely changing a few words or rearranging several words or sentences, you are not paraphrasing. Making minor
revisions to borrowed text amounts to plagiarism.
          Even if properly cited, a "paraphrase" that is too similar to the original source's wording and/or structure is, in fact,
           plagiarized. (See additional information on paraphrasing.)
Remember, your instructors should be able to clearly identify which materials (e.g., words and ideas) are your own
and which originated with other sources.
          That cannot be accomplished without proper attribution. You must give credit where it is due, acknowledging the
           sources of any borrowed passages, ideas, or other types of materials, and enclosing any verbatim excerpts with
           quotation marks (using block indentation for longer passages).
Plagiarism & Unauthorized Collaboration
Plagiarism and unauthorized collaboration are often committed jointly.
By submitting as your own work any unattributed material that you obtained from other sources (including the contributions of
another student who assisted you in preparing a homework assignment), you have committed plagiarism. And if the instructor
did not authorize students to work together on the assignment, you have also engaged in unauthorized collaboration. Both
violations contribute to the same fundamental deception—representing material obtained from another source as your own
work.
Group efforts that extend beyond the limits approved by an instructor frequently involve plagiarism in addition to unauthorized
collaboration. For example, an instructor may allow students to work together while researching a subject, but require each
student to write a separate report. If the students collaborate while writing their reports and then submit the products of those
joint efforts as individual works, they are guilty of unauthorized collaboration as well as plagiarism. In other words, the students
collaborated on the written assignment without authorization to do so, and also failed to acknowledge the other students'
contributions to their own individual reports.


Multiple Submissions
Submitting the same paper (or other type of assignment) for two courses without prior approval represents another
form of academic dishonesty.
You may not submit a substantially similar paper or project for credit in two (or more) courses unless expressly authorized to
do so by your instructor(s). (See Section 11-802(b) of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for the
University's official definition of scholastic dishonesty.)
You may, however, re-work or supplement previous work on a topic with the instructor's approval.
Some students mistakenly assume that they are entitled to submit the same paper (or other assignment) for two (or
more) classes simply because they authored the original work.
Unfortunately, students with this viewpoint tend to overlook the relevant ethical and academic issues, focusing instead on their
own "authorship" of the original material and personal interest in receiving essentially double credit for a single effort.
Unauthorized multiple submissions are inherently deceptive. After all, an instructor reasonably assumes that any completed
assignments being submitted for credit were actually prepared for that course. Mindful of that assumption, students who
"recycle" their own papers from one course to another make an effort to convey that impression. For instance, a student may
revise the original title page or imply through some other means that he or she wrote the paper for that particular course,
sometimes to the extent of discussing a "proposed" paper topic with the instructor or presenting a "draft" of the paper before
submitting the "recycled" work for credit.
The issue of plagiarism is also relevant. If, for example, you previously prepared a paper for one course and then submit it for
credit in another course without citing the initial work, you are committing plagiarism—essentially "self-plagiarism"—the term
used by some institutions. Recall the broad scope of plagiarism: all types of materials can be plagiarized, including
unpublished works, even papers you previously wrote.
Another problem concerns the resulting "unfair academic advantage" that is specifically referenced in the University's definition
of scholastic dishonesty. If you submit a paper for one course that you prepared and submitted for another class, you are
simply better situated to devote more time and energy toward fulfilling other requirements for the subsequent course than
would be available to classmates who are completing all course requirements during that semester. In effect, you would be
gaining an unfair academic advantage, which constitutes academic dishonesty as it is defined on this campus.
Some students, of course, do recognize one or more of these ethical issues, but still refrain from citing their authorship of prior
papers to avoid earning reduced (or zero) credit for the same works in other classes. That underlying motivation further
illustrates the deceptive nature of unauthorized multiple submissions.
An additional issue concerns the problematic minimal efforts involved in "recycling" papers (or other prepared assignments).
Exerting minimal effort basically undercuts the curricular objectives associated with a particular assignment and the course
itself. Likewise, the practice of "recycling" papers subverts important learning goals for individual degree programs and higher
education in general, such as the mastery of specific skills that students should acquire and develop in preparing written
assignments. This demanding but necessary process is somewhat analogous to the required regimen of athletes, like the
numerous laps and other repetitive training exercises that runners must successfully complete to prepare adequately for a
marathon.
