AET334E         The University of Texas at Austin | College of Fine Arts | Arts and Entertainment Technologies
Fall 2019       Syllabus
20899
Course          AET334E Video Game Art Pipeline
Information     Mondays and Wednesdays 11:30-1PM in ART 4.124
                Course website at http://canvas.utexas.edu
Instructor      Bill Byrne
                williammichaelbyrne@gmail.com
Catalog         The art pipeline for game development is a crucial aspect of production. Moving art assets from the
Description     authoring environment to the game engine environment requires a broad understanding of media file
                formats and the limitations of real-time content. This course is an introduction to creating and working
                with game ready assets in 2D and 3D. Students will create various projects and learn how to work with
                modern game engine features such as Graphics, Physics, Scripting, Audio, Animation, Timelines, UI,
                Navigation, Visual Effects, and Content Management.
Prerequisite(s) Upper Level Student Status
Objectives &    By the completion of this course students should be able to the following:
Assessment      1) Through the use of a game engine, students will be able to create and manipulate content in a video
Instruments           game that includes the following: 2D and 3D Graphics, Physics, Scripting, Audio, Animation,
                      Timelines, UI, Navigation, Visual Effects, and Content Management.
                2) Students will be able to create game levels with custom and pre-built content from other software.
                3) Students will be able to identify the differences between major game engines, and where to
                      generate and create the various forms of content that exist in a game.
                4) Students will be able to add basic forms of interactivity in a game including player movement, and
                      collision events.
                5) Students will be introduced to and be able to edit code written in C#
                   This course has no exams, every grade is a project, presentation or quiz.
                The classroom emulating the professional environment is critical for students to understand what is
Professionalism expected of them in the industry. Below is a list of the minimum expectation of professional conduct,
                this is not meant to be a list of things to strive for, this is what is expected of you at the very least:
                              •   Attend all class sessions, if you have to miss a class, contact your instructor before,
                                  hand in anything due on time and get caught up on any missed material by contacting
                                  your peers.
                              •   Be on time to class, return from breaks on time, and attend class for the entire duration;
                              •   Be prepared for class with proper supplies, books and materials AND/OR
                                  with homework completed and prepared to turn in work in the format
                                  specified by instructor;
                              •   Actively participate in class discussion, projects, critiques and/or activities.
                              •   Use language and actions appropriate for a professional setting, including
                                  cultural sensitivity.
                              •   Do not use personal tech devices (phones, tablets, headphones, etc.) for purposes
                                  unrelated to class. If you have an emergency please leave the room.
                              •   Use school equipment, time, and resources in a professional manner to produce
                                  professional- level projects.


Course materials    A computer capable of running Unity and Unreal engines, Microsoft Visual Studio and Maya. A 3-button
                    mouse.
UT Electronic Mail  Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students.
Notification Policy  Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
                     University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-
                     critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
                    It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his
                     or her official e-mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
                     Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for
                     missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a
                     spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
                    (see http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy)
Use of Class        The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework assignments
Materials            are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a violation of federal
                     law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of
                     class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the
                     University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further
                     disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the
                     purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future students.
                     (from https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Attendance          You are allowed three absences for illness or personal reasons; however, you will likely miss points for in-
                    class assignments or activities as a result, and these generally cannot be made up. However, if a serious
                    medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts your attendance, please
                    inform me as soon as possible. In addition, see the exception below for religious holy days.
                    Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving class without
                    permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as being tardy. Three tardies equals
                    an absence. Four absences will lower your course grade by one letter grade. Additional absences may
                    result in failure of the course.
Religious Holidays  Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes
                    or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including
                    travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized
                    for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
                    student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
                    notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the date they will be absent from
                    scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
                    (from http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf)


Grading    Course work will be weighted as follows in calculating the final grade
           Your final grade will be based on percentages of the areas listed below:
           30% - Projects (there are two, midterm and final)
           30% - Assignments and Quiz (an average grade of your assignments indicated on the weekly outline
           40% - Professionalism (an explanation of the Professionalism grade will be below)
           Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
           fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will be
           inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
           A = 94-100
           A- = 90-93
           B+ = 87-89
           B = 84-86
           B- = 80-83
           C+ = 77-79
           C = 74-76
           C- = 70-73
           D+ = 67-69
           D = 64-66
           D- = 60-63
           F = 0-60
Academic   The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide
Integrity  by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to maintain
           absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the
           University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors
           with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
                 • acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                 • complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
                      assistance in preparing them;
                 • follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
                      discipline; and
                 • avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
           (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
Academic   In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty
Dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
                 • Cheating
                 • Plagiarism
                 • Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
                 • Falsifying Academic Records
                 • Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
                      extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
                 • Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
                      without authorization to do so)
                 • Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
           (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
           Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
           including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
           (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)


Plagiarism         “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining
                   by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas,
                   illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that material as
                   one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement
                   (from Sec. 11-402, http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-
                   discipline-and-conduct/).
Copyright and      Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers. Many
Fair Use           of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine of fair
                   use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright holders’ legal rights,
                   and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will discuss these issues during the
                   semester as needed, but when you have questions about whether or when you can appropriate
                   someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K. Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at
                   http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Services for       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
Students with      qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
Disabilities (SSD) (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-
                   6644). Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I
                   can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
Student Support    There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They include (but
Services           are not limited to) the following:
                   Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
                   of services and resources to support students and alumni.
                   The Undergraduate Writing Center
                   (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for
                   their courses.
                   The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
                   time-management, and note-taking courses.
                   University Health Services (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
                   promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
                   officially enrolled in certain University programs.
                   The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with their
                   personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Emergency          Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide students,
Procedures         faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security of the campus
                   community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff of emergency
                   situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have the ability to
                   disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of users subscribed to the
                   service. Please consider subscribing to this service at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/.
                   (adapted from http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf )
Campus Carry       The concealed carry of handguns by permit holders is generally allowed in outdoor areas, as well as
                   buildings and spaces that are accessible to the public. Permit holders are allowed to carry in classrooms.
                   It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or about their person
                   at all times while on campus. “About” the person means that a license holder may carry a holstered
                   handgun in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the license
                   holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must completely cover the trigger
                   area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if jostled. A license holder may not carry a
                   partially or wholly visible handgun on campus premises or on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or
                   walkway, parking lot, parking garage, or other parking area.


            The open carry of handguns is not permitted on campus. Anyone who sees an openly carried gun on
            campus should immediately call 911. (from https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/students)
Overview of Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be altered to
Schedule    accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design program workshop
            opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be announced via Canvas.
            Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas. Use the numbers in
            the left-hand column of this schedule (01, 02, 03,...30) to locate the Canvas module that corresponds to a
            given day of class (e.g., if you are looking for the reading assignment for the seventh day of class, T 4 Feb,
            it will be posted to module 07 in Canvas).
Class 1             Course Introduction             Overview of Game              Assignment 1:
                                                    Development Tools             Research a game
                                                    Overview of Game Engines      developed with Unity and
                                                                                  write a one-page paper
                                                         •    Why use game        describing why.
                                                              engines?
                                                         •    What game           Install Unity and MS
                                                              engines do and      Visual Studio on your
                                                              what they don’t     computer
                                                         •    Why use Unity?
                                                         •    Why use Unreal?
Week 2              Introduction to Unity           Introduction to the Unity     Assignment 2:
Class 2                                             interface                     With the basic game we
                    Due – Assignment 1                                            have started in class, add
                                                         •    Walk through of     obstacles and retexture
                                                              Unity Editor        your game objects
                                                         •    Setting up Unity
                                                         •    Creating Game
                                                              Objects
                                                         •    Introduce Physics
                                                         •    Colliders – Rigid
                                                              Body
                                                         •    Adding
                                                              movement
                                                              controls
                                                         •    Basic C# editing
                                                         •    Creating basic
                                                              materials in Unity
                                                         •    Importing
                                                              materials
Class 3             Introduction to Unity           Review of Assignment 2
                                                    projects
                    Due - Assignment 2                   •    Refining
                                                              character
                                                              movement
                                                         •    Adding a Camera
                                                              Follow Script
                                                         •    Adding OBJ’s and
                                                              FBX’s to a Unity
                                                              scene


                                         •   Using a Physic
                                             Material
Class 4  Building a simple         Unity rooms continued        Assignment 3:
         environment in Unity            •   Creating your      Write a design document
                                             own room           for your room and
                                             projects           Create a white box of
                                         •   Creating a design  your room
                                             document
                                         •   Creating Pre-Fabs
                                   Introduction to the white-
                                   boxing process
Class 5  Due - Assignment 3        Review of Assignment 3
                                   Custom Unity Rooms
         Preparing custom models
         and assets for Unity            •   Replacing white
                                             boxes with 3D
                                             assets
                                         •   Creating collision
                                             events
                                         •   Coding for
                                             objects with tags
Class 6  Unity Game Manager        Custom Unity Rooms           Assignment 4:
                                   Discussion Continues         Complete your custom
                                                                room assignments
                                         •   Creating a “Game
                                             Over” State
                                         •   Adding a HP
                                             variable
Class 7  Unity UI                        •   Introduction to    Assignment 5 – Create a
                                             Unity UI           design document for a 2D
         Due – Assignment 4              •   Creating a level   game in Unity
                                             complete state
Class 8  Keyframe Animation in           •   Creating
         Unity                               Keyframe
                                             animation in
         Due - Assignment 5                  Unity
                                         •   Adding multiple
                                             levels for your
                                             game
                                         •   Creating an end
                                             game state
Class 9  2D Games In Unity         Intro to 2D game tools in    Assignment 6 – Create a
                                   Unity                        2D Level in Unity
                                         •   Creating sprites
                                             and tilesets
Class 10 2D Games In Unity         Animation State Machines
Class 11 Preparing complete levels In class work session on     Mid Term Project:
         for Unity                 Mid Term                     Create a level in Unity
                                                                using your 3D models
         Due – Assignment 6                                     with sound and basic
                                                                interactivity


         Due - Mid Term Project     Review of Mid Term
Class 12                            projects
         Introduction to Unreal     Introduction to Unreal
Class 13                                 •    The Unreal
                                              interface
                                         •    What are
                                              blueprints?
                                         •    Unreal templates
         Introduction to Unreal     Adding content to Unreal     Assignment 7:
Class 14 continued                       •    Adding starter     Research a game built
                                              content            with Unreal
                                         •    Marketplace        and write a one-page
                                              content            paper describing why.
Class 15 Adding content to Unreal   Creating a level from
                                    starter and marketplace
         Due - Assignment 7         content
                                         •    Creating and
                                              managing lights
                                         •    Baking lights
Class 16 Adding content to Unreal   Creating a simple landscape  Assignment 8:
                                    scene                        Complete your mini
                                         •    What are Actors?   outdoor environment
                                         •    Editing Actor      with Actors and lighting
                                              Blueprints
                                         •    Introduce the
                                              node editor
                                         •    Implementing
                                              them in scenes
Class 17 Creating custom content    Review Assignment 7
         for Unreal
                                    Custom content for UE 4
         Due - Assignment 7              •    File structures
                                              and project
                                              management
                                         •    Importing your
                                              Maya FBX files
                                         •    Adding your
                                              textures and
                                              materials
                                         •    Adding audio files
                                    Unreal White-boxing
Class 18 Creating custom content    Continue Discussion of       Assignment 8:
         for Unreal                 Unreal importing and         Write a design document
                                    white-boxing                 for your room and
                                                                 Create a white box of
                                                                 your custom exterior
                                                                 mini-environment
Class 19 Due – Assignment 8         Review Assignment 8
         Exporting models,               •    Exporting models
         materials and textures for           from Maya for UE
         UE                              •    Unwrapping
                                              materials and
                                              textures


Class 20 Exporting models,          Working with Substance       Assignment 9:
         materials and textures for Painter                      Complete your custom
         UE                                                      exterior mini-
                                                                 environment
Class 21 Due – Assignment 9         Review Assignment 9
                                    Preparing your scenes for
                                    real time rendering
                                    processes
                                          •   Rendering
                                              textures
                                          •   Atmospheric
                                              effects
                                          •   Using post
                                              processing effects
Class 22                            Rendering scenes             Assignment 10:
                                                                 Apply atmospheric
                                                                 effects and post
                                                                 processing to your mini
                                                                 environments
Class 23 Due – Assignment 10        Review Assignment 10
         Unreal UI’s                Introduction to UI in Unreal
Class 24 Unreal UI’s                Continuation of UI           Assignment 11:
                                    discussion in Unreal         Adding a UI to your
                                                                 environment
Class 25 Due – Assignment 11        Final Project                Final Project:
                                                                 Create a level in Unreal
Class 26 Troubleshooting and        Optimizing levels
         performance issues with
         UE 4                       In class work session on
                                    Final
Class 27 Troubleshooting and        Present rough final project
         performance issues with
         UE 4                       Quiz on Game Pipeline
                                    Terminology
Class 28 Due - Final Projects       Review final projects
