                           ANT324L (31740) THEORIES OF ARCHAEOLOGY
                           “American archaeology is anthropology or it is nothing.”
                                  Gordon R. Willey and Philip Phillips (1958)
   “We wish now to examine the proposal, again different from traditional and processual archaeology,
                 that archaeology is neither history nor anthropology, but just archaeology.”
                                      Ian Hodder and Scott Hutson (2003)
Instructor: Dr. Maria Franklin
Email: mfranklin@austin.utexas.edu
Course Description:
          This course is a senior seminar for students who are pursuing studies in archaeology, and satisfies
the “theory” requirement for the Anthropology degree. It is a broad survey of the major theoretical trends
that have shaped anthropological archaeology over time. As such it is a course on the history of
archaeological thought that highlights the major debates and key issues that have influenced the ways in
which we diversely claim to know what we know about the past.
          Why a course on theories of archaeology? We tend to envision archaeology as the discovery of
sites and the pursuit of artifacts since field excavations dominate its public persona in the media. Yet
archaeologists actually spend more time dealing with the analyses of excavated materials and moving
from data to interpretations or explanations of the past than we do digging. The various intellectual
approaches that we take towards drawing conclusions, if even tentative ones, are influenced by the
different perspectives we have of the relationship between the past and the present, what kinds of
information or meaning we believe can be derived from the archaeological record, the questions we seek
to answer, and indeed, how much of the past each of us posits is knowable. Thus, what we often refer to
as “archaeological theory” is best stated in the plural since there are multiple and competing ways that
archaeologists theorize archaeological remains in order to interpret past societies and lifeways. That is to
say, there is not a single, proven “archaeological theory” widely accepted by all. Theories are intertwined
with practice/methodologies and are what frames and drives our interpretations, or what serve as the basis
for our generalizing explanations of the past. Rather than bemoan the discipline’s heterogeneity, it is
hoped that students will come to appreciate its diversity and breadth.
          While we will spend the majority of the semester addressing how archaeologists use theory to
learn about past cultures and societies, we will also explore the politics of the discipline. That is, what
role does archaeology play in the contemporary world with respect to urgent issues such as inequality and
nationalism? Some of the topics that are now central in archaeology that will be addressed include
professional ethics, social responsibility, working with the public, and Indigenous rights over their past.
A note on the format and workload of this course:
          This course was designed to provide students with sufficient background knowledge of
archaeological theories in order to prepare them for graduate studies in archaeology where the subject will
be a core feature of the curriculum. Moreover, it will be taught mainly in the style of a graduate seminar,
where student-led discussions are an integral part of the learning process. Thus, students will be expected
to give careful consideration to the assigned readings in preparation for discussions. Please note that there
is a relatively heavy reading load for this course, and that most of the readings are advanced and may be
complicated (i.e., these are not introductory readings).
                                                                                                             1


Course Goals:
By the end of the semester, students will be able to…
•    …define anthropological archaeology, and what its role is within anthropology.
•    …map the history of anthropological archaeology, noting what key questions, agendas, and major
     methods and theories shaped the discipline over time.
•    …explain the difference between broader schools of thought (culture history versus processual
     archaeology, for instance).
•    …illustrate, given a case study, how theory, method, and research goals relate to one another.
•    …assess the various theoretical positions used to interpret or explain the past: what are the strengths
     and critiques of each?
•    …explain why archaeology is relevant in the contemporary world using examples. How is the
     discipline politicized?
•    …make sound recommendations on how to conduct archaeological research that is ethical and
     committed to public or community service. What are our responsibilities in society and how can we
     meet them effectively?
Course Requirements: Final grades will be based on the percentage of points scored out of a possible
“100.” The total points possible are divided as follows:
1. Co-lead 2 discussions, prepare and distribute to the class a 1-page handout (which includes a synopsis
of the readings, and 3-4 questions/topics for discussion) = 10 points total
2. 4 in-class exercises = 5 points each; 20 points total
3. 2 position papers = 40 points
4. 2 take-home written exams = 30 points
Leading discussions, preparing handouts: You will be assigned two dates for leading discussions and
preparing a handout for the class. You and your co-discussant will divvy up the readings for the day, and
prepare a one-page handout that includes an abstract (general overview) of each reading and 2-3 questions
of each that the class can discuss (2.5 points total). Your synopsis must consider the author(s) objective
and a summary of their discussion. Email a copy of the handout to the instructor at least two hours prior
to class so that copies can be made for distribution (or you can bring hard copies to class). In terms of
leading the discussion, it is your responsibility to get it going and to field questions about your assigned
reading (2.5 points total). There is no make-up for this assignment. With prior approval (no less than
one week before your assigned date) you can switch dates with a classmate.
In-class exercises: There will be 4 exercises related to course content. These are opportunities for you to
work in collaboration with your classmates in applying what you’ve learned via readings and discussions
to ‘real world’ case studies. In order to receive any credit, you have to be present in class. If you are
unable to complete the exercises in class, you can turn them in within one week of the date of the exercise
with no penalty.
Exams: Exam questions will be based on the course objectives outlined above and the exams are intended
to give you ample time to think through and develop your comprehension of the major advancements in
archaeological theory. Thus, you are encouraged to use your notes and readings in writing your responses.
Just be sure to cite any readings. You will be emailed the exam questions one week before the due date.
Email your responses to me on the due date by 9:30am.
                                                                                                             2


Position papers: Two position papers based on readings for this class are required during the second half
of the semester. The questions you’ll be asked to respond to will be based on some combination of the
course objectives and issues raised during our group discussions of the readings. You will receive a
handout with the specific requirements. Please submit your papers via email to me on the due date by
9:30am.
Assignments are due as noted in the schedule below and according to your assigned discussion days.
With prior approval, one late assignment will be accepted as long as it is submitted within one week
of the original due date.
ATTENDANCE IS REQUIRED. You are allowed 3 absences (including excused absences). Two points
will be deducted for each absence thereafter.
Class participation: The majority of this course will be conducted as a seminar, with the expectation that
students will come fully prepared to discuss and debate the readings. Your vocal participation and
preparation are integral to the overall success of creating an engaged and active learning environment.
Individuals will be called on to answer questions regarding the readings, and to offer insights on various
topics.
Minute papers: Minute papers are akin to pop quizzes (although these will not be graded). During or after
a lecture or class discussion, you will be asked to answer a question based on that day’s
lecture/discussion. Your responses should be brief (1-3 sentences) and to the point. Minute papers are an
assessment tool. If I note problem areas in terms of students’ comprehension, if there is a clear indication
that a debate needed more discussion time, or if there are significant observations that should be shared, I
will spend a few minutes at the beginning of the next class to address them. Examples of the kinds of
questions you will have to answer include:
What did you perceive to be the major purpose or objective of today’s class or readings?
Would you agree or disagree with this statement: . . .? Why?
In your opinion, what was the most useful idea discussed in today’s class?
Grading Scale: 93.5-100 = A; 89.5-93.4 = A-; 86.5-89.4 = B+; 83.5-86.4 = B; 79.5-83.4 = B-; 76.5-79.4
= C+; 73.5-76.4 = C; 69.5-73.4 = C-; 66.5-69.4 = D+; 63.5-66.4 = D; 59.5-63.4 = D-; 59.0 and below = F
Required Text (available at the UT Co-op or Amazon):
Please note that you will need to purchase the 2nd edition:
Matthew Johnson, Archaeological Theory: An Introduction, 2nd edition, Wiley-Blackwell, 2010.
Canvas: Grades, readings, and assignment handouts are all accessible through Canvas
(canvas.utexas.edu).
Academic Integrity:
Scholastic dishonesty will not be tolerated, and will be reported to the Dean of Students. If anyone is
caught falsifying excuses in order to make-up a required assignment or plagiarizing, the case will be
submitted to SJS for arbitration. Please refer to the Student Judicial Services web site for more
information: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
                                                                                                            3


  Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations is strongly encouraged
  to contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as
  soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
  Observance of Religious Holy Days
  Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending classes or
  other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel
  for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that
  absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student is
  excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to notify each of
  their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
                           SCHEDULE OF TOPICS AND REQUIRED READINGS
  NOTE: “AT” = Archaeological Theory; all other readings + bibliography will be posted on Canvas.
DATE          TOPIC                        READING ASSIGNMENTS                            IMPORTANT
                                                                                          NOTES
                  HISTORY OF ARCHAEOLOGICAL THOUGHT AND PRACTICE
Th: 8/30      Introduction to class.
T: 9/4        Early history of             AT Preface & Ch. 1                             Lecture
              archaeology
Th: 9/6       Overview of major            Praetzellis (Ch 1)                             Lecture
              theoretical trends
T: 9/11       Overview of major            Harris and Cipolla (Ch 1&2)                    Instructor-led
              theoretical trends                                                          discussion
                                            CULTURE HISTORY
Th: 9/13      Overview                     Webster; Trigger (Ch 6; sections with *)       Lecture
T: 9/18       Methods and more             Ford; Steward; McKern                          Group 1
Th: 9/20      Exercise 1                   Seriation
             CRITIQUES & TRANSITIONS: MOVING BEYOND CULTURE HISTORY
T: 9/25       Functionalism,               Trigger (Ch 7; sections with *); Steward       Lecture
              conjunctive                  and Setzler
              archaeology, cultural
              ecology
DATE          TOPIC                        READING ASSIGNMENTS                            IMPORTANT
                                                                                          NOTES
                          EMERGENCE OF PROCESSUAL ARCHAEOLOGY
Th: 9/27      New Archaeology              AT Ch. 2-5                                     Lecture
                                                                                                                  4


T: 10/2   Methods and theory       Watson, LeBlanc, & Redman; Gould &      Lecture
                                   Watson; Binford                         Exam 1 due
Th: 10/4  Evolution and            AT Ch. 9-10; additional reading TBA     Group 2
          archaeology
T: 10/9   Exercise 2               Ethnoarchaeology
                            POST-PROCESSUAL ARCHAEOLOGIES
Th: 10/11 Overview                 AT Ch. 6-8                              Lecture
T: 10/16  New directions in        Hodder; Conkey and Spector; Leone       Group 3
          archaeology
                  CASE STUDIES IN CONTEMPORARY ARCHAEOLOGY
Th: 10/18 Gender analysis and      Praetzellis (Ch 6); Brumfiel; Arthur    Group 4
          feminist archaeology
T: 10/23  Gender analysis and      Dr. Alan Covey, guest lecture           Exam 2 due
          feminist archaeology     Covey; Silverblatt
Th: 10/25 Exercise 3               Gendered pasts in popular culture
T: 10/30  Ethics; Public           AT Ch. 12; Ludlow Collective; ABG       Group 5
          archaeology
Th: 11/1  Indigenous archaeology   Atalay; Watkins                         Group 6
T: 11/6   Exercise 4               Ethical dilemmas in archaeology
Th: 11/8                           Dr. Mariah Wade, guest lecture
T: 11/13  Cultural contact         Readings TBA                            Group 7
Th: 11/15 NO CLASS                                                         Paper 1 due
T: 11/20  Identity and difference  Harris and Cipolla (Ch 4); reading TBA  Group 8
Th: 11/22 THANKSGIVING
T: 11/27  Household archaeology    Readings TBA                            Group 9
Th: 11/29 CRM (Cultural            Doug Boyd, VP, Prewitt and Assoc. guest
          Resource Management)     lecture
T: 12/4   Inequality               Mullins; Zimmerman et al.               Group 10
Th: 12/6  Wrap-up discussion       AT Ch 13
12/11                                                                      Paper 2 due
                                                                                       5
