ALD 330                                        Espinoza                        Language in Education
Katherine Espinoza                                                                                     Fall 2018
espinozaka@utexas.edu                                                                                 SZB 518C
52Office: SZB 440A                                                                        Tuesdays 9:00-12:00
Office Hours: Tuesdays after class or by appointment
                                                Course Description
This course will provide an overview of theoretical and practical perspectives on the nature of language in
education, its use and usage. Students will explore principles of discourse, phonology, morphology,
syntax and semantics as they relate to first and second language acquisition. We will also cover language
varieties, social conventions and linguistic structures. The course focus is to prepare pre-service teachers
to best meet the linguistic and academic needs of bilingual English learner (EL) students in the K-12
classroom.
Topics include English structures and analysis, exploration of bilinguals’ learning experiences, and
pedagogical strategies to promote language acquisition and development. Our beliefs about language and
its acquisition not only shape the kinds of learning opportunities bilingual students experience, but are
also highly consequential to their academic trajectories. This course is structured to support the student in
designing, implementing and reflecting on the academic language development of bilingual students
across a variety of instructional contexts.
                                                  Course Goals
     By the end of the semester, the successful student will be able to:
     1. Discuss the complexities of the English language.
     2. Explain English language structures and patterns.
     3. Critically analyze the linguistic features of a bilingual EL student’s oral language sample.
     4. Understand language as a sociopolitical and historical construct.
     5. Appreciate varieties of the English language and its ongoing transformation.
     6. Identify the linguistic challenges facing bilingual EL students in the academic context
     7. Design activities appropriate to bilingual EL students’ linguistic needs in the academic context
     8. Identify attitudes towards, and modes of inquiry regarding language
     9. Articulate theories of language (e.g. variation, phonology, social conventions, use/usage)
     10. Identify explicit instructional strategies to address bilingual EL students’ development.
                                                Required Reading
     ●   Freeman, D.E. and Freeman, Y.S. (2014). Essential linguistics Second Edition: What teachers need to know
         to teach ESL, reading, spelling, and grammar. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
     ●   Course Packet available at Paradigm Copies, located inside Melissa’s Boutique 2401A Rio Grande on
         the corner of Rio Grande and 24th.
                                                     Grading
                                                             100-93=A                   79-77=C+
Critical Commentaries                        (10%)           92-90=A-                   76-73=C
Tutoring (10h)                               (10%)           89-87=B+                   72-70=C-
Group Presentation                           ( 5%)           86-83=B                    69-60=D
Mid-Term & Final                             (30%)           82-80=B-                   Below 60=F
Content-based ESL Video                      (10%)
Linguistic Analysis                          (35%)
                                                                                                                1
Fall 2018


ALD 330                                 Espinoza                      Language in Education
                                               Canvas
Use of e-mail and Canvas are essential elements of this class. Successful completion of this
course requires that you record a language sample from your bilingual EL student for
transcription and analysis. Projects and assignments must be submitted electronically, posted to
the class Canvas website. E-mail will be used to communicate with Randy and other class
members. A Canvas Site has been established for this course; the site contains a copy of this
syllabus, project guidelines, readings which are not in your textbooks, and general course
information. Announcements, updates, and new documents will be posted throughout the course;
students are expected to check Canvas regularly. Students are encouraged to post their own
presentations to the group presentation folder on Canvas so others in the class may have access
to them. All students must post their weekly critical commentaries by midnight Sunday before
our Tuesday class session.
                                             Attendance
Regular attendance and participation is required. One class absence is acceptable; each
subsequent class absence will result in a 3-point reduction of the final grade.
    If you absolutely have to miss a class session, talk to me before about your plans for keeping
    up with the coursework and compensating—not eliminating—the absence. You are
    responsible for contacting a class member so that you are prepared for the next class session.
    When you come to class, please sign in on the attendance sheet. Tardies will also lower your
    final grade for this class.
    Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at
    least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a
    class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
    day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
    after the absence.
    If you must be absent on a day when you are scheduled to present, it is imperative that you
    let Randy know prior to class so that adjustments may be made. A letter-grade reduction
    will be given if notification is not received prior to 8:00am on the appointed date.
Class sessions will include short lectures, small and whole group discussions, virtual responses,
and student presentations. In order to accomplish the goals of the course, classes are designed for
active participation online and in-class. Students are expected to come to class prepared to
discuss the assigned material. Your perspectives are appreciated, needed, and respected, and
should be shared. Students will respect the viewpoint of all class members. Students’ grade will
depend in part on ideas and understandings developed in class.
                                                                                                   2
Fall 2018


ALD 330                                 Espinoza                       Language in Education
                                 University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community. All students are responsible for reading and understanding the University of Texas
Standard of Academic Integrity and definition of plagiarism. By submitting an assignment to
satisfy course requirements, you are indicating that it is your own work. The failure to properly
acknowledge use of another’s work is plagiarism. References must be cited according to APA
guidelines. Plagiarism of any kind will result in a failing grade for the assignment and/or the
class.
                                Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). Students are
responsible to provide a copy of their letter to Randy at the start of the semester.
                                      Technology Etiquette
This is a discussion based classroom where your input is part of your grade. Please turn off cell
phones and close laptops during class. If there is a need for everyone to be online, we will all
pull up our laptops together.
                                        Classroom Policies
Our classroom is a safe place to share and develop new ideas and gain understanding; respect of
colleagues’ questions is expected. This syllabus is a work-in-progress, dates and details are
subject to change. Any changes will be confirmed both in class and via class email. As
mentioned earlier, participation plays a critical role in understanding of the material and will
contribute to one’s grade.
                                            Writing Flag
ALD 329 carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you will write regularly throughout the semester,
complete a substantial writing project, receive feedback from your instructor and your peers to
help you improve your writing, and provide like feedback to your peers. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your
peers’ work. A substantial portion of your grade will come from your written work. Writing Flag
classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board.
                                                                                                   3
Fall 2018


ALD 330                                   Espinoza                      Language in Education
                                            ASSIGNMENTS
Organization and planning are essential characteristics of professionalism that will help you meet
assignment due dates and will influence the quality of your work. Late submissions will receive
partial credit. A student with an emergency situation preventing a timely submission should
contact Randy immediately.
          Critical Commentaries (10%): ~1 paragraph (max: 1/2 page) per reading
CCs are designed to help you organize, synthesize, and connect course readings—to easily locate
and identify reference materials for exams and the final project.
            1. Title – Full citation of the reading (in APA format)
            2. Brief Summary – 2-3 sentence summary of key points and note any details, key
                 concepts, etc which particularly struck you.
            3. Response – Your opinion of and reaction to the reading. Did the text trigger a
                 connection or reaction upon reading? Comment on, dialogue and interact with the
                 text. Did you agree / disagree? Why? Did you gain any new insights from the
                 reading? Was it helpful? Why / why not? How does it relate to other readings for
                 this class or others? Does it relate to your work tutoring your English learner
                 student?
            4. Key Question//Critical Concept—At least one idea per week that either (a)
                 requires further clarification, or (b) you synthesized in a novel way and will share
                 with your colleagues.
            5. CCs must be posted to Canvas by midnight Sunday before Tuesday class
        **While informal, please carefully edit for spelling, grammar, syntax and clarity. **
                You are welcome to bring hard copies to class to facilitate discussion.
                                      Tutoring (10 hours) (10%)
Several tutoring organizers will speak to our class at the start of the semester (Wooldridge, UT
ESL, Linder); please either sign up with them, or let Randy know where you will be volunteering
prior to the 3rd class meeting. All 10 HOURS are REQUIRED to receive CREDIT. Up to 3 hours
may be classroom observations.
        a) A signature from your supervising teacher will be required on the Tutoring Sign-in
            sheet each time you tutor. Include your teacher and/or supervisor’s preferred contact
            (email/phone) on the form. Submit this form under the tutoring assignment on
            canvas.
        a) You will also log entries describing your tutoring on Canvas Discussion Board.
            These entries will detail the work you do with your student that day, strategies you
            may have used, questions you might have. You will submit two unique posts and
            respond at least twice to other students’ posts across the course of the semester.
        b) At the end of the semester, you will complete a Tutoring Reflection Form, to be
            submitted on Canvas.
If possible, meet your teacher! Ask the Wooldridge & Linder coordinators to set up a time for
you to briefly meet your student’s teacher to better understand your student.
                                                                                                     4
Fall 2018


ALD 330                                  Espinoza                     Language in Education
                                     Group Presentations (5%)
During the first week of class student will divide into groups and choose a presentation topic.
Group presentations will touch on one key aspect of the week’s readings, incorporating one or
more of the English proficiency standards (ELPS). At least 2 group members must meet with
Randy during office hours prior to the scheduled presentation date to generate ideas and
materials for the presentation. Presentations should be engaging, connected to the class readings,
interactive, collaborative, and informative. Consider interactive, non-lecture formats for these
presentations. Make sure to start on time and work out any technical issues prior to presenting.
Please see Canvas for the expanded Grading Rubric. No PPT lectures allowed.
                                       Midterm & Final (30%)
The exams after Week 5 (15%) and Week 11 (15%) will consist of multiple choice, essay and
short answer questions
                           Content-Based ESL Instruction Video (10%)
During the second week of class students will choose partners to develop a content-area
instructional video (2-5 minutes) for bilingual EL learners. Videos will incorporate one or more
of the strategies covered in Diaz-Rico (Sheltered Instruction), Goldenberg, and Fang (expository
texts). Videos will present a key content area objective while also addressing a language
objective and ELPS for your grade level of choice. Please see Canvas for the expanded Grading
Rubric.
                                      Linguistic Analysis (35%)
Students will display their understanding of both (1) the distinct structure and features of oral
English, and (2) the linguistic development of bilingual student by analyzing a language sample
from a tutoring session with their student. Language samples will include approximately 10
minutes of discussion around an academic topic. Claims made in the linguistic analyses must be
supported by references drawn from course readings as well as external texts.
    ➔ Final projects will consist of--
Introduction
How do you connect with your student? What have you learned about yourself and your student
beyond our course teachings? What kind of EL/bilingual instruction does your student
experience? How has this experience influenced your perspective on language and culture in the
community? Connect to course readings as possible. (1.5-2 pp.)
Linguistic Analysis
Critical analysis of your student’s linguistic development as represented in the language sample:
     1. Phonological development
     2. Morphological development
     3. Syntactic development (cont.)
     4. Semantic development
     5. Pragmatic competence (e.g., discourse routines, social conventions).
     6. Free choice: anything else that strikes you as important--Analysis of additional features
         not listed but studied this semester are welcome. (Maximum 5 pages; Minimum 10 references)
                                                                                                    5
Fall 2018


ALD 330                                  Espinoza                     Language in Education
Recommended Classroom Practices.
                      i. Describe 2-3 recommended instructional strategies for working with your
                         bilingual EL student.
                     ii. Strategies should target improving content area development and
                         comprehension based on your work together.
                                                              (1-2 pages; min. 4 references)
SOLOM Results and Discussion. (Only to be completed if tutoring occurs in English**)
Throughout your classroom observations and tutoring sessions, take the time to chat in English,
or better yet, observe your student chatting with classmates during academic periods. Make sure
at least one of your observation blocks consists of English instruction- either ESL or core content
in sheltered English. Analyze the how and why of your participant’s SOLOM results. How
(well) does the SOLOM measure a learner’s use of: syntax, semantics, morphology, phonology,
language use/usage? Which features of the EL student’s oral language prompted the rater to
place him/her at each level in each domain? Does the overall rating reflect the EL student’s
abilities in the larger academic context? How well do ratings in the individual language ability
areas reflect the overall assessment? What questions did the SOLOM answer for you as a
teacher? Were any areas of concern left unaddressed?
                                                              (1-2 pages; min. 2 references)
Reference list for all sections
         Canvas upload (Final): Linguistic Analysis
             ● Narrative (Introduction, Linguistic Analysis, Recommended Classroom Practices)
             ● Copy of completed SOLOM, less bilingual EL student name (if tutoring done in
                 English**)
             ● Annotated Transcript of the language sample (scan or hard copy)
                 Style Guide:
                         References in APA format (www.apastyle.org );
                         Appropriate use of headers and sub-headers to organize the written text
                         Double-spaced, 12 pt. font
                         One-inch margins
                         Last name/page number(s) in footer
(continued)
                                                                                                  6
Fall 2018


ALD 330                                 Espinoza                       Language in Education
                          All materials must be uploaded electronically
                         to Canvas (Narrative; SOLOM; Transcript) by
                                 DECEMBER 4TH AT 11:59PM
                                        Additional Details:
        Language Sample, Working with Your EL Student, Linguistic Analysis Project
       In the 2nd or 3rd week of your tutoring experience, you will record a language sample
       with your bilingual student.
       You will not be interviewing your student, rather you will be recording a regular tutoring
       session. You will then transcribe this language sample, both your language and your
       student’s, and use this as the base of your linguistic analysis.
       Print out a copy of your transcript and bring this to class with you. You will use the
       language elicited from the L2 learner to identify various linguistic features we examine in
       class. In class, we will workshop our transcripts, looking for examples of:
               Pragmatic competence
               Semantic development
               Phonological development
               Morphological development
               Syntactic development
       As you work with your student throughout the semester, reflect on his/her language
       production. As you get to know your student you will want to observe his/her English
       language as well. Most of your tutoring will be in Spanish, but attempt to target your
       student’s classroom both during Spanish and English instruction; not only to get to know
       your student’s linguistic repertoire, but also to observe the teacher’s presentation.
Week 0                                 Introduction & Overview                               9/4
    ● Fillmore-Snow (2000) What Elementary Teachers Need to Know About Language
Semana 1                Language Policy and Bilingual/ EL Education                          9/11
                          Learning Language, Learning Content
    ● Macias, R. (2014) Benefits of Bilingualism: In the eye of the beholder? In R.M. Callahan
       & P.C. Gándara (Eds.) The Bilingual Advantage: Language, Literacy, and the Labor
       Market, pp. 3-15. Multilingual Matters: Clevedon, U.K.
    ● Hakuta, K. (2011). Educating language minority students and affirming their equal rights:
       Research and practical perspectives. Educational Researcher, 40, 163-174
                                                                                                  7
Fall 2018


ALD 330                               Espinoza                    Language in Education
Semana 2                      Language: Learning and Cognition
       Reading, Writing, & Bilingual EL Students                                         9/18
    ● Freeman & Freeman (2014a) How Linguists Study Language: Ch.1 (pp. 1-20)
    ● Freeman & Freeman (2014c) Second and Written Language Acquisition: Ch.3 (pp.52-83)
Semana 3                      Phonology, Reading, & Bilingual EL Students                9/25
                           Sounds & Sound-Symbol Correspondence
    ● Freeman & Freeman (2014d) English Phonology: Ch.4 (pp. 89-118)
    ● Freeman & Freeman: (2014e) Implications from Phonology for Teaching a Second
       Language and for Teaching Reading: Ch.5 (pp. 119-145)
Semana 4               Morphology, Reading & Language Acquistion                         10/2
    ● Freeman & Freeman (2014g) English Morphology :Ch.7 (pp. 180-208)
    ● Freeman & Freeman (2014h) Implications from Morphology for Teaching a Second
       Language and Teaching Reading: Ch.8. (pp. 209-229)
    ● Language Sample Due
Semana 5                       Syntax in the Classroom                             10/9
                        “Just because you can doesn’t mean you should”:
               Modal verbs and other hurdles for bilinguals learning language(s)
    ● Freeman & Freeman: (2014i) English Syntax:Ch.9 (pp. 230-264)
    ● Freeman & Freeman: (2014j) Implications from Syntax for Teaching a Second Language
       and Teaching Reading:Ch.10. (pp. 265-287)
Semana 6                           Semantics and Pragmatics                            10/16
                                  Language Use & Conventions
    ●  Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010). Pragmatics. In
       Why TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, (pp. 71-79). Dubuque,
       IA: Kendall-Hunt.
    ●  Andrews, L. (2001). Social conventions and English use (Ch 4). In Linguistics for L2
       teachers, (pp. 57-86). New York, NY: Routledge.
    ●  Ariza, E.N., Morales-Jones, C.A., Yahya, N., & Zainuddin, H. (2010). Semantics. In
       Why TESOL: Theories in teaching English as a second language, (pp. 81-88). Dubuque,
       IA: Kendall-Hunt.
    ●  Transcripts Due
Semana 7                         Mid-Term                                              10/23
Semana 7                      Academic Content in the L2                              10/30
                       Deriving Meaning from Text
                                                                                              8
Fall 2018


ALD 330                                Espinoza                     Language in Education
    ● Diaz-Rico, L.T. (2013). Content area instruction. The crosscultural, language and
       academic development handbook: A complete K-12 reference, (pp. 115-148). Needham
       Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon.
    ● Fang, Z. (2008). Going beyond the Fab 5: Helping students cope with the unique
       linguistic challenges of expository reading in intermediate grades. Journal of Adolescent
       and Adult Literacy, 51(6), pp. 476-487.
Semana 8               Assessessing Language: Assessing Bilinguals                     11/6
    ● *Cary, S. (2007). How do I assess a student’s English? In Working with English language
       learners, (p. 9-20). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
    ● *Gottleib, M. (2006). Ch.3 Assessing Oral Language and Literacy Development In
       Assessing English language learners: Bridges from language proficiency to academic
       achievement, (pp. 41-61). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
    ● *SOLOM
Semana 9                    Bilingual Students: Linguistics & Language                    11/13
    ● Goldenberg, C. (2008). Teaching English language learners: What the research does—
       and does not—say. American Educator, (Summer), 8-44.
    ● Garcia-Medina (2010), Table 3.1
    ● Callahan, R. (2015). Know more than one language? Don’t give it up!
       TheConversation.com
    ● ELPS (2014) Texas English Language Proficiency Standards
Semana 10              Bilinguals’ Social Integration                                     11/20
    ● Fillmore, L.W. (2000) Loss of family languages: Should educators be concerned? Theory
       into Practice, 39(4), pp. 203-210.
    ● Suárez-Orozco et al (2008). Networks of relationships. In Learning a new land:
       Immigrant students in American society. Harvard University Press.
Videos Due to Canvas
Semana 11                      Language Ideologies                                          11/27
    ● **Bialystok, E. (2009) Bilingualism: The good, the bad, and the indifferent.
       Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 12, 3-11.
    ● **Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The myth of non-accent. In R. Lippi-Green, English with an
       accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, (pp. 41-52). New
       York, NY: Routledge.
    ● **Lippi-Green, R. (2012). The standard language myth. In R. Lippi-Green, English with
       an accent: Language, ideology and discrimination in the United States, (pp. 53-62). New
       York, NY: Routledge.
Semana 12       Code Switching, Translanguaging & Living Two Languages                     12/4
                               Dynamic Bilingualism
                                                                                                 9
Fall 2018


ALD 330                              Espinoza                      Language in Education
    ● Ardila, A. (2005). Spanglish: An Anglicized Spanish Dialect. Hispanic Journal of
       Behavioral Sciences 27(1), 60-81.
    ● Martínez, R. A. (2010). "Spanglish" as Literacy Tool: Toward an Understanding of the
       Potential Role of Spanish-English Code-Switching in the Development of Academic
       Literacy. Research in the Teaching of English, 124-149.
    ● Worthy, J., Durán, L., Hikida, M., Pruitt, A., & Peterson, K. (2013). Spaces for Dynamic
       Bilingualism in Read-Aloud Discussions: Developing and Strengthening Bilingual and
       Academic Skills. Bilingual Research Journal, 36(3), 311-328.
Semana 13                           Final Exam
                           Submit TUTORING Hours on Canvas:
                        1) Sign-in Sheet, 2) Log , and 3) Final Reflection
                            *Last day to upload discussion board entries
Class Schedule
Semana 0:                           Intro and Overview
Semana 1:                           Language Policy and Bilingual EL Education
Semana 2:                           Language: Learning and Cognition--Reading/Writing
Semana 3:                           Phonology, Reading & Bilingual EL Students
Semana 4:                           Morphology, Reading & Language Acquisition
Semana 5:                           Syntax in the Classroom
Semana 6:                           Semantics and Pragmatics
                                    Semana 7:          MidTerm Academic Content in the L2
                                    Semana 8:        Assessing Language: Assessing Bilinguals
Semana 9:                           Bilingual Students: Linguistics & Language
Semana 10:                          Bilinguals’ Social Integration
Semana 11:                          Language Ideologies
Semana 12:                          Code Switching, Translanguaging and Dynamic
Bilingualism
Semana 13:       Final Exam
Semana 14:                          Small Group Meetings
                                                                                            10
Fall 2018
