                                                   Tentative Course Outline
CE 319f Elementary Fluid Mechanics                                         The University of Texas at Austin
Unique Numbers, Lecture and Lab Times, and Locations                                              Summer 2019
Unique          Day           Hour                                Room                 Instructor
C E n319F ELEMENTARY MECHANICS OF FLUIDS (Nine week session)
                MWF           8:30 a.m.-10:00 a.m.               ECJ 1.322
75830                                                                                  LILJESTRAND, HOWARD M
                T             8:30 a.m.-10:00 a.m.               ECJ B.112A
                MWF           8:30 a.m.-10:00 a.m.               ECJ 1.322
75835                                                                                  LILJESTRAND, HOWARD M
                TH            8:30 a.m.-10:00 a.m.               ECJ B.112A
 Note ECJ BASEMENT - B.112A, through B.112
Textbook: Engineering Fluid Mechanics, by Donald F. Elger, Barbara C. Williams, Clayton T. Crowe, John A.
Roberson John Wiley & Sons (10th edition, 2013) E-Text ISBN : 978-1-118-54293-4. September 2012, ©2013
Loose-leaf ISBN : 978-1-118-37220-3
Hardcover ISBN : 978-1-118-16429-7
OR 11TH EDITION or any previous edition EXCEPT 8th edition First Printing
Instructor:         Howard M. Liljestrand
Office:             ECJ 9.102F                       Office Hours:         MTWThF 8-8:30 and 10-1030 / As Posted
Phone               512-471-4604                     EMAIL:                liljestrand@mail.utexas.edu
TA: Seulki 'Ki' Yeo, contact available through CANVAS
Prerequisite:       Statics (EM 306) or equivalent.
ACADEMIC OBJECTIVES: Provide an introduction to the basic principles of incompressible fluid mechanics,
including fluid properties, fluid statics and motion, pressure variations, conservation of fluid mass, momentum and
energy, dimensional analysis and similitude, surface resistance, drag and lift, and closed conduit flow. This course
introduces the application of basic principles of fluid mechanics to solve typical introductory problems of
incompressible flow which are of interest in engineering practice. The basic knowledge of fluid mechanics form a
foundation for developing problem solving skills essential for success as an engineer.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES: Engineering competence and demonstrated ability to solve typical problems in each
of the topics listed in the course schedule below. By the end of the course, each student will be able to solve
problems in fluid statics, fluid dynamics, fluid pressure, fluid continuity, fluid energy with losses, fluid momentum,
fluid boundary layer losses, dimensional analysis, and similitude modeling.
HOMEWORK: Original assignments must be submitted by each student. Solutions will be posted on the web site
of the course. The homework assignment will be graded for solution procedure, numerical results, clarity and
appearance of the report. Students must submit their solutions at the end of class on the assigned due date. If a
student cannot make it to class, scan and upload the homework to CANVAS. All dimensional quantities (in
the given information and in the answers) must have the appropriate units given. It is not necessary to give units for
every value in the middle part of the computations but show that the dimensions balance. Carry 3 significant digits,
at least. Answers must be marked.
PROBLEM SESSIONS AND TUTORIAL OPTIONS: There will be optional problem and review sessions at times
to be arranged before each exam. The TA, peer tutors, and instructor have regular office hours. Texts with other
levels of presentation are available in the PCL Library and can be recommended as needed.


EXAMS: Three tests and the regularly scheduled final examination will be given. All exams will be closed book,
closed notes except that one 8.5"x11" sheet (front and back) of handwritten notes may be used for each test. The
sheets from the tests plus one additional sheet may be used for the final exam. No photocopied material is allowed
on any of these sheets of notes. Any needed graphs and tables from the text and lectures will be supplied with the
exams. No exam material will be accepted after the end of the announced time for submitting the exams. If you
have a legitimate reason for missing an exam, be certain to have someone who can corroborate the reason (e.g., a
doctor). Makeups will not be given for missed tests; if it is necessary for you to miss a test, your grades for the
other tests and the final exam will be prorated. Check to determine if you have more than one final on the same day
and change your schedule if necessary.
LABORATORY: There will be 9 demonstration laboratory sessions (about 1.5 hour each). No lab reports are
required, but in-lab worksheets of the lab calculations and example problems will be completed and turned in.
GRADING:           Tests: 3 at (80/3)% each
                   Optional Final Exam: (80/3)%
                   Homework: 10%
                   Labs: 10%
FINAL GRADING SCALE USING PLUS AND MINUS SYSTEM
Final grades will be assigned according to the following scale:
                          A > 93 > A- > 90
         90 > B+ > 87 > B > 83 > B- > 80
         80 > C+ > 77 > C > 73 > C- > 70
         70 > D+ > 67 > D > 63 > D-> 60
                     60 > F > 0
INSTRUCTOR EVALUATION PLAN: An evaluation of the course and instructor will be conducted at the
end of the semester using the approved UT Course/Instructor evaluation forms.
ACADEMIC DISHONESTY: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since
such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For additional information on these items, see the Dean of students’ website
and University General Information Catalog at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/and
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/.
You are encouraged to work with other students in the class, but the work you turn in must be your own.
Plagiarism will not be tolerated, and suspect cases will be turned over to the Dean of Students for
disciplinary action.
ATTENDANCE: Regular class attendance is expected in accordance with The University's General Information
catalog and the Cockrell School of Engineering policy (see the section on Attendance in the Undergraduate
Catalog). Attendance in the lecture will not be taken and will not be used in determining the final grade.
Attendance in labs is required and factored into the final grade as noted above.
TUTORIAL OPTIONS: Texts with other levels of presentation are available through the UT libraries and can be
recommended as needed. The TA and instructor have regular office hours.
STUDENTS WITH SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS: The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request,
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259 (Videophone: 512-410-6644) or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.


ACCOMMODATIONS FOR RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS: The following statement is from the University General
Info. Catalog, 2017- 2018, see http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-
procedures/attendance/ . “A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. Students and
instructors who have questions or concerns about academic accommodations for religious observance or religious
beliefs may contact the Office of Inclusion and Equity.”
COCKRELL SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING DROP POLICY FOR UNDERGRADUATE STUDENTS: From the
1st through the 12th class day, an undergraduate student can drop a course via the web and receive a refund,
if eligible. From the 13th through the university’s academic drop deadline, a student may Q drop a course
with approval from the Dean, and departmental advisor.
CLASS WEB SITES AND STUDENT PRIVACY: The University must inform students in advance if their name
will be appearing on an electronic class roster. This class has a CANVAS site which is accessible through
https://canvas.utexas.edu/ for all lecture and lab materials, as well as being the site for submission of homework.
Web-based, password-protected class sites will be associated with all academic courses taught at the
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available
within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class discussions and chats, and
exchanging files. In addition, electronic class rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want
their names included in these electronic class rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the
Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on restricting directory information, see the General
Information Catalog or go to: http://www.utexas.edu/directory/faq.php .
INFORMATION REGARDING EMERGENCY EVACUATION ROUTES AND EMERGENCY PROCEDURES:
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, https://financials.utexas.edu/avp-campus-safety:
              • Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
                 buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
                 assembling outside (across the bridge).
              • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
                 occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
                 building.
              • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
                 week of class.
              • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
                 building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Dept., The University of Texas at
                 Austin Police Dept., or Fire Prevention Services office.
              • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
                 found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
BEHAVIORAL CONCERNS: Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) 512 – 232-5050. For more
information visit the BCAL website: http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal/
OTHER POLICIES: All other university policies not explicitly included on this syllabus can be found on the
General Information Catalog: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/.
IMPORTANT DATES (from https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/19summer)
                                                                                                               May 27


Monday Memorial Day holiday.
                                                                               May 28-30
Tuesday-Thursday Registration for continuing and readmitted students for the summer
session for those who have not yet registered.
Add/drop for the summer session for students who have registered and paid their tuition.
Saturday Summer residence halls open at 9:00 a.m.
University Health Services benefits become available to registered students.
Monday Orientation and testing begin for new undergraduate students.
Tuesday–Wednesday Registration for the summer sessions; students who register on
these dates can register for any summer session: first term, whole session, nine-week,
and second term. To complete registration, undergraduate students must pay tuition by
5:00 p.m. on Wednesday, June 5; graduate and law students must pay tuition by 5:00
p.m. on Friday, June 7.
                                                                                  June 5
Wednesday Tution payment deadline is 5:00 p.m. for undergraduates.
                                                                                  June 6
Thursday Classes begin for first-term, nine-week, and whole-session classes.
                                                                                  June 7


Friday Last day of the official add/drop period for first-term, nine-week, and whole-
session classes; after this date, changes in registration may require the approval of the
department chair and usually the student’s dean. (See General Information, Academic
Policies and Procedures, for details.)
Tuition payment deadline is 5:00 p.m. for graduate and law students.
                                                                                    June 11
Tuesday Fourth class day for first-term, nine-week, and whole-session classes; this is
the date the official enrollment count is taken.
Last day an undergraduate student may add a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session
class except for rare and extenuating circumstances.
Payment for added classes (add bill) due by 5:00 pm.
Last day to drop a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session class for a possible refund.
(See General Information, Academic Policies and Procedures, for details.)
Last day a graduate student may, with the required approvals, add a first-term, nine-
week, or whole-session class.
Last day a law student may add a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session class. Last day
a law student may drop a class without the approval of the dean.
Wednesday Registration for the fall semester begins for new summer session students
who have paid their tuition for summer, and for continuing and readmitted students, and
for new graduate students who have not yet registered for fall.
Wednesday Last day a student may change registration in a first-term, nine-week, or
whole-session class to or from the pass/fail or credit/no credit basis.
Tuesday Last class day for first-term two-hour law classes.
Last day to drop a first-term two-hour law class, with required approvals.


                                                                                     July 4
Thursday Independence Day Holiday
                                                                                     July 5
Friday Reading day for first-term two-hour law classes.
                                                                                     July 8
Monday Final examinations for first-term two-hour law classes.
                                                                                    July 10
Wednesday Last class day for first-term three-hour law classes.
Last day to drop a first-term three-hour law class, with required approvals.
                                                                                    July 11
Thursday Last class day for first-term classes.
Last day to drop a first-term class,with required approvals.
Reading day for first-term three-hour law class.
                                                                                    July 12
Friday Registration for students enrolling for the second term only. To complete
registration, undergraduate students must pay tuition by 5:00 p.m. on Friday, July 12;
graduate and law students must pay tuition by 5:00 p.m. on Tuesday, July 16.
                                                                                        Jul
                                                                                          y
                                                                                        12-
                                                                                         13
Friday-Saturday Final examinations for first-term classes, including first-term three-hour
law classes. Nine-week and whole-session classes do not meet.
Saturday First session housing must check out of University residence halls by 2:00 p.m.


Sunday Second session housing may check in to University residence halls starting at
9:00 a.m.
July 15 Monday Classes begin for second-term classes.
 July 16
Tuesday Last day of the official add/drop period for the second term; after this date,
changes in registration may require the approval of the department chair and usually the
student's dean. (See General Information, Academic Policies and Procedures, for
details.)
Tuition payment deadline is 5:00 p.m. for graduate and law students.
                                                                                      July 18
Thursday Fourth class day for second-term classes; this is the date the official
enrollment count is taken.
Last day an undergraduate student may add a second-term class except for rare and
extenuating circumstances.
Payment for added classes (add bill) due by 5:00 p.m.
Last day to drop a second-term class for a possible refund. (See General Information,
Registration Tuition and Fees, for details.)
Last day a graduate student may, with the required approvals, add a second-term class.
Last day a law student may add a second-term course. Last day a law student may drop
a second-term course without the approval of the dean.
                                                                                      July 19
Friday Last day to apply for an undergraduate or a law degree.
Last day a law student may register in absentia.
July 24 Wednesday Last day during the summer session for new summer session
students and for continuing, readmitted, and new graduate students to register for the fall
semester.
Tuesday Tuition bills for the fall semester distributed to students electronically. Notice is
sent to the e-mail address on the student's record.
Last class day for nine-week classes.
Last day to drop a nine-week class. (See General Information, Academic Policies and
Procedures, for details.)


Wednesday Reading day for nine-week law classes.
                                                                            July 31-August 1
Wednesday–Thursday Final examinations for nine-week classes except in the School of
Law.
                                                                                   August 1-2
Thursday-Friday Final examinations for nine-week law classes.
                                                                                      August 2
Friday Last day a student may change registration in a second-term class to or from the
pass/fail or credit/no credit basis.
Last day to apply for a graduate degree.
                                                                                      August 3
Saturday Nine-week session housing must check out of University residence halls by
9:00 a.m.
                                                                                      August 9
Friday Last class day for second-term two-hour law classes.
Last day to drop a second-term two-hour law class, with required approvals.
                                                                                    August 10
Saturday Reading day for second-term two-hour law classes.
                                                                                 August 12-13
Monday-Tuesday Final examinations for second-term two-hour law classes.
August 16
Friday Tuition payment deadline is 5:00 p.m. for undergraduate students who registered
for the fall semester by Wednesday, July 24. The payment deadline for graduate and law
students is the fourth class day of the fall semester.
Last class day for second-term and whole-session classes, including three- and four-hour
law classes.
Last day to submit master's report, recital, thesis, doctoral dissertation, or treatise to the
graduate dean.
Last day to drop a second-term or whole-session class. (See General
Information, Academic Policies and Procedures, for details.)
Last day an undergraduate student may register in absentia.


                                                                                                           August 17
        Saturday Final examinations for second-term and whole-session classes, except in the
        School of Law.
        Reading day in the School of Law.
                                                                                                           August 19
        Monday Final examinations for second-term and whole-session classes.
        Final examinations for second-term and whole-session law classes.
        Official graduation date (no public exercises).
                                                                                                           August 20
        Tuesday Summer residence halls close at 9:00 a.m.
 FINAL EXAM - Optional Final
 Thursday, August 1, 2:00 pm–5:00 pm
        The date and time of the final exam is set by university rules and are given at:
        https://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/196/finals
GENERAL: The schedule below is given as a general indication of the topics to be covered. The schedule,
including the topics to be covered on the tests, may be changed in class. If you miss class, it is your responsibility to
become aware of any announcements made in class.
Lecture           Topic                                         Reading____
Week 1
6/7 F           Introduction and Basic Units                    1 all
                Physical characteristics of the fluid state
                Fluid Properties                                2 all
                Units
                Extensive and intensive properties
                Mass and weight of fluid (density, specific weight, specific volume)
                Ideal Gas Law
                Viscosity
                Surface tension, capillarity
                Vapor pressure
Week 2
6/10 M          Hydrostatic Pressure                            3.1-3.4
                Absolute and gage pressure
                Pressure variation with elevation
                Pressure measurement
6/12 W          Forces on Submerged Plane Surfaces              3.4
                Pressure forces on plane surfaces
6/13 TH         Forces on Submerged Curved Surfaces             3.5
                Pressure forces on curved surfaces
Week 3
6/17 M          Buoyancy and Stability                          3.6-8
                Archimedes’ principle


6/19 W         Flow Visualization, Rate and Acceleration       4.1-4.2
               Velocity, streamlines and pathlines
6/21 F         Reynolds Transport Theorem and Continuity 5 all
               Control volume approach
               Conservation of mass – The continuity equation
Week 4
6/24 M         Quiz # 1 (Covering Chapters 1-3)
               Fluid masses subjected to acceleration
6/26 W         Euler’s Equation                                4.3-4.4
6/28 F         Bernoulli's Equation and Pressure               4.5-4.7
Week 5
7/1 M          Separation, Cavitation, Coefficient of Pressure 4.8
               Stagnation pressure and the Pitot tube
7/3 W          Momentum                                        6 all
7/5 F          Momentum                                        6 all
Week 6
7/8 M          Energy Equation and Gradelines                  7 all
7/10 W         Flow in Conduits and Pipes                      10.1-10.4
7/12 F         6-Week Finals – NO CLASS
Week 7
7/15 M         Pipe Systems Headlosses and Pump Systems 10.5-10.8
               Laminar flow in pipes
               Turbulent flow inside smooth and rough pipes – The Moody diagram
               Local losses in pipelines
7/17 W         Non-Circular Conduits and Open Channels         10.9, 15.1-3
7/19 F         Quiz #2 (Covering Chapters 4-7)
Week 8
7/22 M         Dimensional Analysis                            8.1-4
7/24 W         Similitude and model testing                    8.5-10
7/26 F         Surface Resistance                              9 all
               The no-slip condition and the boundary layer
               Drag, lift and pressure coefficients            11 all
Week 9
7/29 M         Quiz #3 (Covering Chapters 8-11)7/31 Tu
7/30 Tu        Instructor Evaluations
8/1 W          Optional Final Exam 2-5
               As set by
               https://registrar.utexas.edu/schedules/196/finals
TENTATIVE LAB Schedule
Week 1 – No Lab Thursday 7 June
Lab 1 - Fluid Properties (week of June 10-14)
Lab 2 - Pressure Measurement and Hydrostatic Forces (week of June 17-19)
Lab 3 - Flow Visualization and Continuity (week of June 24-28)
Lab 4 - Bernoulli Equation (week of July 1-5)
Lab 5 - Momentum Equation (week of July 8-12)
Lab 6 - Dimensional Analysis and Similitude (July 15-19)
Lab 7 - Laminar and Turbulent Flow (July 22-26)
Week 9 – No Lab Tuesday 30 July Return of Exam 3 and Instructor Evaluations Instead
