University of Texas at Austin                                                                       Fall 2018
   WRITING FOR GAMES
RTF 344M/AET 337
CMA 4.144 | TTh 5 - 6:30pm
Professor: Susan O’Connor | email: susanoconnor@utexas.edu | text: (512) 565-6124
Oﬃce Location and Hours: CMA 6.166 Thursdays, 2:30 - 5pm
TA: Alessandra Lichtenfeld | Oﬃce Hours: By appointment
Why study interactive storytelling?
Because it explores two of the most powerful forces in our lives: the stories we tell, and the
technology we use.
Stories and computers are both tools that enable us to connect with the world around us — and
with each other.
We can think of interactive storytelling as a form of dramatic writing, just like theater or television.
But what makes it exciting and weird is that the writer does not control the story; the audience
does. Creatives (like you) have only just begun to explore the storytelling possibilities of this field.
All semester long, we will be wrestling with one central idea:
                                  How we tell stories in this new medium
Why is this course important?
Because this moment in time is a turning point for digital storytellers. We still don’t really know how
this medium works when it comes to narrative. The creative discoveries we make in the next few
years could shape games (and stories) for decades to come - and this class can be the beginning of
that adventure for you.
In the 1920s and ‘30s, writers invented new ways to tell stories, using an exotic technology called
film. Writers today are playing around with games, digital media, VR, and augmented reality. They
have questions, lots of questions. What does it mean, to share the story with the audience? What
new possibilities does that open up for us? What can we do now, that we could never do before?
In this class, we will ask new questions, make new discoveries, and (with any luck) start to blaze a
new path forward.
RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                            1


University of Texas at Austin                                                                     Fall 2018
What will I be able to do by the end of this course?
By the end of this course, you will be able to:
        • Compare and contrast diﬀerent forms of media, to better understand how writers create
          interactive stories
        • Understand and analyze how stories are structured - in both old media and new
        • Create a cast of characters, including player avatars and non-player characters (NPCs)
        • Understand how game design and narrative intersect - or collide
        • Use storytelling tools from diﬀerent media to craft a story for a level of a game
        • Write an interactive script, just like the pros do
What skills will I develop?
Over the course of the semester, you will develop strengths in the following areas:
        • Creative writing and problem-solving skills
        • Communication skills, both written and verbal
        • Critical thinking skills
        • Collaborative learning; the ability to give (and receive) constructive feedback
        • Design-thinking skills, including emotional intelligence and empathy
        • Creative flexibility - the ability to generate and revise content under tight deadlines
How will you teach this class?
This class relies heavily discussions and small-group work, both inside and outside of class.
Lectures will be kept as short as possible. The best way to learn is to learn by doing, so come to
class ready to Do. Class participation is an important part of your grade.
How do I succeed in this class?
To answer this question, I looked to two of my past students. One was an AET major; one was from
RTF. This class was a real challenge for both of them. But they stuck with the work, they persevered
through the challenging moments in the semester, and they came out the other side as more
confident and skilled creatives. I learned a lot from them about how to succeed.
Here’s what I think they would suggest:
• Be prepared. Do the readings, play the games, come ready to work. We will be doing a fair
  amount of work in-class, and you want to be able to hit the ground running.
RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                          2


University of Texas at Austin                                                                     Fall 2018
• Help others when you can. Your attendance and your level of participation - in class
  conversations, in workshops and in online discussions - will be part of your overall grade. Bring
  your whole self to class. You will be learning from each other as much as you will be learning from
  me.
• Ask for help when you need it. This subject matter is a combination of left-brain and right-brain
  work, and it can be challenging in surprising ways. Reach out for help when you need it - myself,
  the TA, the writing tutor, and your fellow students can be great resources.
• Be here now. Don’t use cell phones in class. They prevent you and those around you from
  learning. Most of the time, you won’t need your laptops open, either. I need you for a few hours a
  week. For the short time we are together, let’s give each other our full attention.
• Go pro. Professionals deliver work that is clean and well-written. Set this as a standard for
  yourself, too. Before turning in writing assignments, use spellcheck. A paper full of errors is
  diﬃcult to read, and this will negatively aﬀect the grader’s first impression.
This class is designed with your success in mind. You’ve got this. I’m here to help.
What textbooks will I need?
You will spend plenty of time this semester reading books, watching movies, and playing games.
Hooray! A few textbooks that you will want to order right away are:
• Hamlet on the Holodeck (2016 edition) by Janet Murray (be sure to get the 2016 edition!)
• The Anatomy of Story by John Truby
You can find the full list of required materials on Canvas.
What does our class schedule look like?
The course follows a series of modules that include Story Structure, Character, Design,
Environment, and Dialog. See Canvas for more.
How will I be graded?
The main focus of this class will be your final deliverable, which will be worth 40% of your grade. I
will be assigning frequent in-class and out-of-class supporting activities, which will comprise
another 40% of your grade. You’ll also be graded on attendance (10%) and participation (10%).
For the full grading scheme, see Canvas.
RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                          3


University of Texas at Austin                                                                       Fall 2018
This class carries a Writing Flag. What does that mean?
In this class - as in any Writing Flag course - you will:
1. Write regularly, several times during the
     semester, and complete writing projects                    What if I need extra help
     that are substantial, such as critical essays                    with my writing?
     and creative work;
                                                                    No problem! Just visit the
2. Rewrite your work, incorporating feedback                   Moody Writing Support program.
     from the instructor, TA, and fellow students;
                                                               They provide one-on-one support
     and
                                                               for students enrolled in this class.
3. Earn at least one-third of your grade - if not
     more - through your writing assignments.
But wait! What about [_______]?
If you don’t see your question answered here, please let me know. I am here to help.The full syllabus
- including policies on late work & absences, as well as university-wide policies and campus
resources - will be posted on Canvas under Module 00, Class Resources.
OK sounds good. Can you tell us a little bit about yourself?
Yes, I can. After graduating from UT Austin (B.A. Art History), I started my career as a writer at a
small game studio down on Congress Avenue. Since then, I’ve worked on over 25 game titles.
Some were good, some were not so good! The good ones include BioShock, Tomb Raider, and Far
Cry 2. Titles in my portfolio have sold over 30 million copies and generated over half a billion dollars
in sales. (Not all of that money went to me.)
Early in my career, I didn’t know any other game writers. I wanted to find them, and to create a
place where we could come together and learn from each other, so I founded the Game Writers
Conference, which is now the Game Narrative Summit at GDC.
Some of my recent projects include an interactive-television show with Netflix and a VR game with a
studio here in Austin. And, of course, this class. I feel very fortunate to be your professor, and I’m
looking forward to working with you and exploring this material together.
- Professor O’Connor
RTF 344M/AET 337                                                                                            4
