       PUBLIC COPY – DETAILED SYLLABUS AVAILABLE ON CANVAS
ANS 379/CL 323           Spring 2019                          Dr. C.M. Lai
Capstone Seminar in Asian Studies
All lectures and readings in English; no previous background in Chinese language,
culture or literature is required.
Required:        [All course texts available at the University Co-op Bookstore]
CAO Xueqin, translated by David Hawkes, The Story of the Stone, Vols. I, II, III
        (Penguin, 1973, 1977, 1980) [aka Honglou meng (Dream of the Red Chamber)]
CAO Xueqin and Gao E, translated by John Minford, The Story of the Stone, Vols. IV, V
        (Penguin, 1982, 1986)
Richard J. Smith, The Qing Dynasty and Traditional Chinese Culture (Rowman and
        Littlefield, 2015) [QDTCC]
Course Description – Cultural Memory and the Classic Chinese Novel
     2019 Novel: The Story of the Stone (aka Dream of the Red Chamber)
        The focus of this course is on the masterpiece 18th c. Chinese novel, Dream of the
Red Chamber (Honglou meng 紅樓夢), with the alternate title of The Story of the Stone
(Shitou ji 石頭記). Lectures and seminar-style discussion will examine the metaphors
and mythology from Chinese cultural memory that are present in this classic novel. In
particular, the course will introduce American students to one of the most well-known of
Chinese literary figures in Lin Daiyu, the novel’s female protagonist that holds a
significant place in Chinese cultural memory. Lin Daiyu’s cultural significance is
comparable to Juliet or Ophelia in Western cultural memory. This close study of the
enduring appeal of the characterization of Lin Daiyu will include a perusal of antecedents
for the Chinese “goddess” archetype in literary memory. Lectures will provide literary
and socio-historical contexts for the novel. A selection of primary and secondary source
readings will introduce a cross-section of influential works from classical literature and
the major founding schools of Chinese thought. Complementary study will include the
viewing of modern-day visual and dramatic representations of this novel.
        The core of the seminar will be the intensive reading and study of The Story of the
Stone. Our reading of the novel in this course is modeled after the original serial nature
of the work, where segments of the story were serially released, and read and discussed
with great fervor in both public and private spheres. The attendant commentary and
reimagining of the story belonged to the reading public. One could argue that this was
one of the earliest prominent works to spawn “fan fiction,” especially in the context of
Chinese artistic ownership, or lack thereof. We will consider the novel in this light of
pop culture, and address the work as a stellar example of how a lowbrow cultural practice
has evolved into a highbrow dynamic.
                                                                                           1


Statement on Global Cultures and Writing Flags:
Global Cultures: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of
at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Writing: This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you
improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and to read
and discuss your peers' work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
your written work.
Course Grade Based On:
      There is no final written exam in this course.
      There is a class attendance policy.
      No late assignments are accepted; no make-up of missed assignments and
          presentations allowed
I.        20%      Class discussion, participation and “preparedness” (including
                   in-class informal writing)
II.       50%      Reading and Discussion Questions –Weekly 1-page Response Writings
III.      15%      One 5-6 page Research Inquiry Note (due 5/12/19)
IV.       10%      One Oral Presentation (on QDTCC chapter),Weeks 5-11 Roundtables
V.        5%       One “Fan Fiction” scenario piece (2 pages) (due 5/3/19)
                                     COURSE EXPECTATIONS
      This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
      No assignments will be accepted after the last day of term. Your final course
          grade will be based on work completed up to this date.
      There is no written final exam for this course.
      Laptop Use Policy – Laptops may ONLY be used for your designated
          presentation day
      Any Electronic Devices Use Policy – All devices must be turned off during
          class. Any use of these devices, including texting, websurfing, etc. will lead to
          dismissal from class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat offenders
          will result in a filing of a report of academic problems.
      There is a class attendance policy for this course.
          Quality class discussion is vital for success in this course and thus attendance is
incumbent for such participation. As well, lectures will be vital for background on
literary and historical contexts and schools of thought, as well as fleshing out ideas and
concepts for discussion, all of which cannot be replaced by reading lecture outlines online.
In-class writing and oral presentation work cannot be made up.
ATTENDANCE POLICY – More than 2 unexcused absences, your final class
discussion/participation grade deducted a FULL grade (e.g. A- to B-); additional
half grades deducted for each additional absence.
                                                                                                             2


          It is your responsibility to inform me of extenuating circumstances
         More than 1 hour late to class will result in a “half” absence
         Leaving early from class will result in a “half” absence
         More than 8 absences will result in a failing grade for the course.
     Religious Holidays – Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules.
     If you miss an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy
     day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the
     absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your
     instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to
     observe a religious holy day.
I.        Class and online discussion, participation and “preparedness” (20%)
          Discussion is essential for an understanding and appreciation of the literature.
Both verbal and written forms of expression are emphasized in this course. You will be
called upon to be lead discussant -- be prepared to lead with discussion questions and/or
observations for each class session. Always come to class with at least two observations
to contribute to discussion. The reading of the novel will be a balance between an
“intensive” focus on details and “extensive” broad reading.
          Informal Writing          *There is no make-up for in-class informal writing.
          Informal “free-writing” and “list-writing” will jumpstart many discussions, or
continue discussion with Roundtable discussions. I strongly encourage you to be on time
for class as the informal writing will take place at the beginning of class for only a few
minutes. These will be collected and assigned points to be tabulated toward your class
discussion/preparedness grade.
          Strongly recommended approaches to reading the novel:
         Start as soon as possible.
         Keep a reading “journal” with entries for each chapter
         Review this journal in writing your Reading Responses
         Form informal reading partners in your Lead Discussant Group
         Consult Appendices and Kinship Charts in each Volume.
         Consult the Reading Summaries (Canvas/Files) only as a guideline
          Writing – Critical and Analytical Writing
                   See Canvas/Files for sources on academic writing and citation.
          The reading of literature is incomplete without the writing about one’s
understanding of the literature at a given moment. In this course, we will be engaged in
critical thinking and writing about literature; in addition to informal writing in class, there
will be formal writing assignments. We will also work on rethinking and revising prior
written submitted work.
                                                                                                           3


II.     Weekly Reading Response Writings (50%)
All Reading Response (RR) assignments (1 page, double-space) due on
Canvas/Assignments by 11:59 p.m. on WEDNESDAYS. There is no make-up for
Reading Responses. Late submissions will not be accepted for credit.
        Each reading response is worth 10 points. There is no make-up of Reading
Responses but your lowest score (including 0 for one missed) will be dropped in the
final tabulation of your average.
        These reading responses are exercises in developing critical thinking and
formulating your ideas and observations about the week’s assigned chapters in the novel.
The expectation is that these responses will stimulate rethinking and “digestion” of
discussion from class. I would like you to regard all informal writing as ongoing drafts,
therefore you are NOT expected to focus on writing mechanics nor to have formal
introductions or conclusions. Rather, the focus is on thinking, analysis, and
brainstorming in written form, with some semblance of clarity and organization to
contribute to readability. Evaluation will be based on the CONTENT of a “focused”
response to that week’s assigned chapters for discussion. (Think of these reading
responses as excerpts of observations from your reading journal of the novel but without
blocks of description or summary.)
III.    Research Inquiry “Note” (5-6 pages, double-space) (15%)
       Assignment Due by SUNDAY 5/12 11:59 p.m.
       No late submissions accepted
     Submit a .doc or .docx or pdf file (double space) on Canvas under Assignments. Allow for technical
problems and wait time in meeting the deadline.
    Rethink your Response writings and Journal, and formulate a FOCUS
    Consult at minimum two secondary sources selected from QDTCC, Appendix F:
     Some English-Language Writings on Honglou Meng (Dream of the Red
     Chamber). Instructor approval needed for other sources.
        Analytical and critical reading and thinking will be the focus for this research
inquiry note. Review and rethink your Reading Response writings, and your Reading
Journal, and develop your observations and ideas into a well-defined focus, with support
of two secondary sources (from Appendix F). Incorporate relevant ideas, interpretations,
and background information from these sources, as well as lectures, background reading,
and potential additional research. View this critique as a point of thoughtful and
analytical discussion, rather than as a summary of the secondary sources. Strongly
support your observations and analysis with textual evidence from the novel and with
secondary source support. How you define the parameters of this framework is up to you,
and should reflect you in voice and in taste, and should be within the scope of a 5-6 page
discussion.
        I look to your Note to reflect thoughtful observations and clear analysis regarding
your chosen focus. Last but not least, your Note should reflect something of your interest
and inspiration as a reader of literature.
                                                                                                        4


        Citation required. Acceptable styles: APA, Chicago, MLA. Plagiarism will
not be tolerated and consequences will include failure of assignment and may lead to
failure of the course. Serious breaches of academic integrity will be reported.
        I expect you to proof your work carefully and to hand in final assignments with
minimal errors in spelling, punctuation, and grammar. The assignment will be assessed
two separate grades, equally evaluated on the following:
Content         Quality of discussion and selection of a well-defined focus, persuasive
support of textual evidence from the novel, incorporation of secondary scholarship
support, and expression of ideas and opinions, observations
Written Presentation           Organization, clarity of expression of ideas and opinions,
proper usage of English (writing mechanics of spelling, punctuation, grammar), proper
citation usage
IV.     Oral Panel Presentation and Roundtable Discussion (10%)*
                *There is no make-up for missed presentations
        ONE 5-minute Powerpoint Presentation and leading a Roundtable Discussion
          on your designated chapter from Smith, QDTCC. (3-4 students per panel)
        Present on the questions: From your in-depth reading and study of the
          designated QDTCC chapter, what are the relevant contexts that contribute to
          understanding the novel? What are the relevant connections to the novel?
        Please sign up for a presentation time on CANVAS/People/Oral Presentations
          by Week 3 2/6. If you have not signed up for a chapter, one will be assigned to
          you.
        Weeks 5-11: Presentations will take place after the in-class break.
The process of preparing an oral presentation of one’s ideas is an integral part of
developing ideas and refining observations. A prepared oral presentation is an excellent
exercise in abstracting the essence of one’s ideas, basically “getting to the point,” and
supporting one’s point with meaningful examples. Your presentation and lead discussant
work should be based on the assigned chapter from the required background text, Richard
J. Smith, The Qing Dynasty and Traditional Chinese Culture.
       Merge your panel’s Presentations into one file and upload the Powerpoint
        file to CANVAS / Assignments by 3:30 p.m. on your Presentation day.
   Please consult with your fellow panelist(s) to avoid overlap in presentation topics.
   Each presentation should be 5 minutes (minimum of 4:30 minutes, maximum of 5
    minutes), with a Roundtable Discussion at the conclusion of all presentations. Arrive
    early to set up any other presentation needs.
   Roundtable Discussion (30 minutes) – After all presentations have concluded, your
    panel will lead discussion on the assigned QDTCC chapter and further discussion of
    relevance to the novel.
                                                                                          5


Your presentation and lead discussion work will be evaluated on Content and Oral
Presentation. You will be assessed on oratory skills, for a well-spoken and well-timed
presentation will greatly contribute to a communication of your ideas. As well, oral
presentations and fielding questions are always good practice for something you will be
called upon to do at some point in your life and career, long after you leave the classroom.
Content         Quality of discussion and selection of focus, discussion of relevance to
                novel, quality of expression of ideas and opinions in Roundtable
                discussion
Oral Presentation Organization, clarity of expression of ideas and opinions;
                “mechanics” of presentation (within time limit, articulate delivery of
                presentation), effective use of Powerpoint presentation, effectiveness in
                Roundtable discussion
V.      Fan Fiction Piece (2 pages, double-space) (5%)
        See CANVAS for worksheet
       Due in Week 15 Friday 5/3 by 11:59 p.m. on CANVAS/Assignments. Submit
        in .doc/.docx/pdf format. No late submissions accepted.
       Discussion of your fan fiction pieces will take place for the last class session.
        (Fan fiction pieces will be posted on Canvas/Discussions to be shared.)
       A “creative” piece of fan fiction will be the endpoint of dialogue on the novel. In
        contrast to the academic nature of the research inquiry paper, view this
        assignment as a form of speculation and conjecture, involving your reading of
        plot, theme, characterization, and authorial intent, to name just a few possibilities.
        You are encouraged in this piece to freelance and forge your insight and critical
        analysis into more innovative directions, along the lines of creating fan fiction --
        prequels, sequels, and other tangential avenues.
       Your piece will be evaluated on:
    Content Quality of selected focus, including assimilation and relevance to original
    novel, effective use of allotted space (2-3 pages, double-space)
    (NOTE – This is fan fiction – written presentation is not a priority but your piece
    should be have clarity and be fairly accessible to readers.)
                                                                                             6


Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
created for each course. Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys.
You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements.
As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated
disruptions. Notifications of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled
downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant
period of time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date.
Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400
Monday through Friday 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
The UT Library
The UT Library offers resource help and many services. The following link is for Undergraduate Students:
     Website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
The Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing to UT
undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment. Location: PCL 2.330.
          Website: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
(Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students)
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for
checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of the
University, your e-mail address in Canvas is your employee address.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                                                                                                             7
