                   THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                 STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:              SW n381T                  Instructor:        René Gaitan, LCSW-S
 Unique Number:              87580                     Email:             rene.gaitan@austin.utexas.edu
 Semester:                   Summer 2020               Office:            3.124J
 Meeting Time:               Mon/Wed 5:30-8PM          Office Phone:      512-232-5871
 & Place:                    Online                    Office Hours:      Wed 4PM-5PM or by appt
                       Dynamics of Organizations and Communities
I.      STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course familiarizes students with the macro context of social work practice. It examines the
reciprocal relationship between human behavior and social environments. It emphasizes the
interlocking and complex nature of culture and personal identity with content on populations-at-risk,
examining the factors that contribute to and constitute being at risk. It introduces the student to the
obligation that social services meet the needs of groups served and are culturally relevant. This includes
equipping students with skills to recognize diversity within and between groups that may influence
assessment, planning, intervention, and research. Students learn how to define, design, and implement
strategies for effective practice with persons from diverse backgrounds.
This course examines the impact of social structure and other societal factor on one’s personal life
chances in relation to equity, fairness, opportunity, and other issues of social and economic justice.
Drawing on a systems-ecological perspective, this course helps students develop skills at using systems
thinking approaches to understanding organizations and communities with special emphasis on their
application to a variety of oppressed and disadvantaged populations and multiple levels of intervention.
Special emphasis is given to the development of assessment skills and intervention methods that are
relevant to empowerment, capacity building and social change within organizations and communities.
Understanding the role of age, race, gender, social class, culture, ethnicity, religion, sexual orientation,
national origin, and physical and mental ability is an integral part of this course.
II.     STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
             1. Discuss communities and organizations as a context for professional practice to meet
                 individual needs, build community capacity, and promote social and economic justice.
             2. Demonstrate an understanding of the value dilemmas and ethical issues confronting
                 social work professionals and their implications for social work practice with
                 organizations and communities.
             3. Assess the influence of community norms, priorities, and competitive community
                 factions on the social structure of communities and the delivery of human services.
             4. Assess various evidence-based intervention approaches for working with organizations
                 and communities.
             5. Analyze the impacts of organizational and community dynamics on populations at risk
                 and relate those impacts to the participation of such populations in organizational and
                 community governance, human service provision, and policy formulation.
                                                                                                          1


            6. Evaluate alternative strategies for initiating change in organizations and communities,
                 including planning models, coalition building, community development, direct action,
                 and legislative advocacy.
            7. Understand the relevance of age, race, gender, social class, culture, ethnicity, religion,
                 sexual orientation, national origin, and physical and mental ability in social work
                 practice that is grounded in social and economic justice.
EPAS Competencies
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on Social
Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the UT SHSSW
engages in ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s Education
Policies and Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of
knowledge, skills, values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following
competencies:
Competency 6: Engage with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 6.2: Use empathy, reflection, and interpersonal skills to effectively engage diverse clients
and constituencies
Competency 7: Assess Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 7.1: Collect and organize data, and apply critical thinking to interpret information from
clients and constituencies
Outcome 7.3: Develop mutually agreed-on intervention goals and objectives based on the critical
assessment of strengths, needs, and challenges within clients and constituencies
Outcome 7.4: Select appropriate intervention strategies based on the assessment, research
knowledge, and values and preferences of clients and constituencies
Competency 8: Intervene with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and Communities
Outcome 8.1: Critically choose and implement interventions to achieve practice goals and enhance
capacities of clients and constituencies
Outcome 8.3: Use inter-professional collaboration as appropriate to achieve beneficial practice
outcomes
Outcome 8.4: Negotiate, mediate, and advocate with and on behalf of diverse clients and
constituencies
Outcome 8.5: Facilitate effective transitions and endings that advance mutually agreed-on goals
Competency 9: Evaluate Practice with Individuals, Families, Groups, Organizations, and
Communities
Outcome 9.1: Select and use appropriate methods for evaluation of outcomes
Outcome 9.3: Critically analyze, monitor, and evaluate intervention and program processes and
outcomes
Outcome 9.4: Apply evaluation findings to improve practice effectiveness at the micro, mezzo, and
macro levels
III.     TEACHING METHODS
                                                                                                        2


This course uses various teaching methods which includes lectures, class discussions, video
presentations, and guest speakers. Furthermore, assignments are provided to help foster deep
reflection and facilitate open and engaging class discussion. These assignments will include
readings, brief case studies, reflective writing pieces, community analysis, and small group work and
presentations. Parallel processing is noted as class and small group dynamics are built around the
same positive community and organizational dynamics forming the foundational purpose of this
course.
IV.      REQUIRED TEXT AND MATERIALS
The primary text for this course will be the Community Tool Box (https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-
contents) developed by the Work Group for Community Health and Development at the University of
Kansas. This work group is part of the World Health Organization Collaborating Centre for
Community Health and Development. The Community Tool Box is available for free online.
While the focus of much of the content is on community health, the tools and skills covered in the book
are easily translatable to other kinds of community issues. All assigned readings and other course
materials are available in the class Canvas page, which is organized into modules for each class session.
Additional readings and materials may be assigned as we progress through the semester. These
readings will also be available on-line in the course modules. If additional readings are assigned, the
class will be notified the week before so that students will have adequate time to read it before class.
V.       COURSE REQUIREMENTS
Weekly Reflection (70 Points) - Writing prompts requiring students to reflect/respond to case
scenarios related to course EPAS core competencies. These reflections are expected to be written
in journal format of no more than 1-page double spaced. The intent is to prepare the student for
the common case assessment due at the end of the semester. 7 reflections at 10 points each will
be assigned through the semester. Specific weekly prompts will be published on CANVAS one
week before they are due.
Community Analysis (75 Points) - Students will be assigned to a task group of 4-5 members to
analyze a community within Travis County (East Austin, Del Valle, Manor, Dove Springs, etc).
Community will have a specific geographic boundary that encompasses at least one zip code. This
assignment will require task groups to engage, assess, hypothetically intervene, and evaluate
interventions proposed for/with selected communities. Tasks groups will collaboratively develop
a handout summarizing analysis and provide an in class presentation. A detailed assignment and
grading rubric will be posted on CANVAS by the end of the first week of class.
Common Assignment (75 Points) - Students will review and respond to a scenario involving a
hypothetical neighborhood coalition meeting. 6 questions will be provided related to course EPAS
core competencies. Assignment responses are expected to be written in APA format and will be
no more than 3 double-spaced pages. A detailed assignment and grading rubric will be posted on
CANVAS by the 5th week of class.
Participation (80 Points) - Lectures, readings, and assignments make up a portion of the learning
experience. Experiential learning through class engagement and participation will make up a great
portion of the learning experience. In order to achieve these learning objectives it is important that
students attend class on-time, are engaged, and present free of distraction (email, texting, etc).
Students are allowed one unexcused absence and will lose 5 points for each subsequent absence.
Arriving to class after start time will result in a deduction of 2 points per incident. Extenuating
                                                                                                         3


circumstances involving documented medical emergencies may be considered on a case-to-case
basis.
VI.      GRADES
         94.0 and Above            A
         90.0 to 93.999             A-
         87.0 to 89.999             B+
         84.0 to 86.999             B
         80.0 to 83.999             B-
         77.0 to 79.999             C+
         74.0 to 76.999             C
         70.0 to 73.999             C-
         67.0 to 69.999             D+
         64.0 to 66.999             D
         60.0 to 63.999             D-
         Below 60.0                  F
VII. CLASS POLICIES
Class Attendance & Participation - Classes will begin promptly at the start time indicated. A
zoom waiting area will be available for students to log into pending initiation of class. Students
are allowed one unexcused absence and late arrival. Subsequent absences will result in a deduction
of 5 points per incident. Incidents of tardiness will result in a deduction of 2 points per incident.
Extenuating circumstances involving documented medical emergencies may be considered on a
case-to-case basis. Students are responsible for checking CANVAS and reaching out to peers for
any information and class notes missed.
Assigned Readings – Readings listed in the syllabus are to be read before class for the days they
are assigned to help facilitate conversation about the topic listed. Any additional readings or
direction around specific page numbers will be communicated no later than one week before
reading assignment is due.
Assignment Deadlines and Late Submissions - Assignments are due no later than 11:59 PM on
the assigned due date. Assignments submitted past the deadline will result in a deduction of 5
points per day. Assignments that are 3 days past due will require a meeting with the Professor
before being accepted.
Writing Style - Certain assignments will require students to follow APA 7th Edition guidelines
regarding professional writing (cover page, running head, in-paper references, bibliography).
Students are encouraged to access UT resources through the University Writing Center to review
papers: http://uwc.utexas.edu/.
Students can use Purdue University online resources to help guide APA formatting:
https://owl.purdue.edu/owl/research_and_citation/apa_style/apa_style_introduction.html
CANVAS - All assignments, relevant instructions, grades and announcements will be posted
through shared class CANVAS page. Students will be expected to maintain their UT provided
emails in order to continue to receive timely communications regarding class or assignments.
                                                                                                   4


Online Etiquette and Professionalism - All University Policies including but not limited to those
regarding conduct, civility, and professional communication still remain in effect with regards to
remote/online instruction courses. As a professional courtesy to fellow peers, students will be
expected to focus in class and refrain from texting, browsing other sites, or answering emails while
in class. All information shared in class is expected to be held in confidence.
Course Modification - To ensure achievement for course objectives, the professor reserves the
right to make modifications to any part of this syllabus related to schedule and assignment due
dates. Should any modifications be made, students will be notified in class and modifications will
be posted to Canvas. Students should check their email frequently. Note that some of the links to
documents and videos on the Internet may change. Documents, new links or alternate options will
be provided
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
                                                                                                     5


communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
                                                                                                     6


CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
                                                                                                    7


Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    ·     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    ·     If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    ·     In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    ·     Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX.      COURSE SCHEDULE
Reading Selection Acronymns
    •    CTB – Community Tool Box
    •    SWDR – Social Work Desk reference
    •    SWP – Social Work Practice with Groups, Communities, and Organizations
   Date                 Topic               Assignment Due               Readings
                                 Week 1 - Intro to Course
              Class Introductions
   Mon
              Class Overview
   June                                                           None
              Syllabus
    8th       Group Dynamics
   Wed        Course EPAS
   June       Assignment Overview                                 None
   10th       Group Assignments
                                  Week 2 - Understanding
               Understanding
                                          Reflection #1           CTB - Chp 2
   Mon        Communities
                                                                                                  8


         Logic Models/Theory of
         Change
 June
 15th    Asset Development
         MAPP
          Understanding
 Wed     Organizations
         For-Profit & Non-Profit
 June
 17th    Board Stewardship
         Task Groups
         Project Management
                            Week 3 - Collaborating
          Leadership within
 Mon     Communities
         Formal & Informal
 June                              Reflection #2   CTB – Chp 13-15
         Influence
 22nd
         Relationship Building
          Leadership within
 Wed     Organizations
         Leadership vs
 June    Management
 24th                                               SWDR - Chp 6
         Servant Leadership
         Leadership
         Effectiveness
                               Week 4 - Engaging
          Engaging
 Mon     Communities
         Communication Plans
 June                              Reflection #3   CTB - Chp 6
 29th    Crisis Communication
         Persuasion
          Engaging
 Wed     Organizations
         Supervision/Staff
July 1st
         Development
         Effective Meetings
                                                                   9


                            Week 5 - Assessing
      Assessing
Mon  Communities
     Tools for Analysis                          CTB - Chp 3
July                            Reflection #4
                                                 SWP - Chp 3
 6th
     Community Typologies
      Assessing
Wed  Organizations
July Stakeholder
 8th Perspectives
                                                 SWP - Chp 5
     Leadership Assessment
     Performance Measures
     Agency Satisfaction
                          Week 6 - Intervening
      Interventions for
Mon  Communities
     8 Models of Community     Community
July Intervention              Analysis –Handout
13th                                             SWP - Chp 4
     Civic/Cultural            Reflection #5
     Engagement
      Interventions for
Wed  Organizations
     Human Resources           Community
July                           Analysis -        SWP - Chp 6
15th ARC Model                 Presentations
     Phases of Intervention
                           Week 7 - Evaluating
Mon         Evaluating
      Community Practices
July                           Reflection #6     CTB – Chp 36-39
        and Effectiveness
20th Logic Model (Review)
            Evaluating
Wed       Organizational
           Practices and
July       Effectiveness
22nd Strategic Goals
                                                                 10


            Key Performance
            Indicators
                                    Week 8 - Finalizing
  Mon
   July         Course Summary          Reflection #7
   27th
  Wed
                 Hindsight and          Common
  June              Foresight           Assignment
   29th
X.      BIBLIOGRAPHY
Corcoran, K., & Roberts, A. (2015). Social workers’ desk reference / Kevin Corcoran, Editor-in-
        Chief ; Albert R. Roberts, Founding Editor-in-Chief. (Third edition.). New York, NY: Oxford
        University Press.
Community Tool Box. (2020, May 25). Learn a Skill. https://ctb.ku.edu/en/table-of-contents.
        Retrieved on May 25, 2020.
Glisson, C., Dulmus, C., & Sowers, K. (2012). Social work practice with groups, communities, and
        organizations evidence-based assessments and interventions / Charles A. Glisson, Catherine
        N. Dulmus, Karen M. Sowers. Hoboken, N.J: Wiley.
                                                                                                 11
