LA f110WB: LIBERAL ARTS INTERNSHIP COURSE
FIRST-TERM SUMMER 2020 SYLLABUS
Instructors
   Instructor: Alyssa Wyvratt • Liberal Arts Career Services, FAC 18 • a.wyvratt@austin.utexas.edu
   Office Hours: Please call 512.471.7900 to schedule an office hours appointment
Course Information
   The purpose of this undergraduate course is to establish the academic foundations of the Liberal Arts students’ internship.
   Students will integrate knowledge derived from their academic studies with the experiences gained from real-world work
   settings. This class will support these work experiences through personal reflection and professional development.
Course Application Process
   Application Deadline: Thursday, June 4, 2020 at 12:00 PM
   See the full details and access the application at: http://goo.gl/ghBRV4
Internship Completion Requirement
   In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the internship before the end
   date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week, you will automatically fail the internship
   course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you will not automatically fail this course; we will work with
   you in such cases.
Assignment Schedule
       Date    Assignment                   Details
       6/8     Course Material              No Assignment Due: Review Course Syllabus and Canvas Assignments
               Review
       6/9     Journal 1                    Part I: Considering the very short internship period, what are your three main
                                            internship goals for the next few weeks? Explain why you have chosen each goal and
                                            how you hope to accomplish each. Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
       6/16    Journal 2                    Part I: How might you be able to use your academic experiences (coursework, projects)
                                            to help you succeed in the internship? How does your major directly or indirectly relate
                                            to this internship? Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
       6/23    Journal 3 & Resume           Journal: Part I: Describe a specific issue of significance to your internship site (ie stock
                                            market at an i-bank, news piece in media, policy issue at the Capitol). Explain the
                                            significance, what it means to your office, how it is being managed and what you think
                                            about this issue. Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
                                            Resume: Details available in Canvas Assignments section.
       6/30    Journal 4                    Part I: In a future interview, a recruiter asks you about the skills you bring to the table.
                                            Name your strongest three and explain how your current internship has aided in the
                                            development of these skills. Part II: Epiphany or Observation of the Week
       7/7     Final Paper and              Evaluation links and Final Paper details in Canvas Assignments section.
               Supervisor & Student
               Evaluations Due
                         LA f110wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer-First 2020                            Page 1 of 3


Assignment Deadlines
    Assignments are due by 11:59 pm on the due date. All deliverables will be considered late if not properly submitted by 11:59 pm
    on the due date. Late submissions will be accepted with point deductions. Assignments submitted by 5:00 pm one day after the
    deadline will be accepted at 75% point value. Assignments received after that time but before 8:30 am on the Friday following
    the due date will be accepted at 50% point value. Submissions received after the specified late submission date will not be
    accepted. For example: assignments submitted on Tuesday by 11:59pm 100%, Wednesday by 5pm 75%, Friday by 8:30am 50%,
    and after Friday at 8:30am assignments are not accepted (0%).
Assignment Formatting Requirements
Please do not include the prompt or headers (i.e. your name, Professor, date, etc.) on the documents that are to be
uploaded to Canvas. All written documents are to be double-spaced, 12-point font, typed in Arial or Calibri font, and
submitted on a Microsoft Word document unless otherwise specified. If an assignment asks for works-cited, a separate page in
addition to the document, should be created to house a list of citations. All citations should be in MLA format.
If formatting requirements are not adhered to, points will be deducted at the discretion of the instructor.
Assignment Descriptions & Submission Information (Details in Canvas)
    Journals: Please include both parts in one document so that you are only uploading one document to Canvas
      PART I: Please write on the journal topics provided in the schedule above. Journals should be reflective, comprehensive, well
      thought out and well composed. Each journal should be at least 1-page and no more than 1.5-pages in length (12 point text, 1”
      margins, double-spaced, Arial or Calibri font). Upload parts 1 & 2 in one document.
      PART II: Please write a brief description of your epiphany or observation of the week and its current relevance. Your epiphany
      can be directly or indirectly related to your internship, personal/professional goals, career objective or daily schedule. There is
      no minimum length for Part II.
    Evaluations: You will submit a midterm and final self-/site evaluation of the internship. Your supervisor will complete a midterm
    and final evaluation of your performance. Evaluations are the only assignments not uploaded to Canvas; instead evaluations will
    be completed as web forms online. Evaluation form links for students are available in Canvas. Evaluation links for supervisors will
    be sent to their email of which you provided in part I of your application.
    Resume: Create a resume or update your resume with your current internship details. You should target your resume to a job,
    company or industry of interest to you. For help creating your resume, visit: http://goo.gl/c0My80
    Final Paper: The final paper has two parts, please include both parts in one document.
       PART I: Write a short description (no page requirement) of your internship and your internship site to be shared with other
       liberal arts students on our website. The goal of this assignment is to help other students learn about the company or
       organization as a potential internship site by describing your role and responsibilities. Use the template in files titled
       “Internship Course Final Paper”
      PART II: Write a two-page paper (12 point text, 1” margins, double-spaced) in which you address the points listed below. The
      goal of this section is to write a reflective and comprehensive summary of your experience. Part II will not be shared publicly.
         1. Summarize your internship activities and the knowledge you have learned.
         2. Reflect on your experience: what have you learned about the work environment as well as yourself.
         3. Did this experience help you decide what to do next and did it give you the tools to do so. If not, why not?
Grading
    Journals ........................................................... 40%
    Resume ………………………………………………………….. 10%                                               GRADING SCALE PASS: 75 – 100
    Evaluations ...................................................... 10%                          FAIL: 0 – 74.9
    Final Paper ...................................................... 40%
                              LA f110wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer-First 2020                     Page 2 of 3


    You must earn a 75 or greater to pass this course; overall grades of 74.9 or below will receive a fail grade for this course.
    Grading Note: In order to successfully complete this course, you MUST complete the internship. If you leave the internship
    before the end date, are let go from the site or fail to complete the required number of hours per week, you will automatically
    fail the internship course. If the employer lets you go for reasons beyond your control, you will not automatically fail this course;
    we will work with you in such cases.
Course Credit
    This course offers in-residency, lower-division liberal arts elective credit and grading is on a pass/fail basis only (no letter grade).
    A passing grade does not count towards your GPA; however, a failing grade does count towards your in-residence GPA.
Course Information & Downloads
    Course information and downloads are available in Canvas: https://courses.utexas.edu/
University Policies
Students with Disabilities: Please notify us of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a disability-related
need. Students may register with SSD and receive accommodations. It is important to note that accommodations will not take effect
until you have met with the instructor and have presented your accommodation letter to them. You may find out more information
on the Services for Students with Disabilities website.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please
visit the Office of Student Conduct and Academic Integrity website.
Religious holy days: A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a
religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to
complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Senate Bill 212 and Title IX Reporting Requirements: Under Senate Bill 212 (SB 212), the professor and TAs for this course are
required to report for further investigation any information concerning incidents of sexual harassment, sexual assault, dating
violence, and stalking committed by or against a UT student or employee. Federal law and university policy also require reporting
incidents of sex- and gender-based discrimination and sexual misconduct (collectively known as Title IX incidents). This means we
cannot keep confidential information about any such incidents that you share with us. If you need to talk with someone who can
maintain confidentiality, please contact University Health Services (512-471-4955 or 512-475-6877) or the UT Counseling and Mental
Health Center (512-471-3515 or 512-471-2255). We strongly urge you make use of these services for any needed support and that
you report any Title IX incidents to the Title IX Office.
                         LA f110wb: Internship Course Syllabus • Summer-First 2020                         Page 3 of 3
