ME 130L, Summer 2019                                                        Dr. Adela Ben-Yakar
                    ME130L, EXPERIMENTAL FLUID MECHANICS
                                          Summer 2019
                  Unique #’s 76515 (1 session, Friday 11:00 am - 2:00 pm)
                       Lectures on Thursday 11:00-noon, ETC 7.146
                                   Lab Sessions, ETC 1.204
Instructor: Dr. Adela Ben-Yakar, ETC 7.132, 475-9280. ben-yakar@mail.utexas.edu
Office Hours: Th noon-1:30 pm
Teaching Assistants: Chris Yoon, cyoon@utexas.edu
Office Hours: TBD
Lab Manager:           Israel Gutierrez, Israel.Gutierrez@austin.utexas.edu
Text: Fundamentals of Fluid Mechanics by Munson et al., John Wiley and Sons (same as for
     ME 330).
Course Description: This is a laboratory course in fluid mechanics to be taken concurrently
     with the ME 330 theory and practice course. Laboratory exercises will involve use of
     experimental instrumentation and facilities, such as water channel and wind tunnel
     facilities. Flow visualization and flow measurement techniques will be taught and
     practiced. During the semester, a series of lectures along with five (5) laboratory exercises
     will provide insight into various flow phenomena with a particular emphasize on the
     interaction of these flows with solid bodies.
Co-requisite: ME 330 (Fluid Mechanics)
Knowledge, skills, and abilities students should have before entering this course
   Knowledge and skill to understand and use differential and integral calculus.
   Understand the meaning of physical quantities employed in Thermodynamics.
   Ability to apply basic laws of Thermodynamics to compute various items.
   Understand the meaning of physical quantities employed in Newtonian Mechanics.
   Ability to apply basic laws of Newtonian Mechanics to compute various quantities.
Knowledge, skills and abilities students should gain from this course
   Knowledge of physical quantities important to fluid flow. Examples include pressure
     viscous friction, momentum, drag coefficient.
   Ability to apply fundamental laws in control volume form to engineering situations.
   Knowledge of fluid flows in pipes and around objects.
   Uncertainty analysis for experimental measurements.
Impact on subsequent courses in curriculum
     Knowledge needed to understand heat transfer, design of thermal systems, and all other
     thermo-fluids area courses.


ME 130L, Summer 2019                                                       Dr. Adela Ben-Yakar
ABET EC2000 Program outcomes achieved:
    Knowledge of and ability to apply engineering and science fundamentals.
    Ability to set up and conduct experiments, and to present the results in a professional
       manner.
    Ability to communicate in written, oral and graphical forms.
    Ability to work in teams and apply interpersonal skills in engineering contexts.
Lectures:
       Lectures will be conducted on Thursdays on the dates indicated in the syllabus. These
       lectures will focus on fundamental concepts and more difficult aspects of the laboratory
       exercises.
Laboratory Sessions: ETC 1.204
       TAs will lead these sessions that will be spread throughout the week. We will perform
       five (5) different laboratory exercises:
       1. Fluid properties and uncertainty analysis
       2. Flow visualization techniques and study of vortical structures
       3. Wind tunnel measurements of wake and drag measurements for a cylinder in cross-
           flow.
       4. Pipe flow measurements.
       5. Lift and Drag on automotive vehicles.
                                       Course Policies
Attendance:
       Laboratory attendance during lab running sessions is mandatory. Attendance will be
       taken by the TAs at the beginning of each lab running session. Punctuality is also
       expected. Late arrivals will not be tolerated. You will not be allowed to submit a Lab
       Report for a lab running session you do not attend and/or arrive late and you will receive
       no credit for that lab. Only under extraordinary circumstances would make-up lab
       sessions be allowed. These would require written documentation of the circumstances
       and notice in advance (minimum of 24 hours before the originally scheduled lab
       session).
Laboratory Reports:
       All Lab Reports will be due two weeks after you run the lab experiment, at the beginning
       of your next lab running session meeting time. Late Lab Reports will not be accepted,
       and you will receive no credit for that lab. Your reports are expected to be neat, well
       organized, and legible. The Lab Reports that you submit are expected to be your own
       work. Copying of any material amounts to scholastic dishonesty and it will be handled
       accordingly. Any student handing in an out-of-class assignment containing any material
       that is merely copied from a solutions manual, another student, a previous semester, or
       that is clearly the work of someone else will be awarded no credit for that entire
       assignment and disciplinary actions will be taken.
Prelab and Homework Assignments:


ME 130L, Summer 2019                                                          Dr. Adela Ben-Yakar
       The laboratory exercises will be assigned as the semester progresses. You are expected
       to be knowledgeable with the essentials of each exercise through careful reading of your
       lab handouts and lecture notes and prepare your pre-labs prior to the laboratory. All
       prelab assignments will be due at the beginning of your lab section meeting time. You
       will not be allowed to participate on a lab without a fully completed pre-lab assignment
       and you will receive no credit for that lab. All lab handouts and assignments will be
       handed during the lecture hours.
Quizzes:
       You will be given a 10-mins quiz at the beginning of your lab section meeting time after
       handing the prelab assignments. The quiz will include 2-3 short questions based on your
       prelab assignments and lab reading material (lab handout and related lecture notes).
Final Exam: TBD
       There will be a “Final Lab Exam” covering the lab material learned during the semester.
Grading: Laboratory reports              70%
           Quizzes/Prelabs               15%
           Final Lab Exam                15%
       Grades will not be curved. Your grade depends only on your scores, not on the scores
       of the rest of the class. It is theoretically possible for everyone in the class to receive an
       A. You are encouraged to collaborate with your classmates. Final numerical scores
       might be adjusted to accommodate for possible discrepancies in grading between the
       different TAs.
Canvas:
       Course communications will be conducted through the Canvas on-line course
       management system. You can access it via http://canvas.utexas.edu. There you will be
       able to see your scores, download assignments, lab handouts, and any other relevant
       course documentation that might become available, check for announcements, and e-
       mail your colleagues in the course.
Special Note:
       The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
       adjustments for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
       Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4241 TDD or the College of
       Engineering Director of Students with Disabilities at 471-4382.


   ME 130L, Summer 2019                                                      Dr. Adela Ben-Yakar
                                       Summer 2019 Schedule
# Week of                   Thursday Lecture              Lab           Prelabs        Lab Reports
                             11am, ETC 7.146              Meeting                      Submissions
1 June 6-7                                                    Meeting in the lab on June 7 at 11am
                          No meeting on June 6                        NO LAB SESSION
                                                           Lecture 1: Intro to Lab #1 (Fluid properties
                                                             and propagation of uncertainty analysis)
2 June 10-14         Lecture 2: Intro to Lab #2 (Flow Quiz 1           Prelab 1
                         visualization techniques)        Run Lab 1
3 June 17-21         Lecture 3: Intro to Lab #3 (Wind Quiz 2           Prelab 2 Lab 1 – due in your
                     tunnel measurement of wake and Run Lab 2                      lab session time
                     drag for a cylinder in cross-flow)
4 June 24-28          Lecture 4: Uncertainty analysis Quiz 3           Prelab 3 Lab 2 – due in your
                                 for Lab #3               Run Lab 3                lab session time
5 July 1-5                       No lecture               Lab3                     Lab 3-Part1– due in
                                                          Discussion               your lab session
                                                          only on                  time.
                                                          Friday
6 July 8-12          Lecture 5: Intro to Lab #4 (Pipe Quiz 4           Prelab 4 Lab 3-Part2– due in
                                    flow)                 Run Lab 4                your lab session
                                                                                   time
7 July 15-19          Lecture 6: Intro to Lab #5 (Lift Quiz 5          Prelab 5 Lab 4 – due in your
                     and drag on automotive vehicles) Run Lab 5                    lab session time
8 July 22-26            Lecture 7: Review for final       No                       Lab 5 – due in your
                                    exam                  meeting                  lab session time
9 July 29-30                     No lecture               No
                                                          meeting
                                                      Final Exam, TBD
   Summary of due dates:
    All prelab assignments are due at the beginning of your lab section meeting time.
    You will take a 10-mins quiz at the beginning of your lab section meeting after handing
      the prelab assignments.
    Lab reports are due 1-week after you run the lab, at the beginning of your lab session
      meeting time. An exception is made for Lab 3, which will have two parts – Part 1 will be
      due in your session, 1-week after you run the lab experiment and Part 2 will be due a week
      after Part 1 due in your lab session.
