  ANT 324L: Environmental Anthropology
  Professor: Jason Cons
  UTC 3.112 MW 1pm-2pm + Section
                Jason Cons: SAC 5.138; jasoncons@utexas.edu; 512.232.3832
                    Office Hours: Monday, 2:30-4:30pm or by appointment
What is the relationship between culture and ecology? How can environments produce
inequalities? Is there such a thing as wilderness? Where is the boundary between the human
and the non-human? How is “nature” understood in different communities? And how do
people around the world live with toxicity, climate change, and other forms environmental
degradation? Environmental Anthropology explores the answers to these questions and more.
The course is designed around a set of key questions and challenges in the anthropological
study of the environment. The course is designed not as a survey of the history of the field, but
rather as a means to introduce students to a set of questions and analytic tools and invite them
to quickly move towards applying them to real-world cases.
                                   Course Teaching Assistants:
•   Emmy Dawson: eldawson@utexas.edu Sections: 31695 & 31705 (Friday 9-10 am and 2-3pm).
    Office hours: Wednesday, 2-3pm or by appointment.
•   Kenza Yousfi: kenzayousfi@utexas.edu Sections: 31690 & 31700 (Thursdays 8-9 am and
    Mondays 9-10am). Office hours: Monday 10-11am or by appointment.


                                   Learning Objectives/ Goals
Upon completion, students will be able to:
. Identify key contributions, ideas, and concepts in environmental anthropology
. Use analytic tools in environmental anthropology to pursue independent inquiry into
  problems in environment and society
. Investigate environmental issues using ethnographic methods
. Understand and explain different cultural perspectives on nature, ecology, and the
  environment
. Engage with both local and global environmental politics in informed and inquisitive ways
. Write, speak, communicate, and think more critically and clearly about the world around you
Assignments and Grades
The following is a breakdown of how I will evaluate your performance in the class. More in-
depth descriptions, rubrics, and prompts will be provided with each assignment.
•   Class and Section Participation: 15%—Active, informed, and respectful participation in
    section discussions and small group work.
•   Section assignments: 20%—For each section there will be a brief, writing assignment.
    o The first 7 of these will be graded on a check +, check , check – basis, roughly
        corresponding to an A, B, C scale.
    o The best 5 of these 7assignments will count towards your section assignment grade.
    o The final three section assignments will be final project check ins and will not count
        towards your section assignment grades.
•   Mid-Term Exam: 30%—There will be a mid-term exam covering core concepts in the course.
•   Final Project: 35%—There will be a final group project consisting of a podcast and a written
    report based on research you conduct in your sections.
I use the following cutoffs for grade assignments:
Grade        Cutoff
A            94%
A-           90%
B+           87%
B            84%
B-           80%
C+           77%
C            74%
C-           70%
D            65%
F            <65%


Course Format
This course combines lectures, small group work, and discussion sections. We will cover a range
of different materials in a number of different ways. I expect your full, active, and professional
participation in class both class and sections. This means:
. Attending all class and section meetings
. Showing up on time (persistently showing up late will negatively affect your participation
  grade)
. Respectfully engaging with the course instructor , TAs, and your peers
. Being responsible for all of the assigned reading and materials: this means that if you miss a
  class, it is your responsibility to do the reading and get class notes from one of your peers
In any given week, the course will likely take the following structure:
•   Monday: There will be a lecture that addresses a concept, problem, theory, etc. in
    environmental anthropology.
•   Wednesday: We will discuss a specific case. This may involve additional lectures, breakout
    groups, class discussions, etc.
•   Section: You will either continue discussion on this concept by bringing particular cases to
    class or will work on the final project (see below).
Attendance at all of these is required.
                     Part 1: An Introduction to Environmental Anthropology
Week 1: What is Environmental Anthropology?
August 29: Course Introduction
Section meeting:
    • Introductions, course format, and expectations
Week 2: What is an ecosystem (or, a brief history of environmental anthropology)?
September 3: No class, Labor Day
September 5: Rituals and Pigs, Ecology and Homeostasis
    • Roy Rapaport. 2008 (1967). “Ritual Regulation of Environmental Relations among a New
        Guinea People.” In Environmental Anthropology: A Historical Reader. Blackwell.
Section meeting:
    • Writing Assignment (aprox. 500 words): Describe an ecosystem that you are familiar with.
        Drawing on the in-class lecture, what kinds of language might you use to describe this
        system (open, closed, homeostatic, etc.). Be prepared, in section discussion, to discuss
        why you have chosen the language that you did.


Week 3: What’s the trouble with “Wilderness”?
September 10: Wrong Natures?
   • William Cronon. 1995. “The Trouble with Wilderness; or, Getting Back to the Wrong
       Nature.” In Uncommon Ground: Rethinking the Human Place in Nature. WW Norton.
   • Timothy Morton. 2012. “Ecology Without Nature.” In Depletion Design: A Glossary of
       Network Ecologies. Theory on Demand #8.
September 12: CASE STUDY—Conservation and Violence in Tanzania
   • Roderick Neumann. 2001. “Disciplining Peasants in Tanzania: From State Violence to
       Self-Surveillance in Wildlife Conservation.” In Violent Environments. Cornell University
       Press.
   • Conservation and Violence Dossier available on Canvas.
Section Meeting:
   • Writing Assignment: What kinds of politics of conservation take place in your home
       state? Write a brief (500 word) writing response. Come prepared to discuss specific
       cases.
Week 4: How should we understand the relationship between “culture” and “nature”?
September 17: Classic framings—Cattle
   • Marvin Harris. 2008 (1966). “The Cultural Ecology of India’s Sacred Cattle.” In
       Environmental Anthropology: A Historical Reader. Blackwell.
September 19: CASE STUDY—Tigers, Demons, and Goddesses in The Sundarbans
   • Annu Jalais. 2010. “Is Salt Water Thicker than Blood?” In Forest of Tigers: People,
       Politics and Environment in the Sundarbans. Routledge.
   • Tigers, Demons, and Goddesses Dossier available on Canvas.
Section Meeting:
   • Writing Assignment: What kinds of articulations of nature and culture do you encounter
       in your daily life? Write a brief (500 word) writing response. Bring several examples to
       section and be prepared to discuss them in class.
Week 5: What do we learn from deep environmental history?
       COURSE LEADER THIS WEEK: Emmy Dawson
September 24: Agriculture, Sedentarization, and “Civilization”
   • James Scott. 2017. “Agro-Ecology of the Early State.” In Against the Grain: A Deep
       History of the Earliest States. Yale University Press.
September 26: CASE STUDY—Environmental History


   •   Margaret C. Nelson et al. 2010. “The Cross-scale Interplay between Social and
       Biophysical Context and the Vulnerability of Irrigation-dependent Societies:
       Archeology’s Long-term Perspective. Ecology and Society. 15 (3).
   •   Environmental History Case Study available on Canvas
Section Meeting:
   • Assignment details to be announced in class.
                             Part 2: Learning (from) Landscapes
Week 6: What are urban ecologies?
October 1: Thinking through Urban Natures
   • Erik Swyngedouw. 2006. “Circulation and Metabolisms: (Hybrid) Natures and (Cyborg)
       Cities.” Science as Culture. 15 (2).
October 3: Case Study—Lawns and/as Urban Ecology
   • Paul Robbins. 2007. “Explaining Lawn People.” In Lawn People: How Grasses, Weeds,
       and Chemicals Make Us Who We Are. Temple University Press.
   • Lawns as Urban Ecology Dossier Available on Canvas
Section Meeting:
   • Writing Assignment: What are the politics of lawns in Austin’s urban ecology? Conduct
       some basic investigations (internet research is fine, though more hands-on work is
       welcome). Write a brief (500 word) writing response and come prepared to discuss this
       topic in section.
Week 7: What is land?
October 8: Inscribing Land
   • Tania Murray Li. 2014. “What is Land? Assembling a Resource for Global Investment.”
       Transactions of the Institute of British Geographers. 39 (4).
October 10: Case Study—Land, Religion, and Identity in the Oregon Desert
   • In-Class Film: Wild Wild Country.
   • Land, Religion, and Identity Dossier available on Canvas
Section Meeting:
   • Writing Assignment: Write a brief (500 word) writing response and come prepared to
       discuss the question land and its various meanings in relation to the Bhagwan Shree
       Rajneesh commune in Oregon.
Week 8: What is water?
October 15: Watery Thought


   •   Stefan Helmreich. 2011. “Nature/Culture/Seawater.” American Anthropologist. 113 (1).
October 17: Case Study—Pipe Politics in Mumbai
   • Nikhil Anand. 2011. “Pressure: The PoliTechnics of Water Supply in Mumbai.” Cultural
       Anthropology. 26 (4).
   • Pipe Politics in Mumbai Dossier available on Canvas.
**Mid-term exam distributed. Due Tuesday, October 21st at 11:59pm on Canvas**
Section Meeting:
   • Mid-term working session
Week 9: What’s so “natural” about natural resource?
       COURSE LEADER THIS WEEK: Kenza Yousfi
October 22:
   • Reading TBD (will be available on Canvas)
October 24: CASE STUDY TBD
   • Reading and Case Study TBD (will be available on Canvas)
Section Meeting:
   • Assignment details to be announced in class.
                              Part 3: Environmental Inequalities
Week 10: What is a hazard?
October 29: So-called “natural” disasters
   • Michael Watts. 1983. “The Political Economy of Climatic Hazards: A Village Perspective
       on Drought and Peasant Economy in a Semi-Arid Region of West Africa.” Cahiers
       d’Etudes Africaines. 23.
October 31: Case Study—Climate Vulnerability in Bangladesh
   • Kasia Paprocki. 2015. “Anti-Politics of Climate Change.” Himal South Asian. 28(3).
   • Climate Vulnerability Dossier available on Canvas.
Section Meeting:
   • Final project assignment distributed and discussed
Week 11: What is the velocity of environmental catastrophe?
November 5: Slow Violence
   • Rob Nixon. 2011. “Introduction.” In Slow Violence and the Environmentalism of the
       Poor. Harvard.


November 7: Case Study—The Aral Sea
   • Amanda Wooden. 2004. “The Nexus Between Environmental Policy and Human Rights
       in Central Asia.” Harvard Asia Quarterly.
   • Aral Sea Dossier available on Canvas.
Section Meeting:
   • Working session: Research design and planning
   • Section assignment to be announced in class
Week 12: How do environments become “toxic”?
November 12: Arsenic, development, and toxicity
   • Nabil Ahmed. 2014. “The Toxic House.” In Forensis: The Architecture of Public Truth.
       Sternberg Press.
November 14: Case Study—Flint’s Water Crisis
   • Catherine Fennal. 2017. “Are We All Flint?” Limn 7: Public Infrastructures/ Infrastructural
       Publics. https://limn.it/articles/are-we-all-flint/
   • Flint Dossier available on Canvas.
Section Meeting:
   • Research session
   • Section assignment to be announced in class
                               Part 4: Animal, Vegetable, Mineral
Week 13: How do relationships with animals shape our world?
November 19: Eating and thinking with goats
   • Radhika Govindrajan. 2015. “‘The Goat That Died for Family’: Animal Sacrifice and
       Interspecies Kinship in India’s Central Himalayas.” American Ethnologist. 42 (3).
November 21: No Class, Thanksgiving Break
Week 14: In what ways are we what we eat?
November 26: Food, place, and culture
   • Brad Weiss. 2011. “Making Pigs Local: Discerning the Sensory Character of Place.”
       Cultural Anthropology. 26 (3).
November 28: Case Study—The Cattle Industry
   • Timothy Pachirat. “Hidden in Plain Sight” and “The Kill Floor.” In Every Twelve Seconds:
       Industrialized Slaughter and the Politics of Sight. Yale University Press.
   • The Cattle Industry Dossier available on Canvas.


Section Meeting:
     • Research Session
     • Section assignment to be announced in class
Week 15: Is there a future, and is it wild?
December 3: Wild anxieties in the Anthropocene
     • Paul Robbins and Sarah Moore. 2012. “Ecological Anxiety Disorder: Diagnosing the
         Politics of the Anthropocene.” Cultural Geographies. 20 (1).
December 5: Case Study: Rewilding Chernobyl
     • Kate Brown. 2017. “Marie Curie’s Fingerprint: Nuclear Spelunking in the Chernobyl
         Zone.” In Arts of Living on a Damaged Planet. University of Minnesota Press.
     • Rewilding Chernobyl Dossier available on Canvas
Section Meeting:
     • Working session: developing your final reports and podcasts
                                           Course Conclusion
Week 16: So what (or, what does an ethnographic perspective on the environment allow us to
see differently)?
December 10: Course Conclusion
FINAL PROJECTS DUE DECEMBER 14 at 11:59pm
                                  Course Policies and Procedures
Course readings and syllabus
I believe that a course and its instructor should be adaptable. This means that readings and
course activities may change to suite course developments, forward fruitful discussions, or to
address student interests. For this reason, the readings in this syllabus should be regarded as
provisional. For any given week, the readings will be available on Canvas.
While readings may, from time to time change, the course policies and procedures listed in this
syllabus will not. It is your responsibility to know them.
Reading Policy
All of the course readings for this class can be found on Canvas.


In some classes, we will spend significant time discussing particular readings. In others, we will
treat them as background. In all cases, if there is something you don’t understand in the
material, it is your responsibility to make sure that you gain an understanding of it by asking
questions and raising issues. You are expected to arrive at class ready to discuss any and all of
the required course readings.
On Wednesdays, we will typically discuss a case in depth. For each case, a dossier of
supplementary materials will be provided on Canvas in addition to the assigned, required
reading. These materials are optional unless your TA tells you otherwise. They provide
additional material to help you better understand the case and its context.
Policy on Plagiarism
I strongly believe that learning is a collaborative venture. I encourage you to study with your
peers, meet to discuss readings with them, and, on particular assignments, to work together
with them. That said, the work that you produce for this course must be your own. There are no
exceptions to this rule and no legitimate excuses for violating it.
In event that you fail to acknowledge others' work or that you are caught overtly plagiarizing
from online or written sources, you will receive a zero on the assignment and may be subject to
disciplinary procedures. See below (following course readings) for links to the University Policy
on Academic integrity
Email and Office Hours policy
Please, feel free to contact me and/or your TA via email. I prefer that you contact me directly
rather than through Canvas. Please also keep in mind that we are as busy as you. Make sure you
consult the course syllabus, other handouts, your peers and the course Canvas site before
sending an e-mail. Note that e-mail should not be seen as an alternative to meeting with me or
your TA during office hours. Nor should e-mail be used as a mechanism to receive private
tutorials or to explain material that was covered in classes you missed (those are your
responsibility to obtain from your peers). We will endeavor to respond within 24 hours, though
we do not respond to email on the weekends or after 5pm, so plan ahead. Contacting us the
night before an assignment is due is, by definition, too late.
My office hours are your time and you are welcome to drop by at any time during them.
Because, at particular times in the semester, many of you will want to see me, I do recommend
setting up an appointment ahead of time. Also, if you have a regular class conflict during my
office hours, I am more than happy to set up an appointment with you at another time,
however, I ask that you do not just drop by my or your TA’s office outside of office hours without
checking first. We may be there, but we will be working on other things with pressing deadlines.
Late Policy
I adhere to the following late policy on assignments:
. Section assignments are before class the day of your section meeting. Late assignments are


  not accepted
. Assignments turned in up to 12 hours late will be penalized by 1/3 of a letter grade.
. Assignments turned in between 12 and 24 hours late will be penalized a full letter grade.
. Assignments turned in between 24 and 48 hours late will be penalized two full letter grades.
. Assignments more than 48 hours late will not be accepted.
Writing Policy
While this is not a writing flag course, there are assignments that will require that you write and
communicate clearly.
    •   I have extensively detailed my policy on citation and bibliography on my website:
        http://www.jasoncons.net/formatting-and-referencing-papers.html
    •   I have also provided advice for student writers that is applicable not just in my courses,
        but in any course you are likely to take as an undergraduate:
        http://www.jasoncons.net/advice-on-writing.html
Global Cultures Flag
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Independent Inquiry Flag
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing you with the
opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to your
major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from the
independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
Attendance Policy
Attendance at all course and section meetings is required. There will be an attendance sheet
available when you come into class.
You are permitted two unexplained course absences and one section absence per semester.
After that, each absence will reduce your overall participation grade by 3.33% (i.e., by 1/3 of a
letter grade). If you have a legitimate reason to miss class, it is your responsibility to let me and
your TA know by email before class.
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all
learn differently. If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude
you, please let me know as soon as possible. We will develop strategies to meet both your


needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to reach out to the student
resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect you
with a person or Center if you would like.
Student Rights & Responsibilities
• You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
• You have a right to respect.
• You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
• You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
• You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
• You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve
    your learning environment.
• You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall
    be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
• You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating
    with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
• You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of
    others.
• Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
    bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
• You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
    someone is excluded.
• You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other
    to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s
legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than what
appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this
preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
                              UNIVERSITY POLICIES & RESOURCES
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity
to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.


Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Student Accommodations
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations
from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with
Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
• Please request a meeting as soon as possible to discuss any accommodations
• Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not
      accessible
• Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity.”
This means that work you produce on assignments, tests and exams is all your own work, unless
it is assigned as group work. I will make it clear for each test, exam or assignment whether
collaboration is encouraged or not.
Always cite your sources. If you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used
in previous class), you must make that clear otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and
subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course.
You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty Policy which can be found at the
following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
University Resources for Students
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your
learning, use these to help you succeed in your classes
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning
Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take
advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments,
peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas.


For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES
A332).
The University Writing Center
The University Writing Center offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT
student, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Consultants help students develop strategies to
improve their writing. The assistance we provide is intended to foster students’ resourcefulness
and self-reliance. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
The Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC) provides counseling, psychiatric,
consultation, and prevention services that facilitate students' academic and life goals and
enhance their personal growth and well-being. http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
Student Emergency Services
 http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
ITS
Need help with technology? http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Libraries
Need help searching for information? http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
Canvas
Canvas help is available 24/7 at https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-
tutorials
                                     Important Safety Information
BCAL
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call
BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If
something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Evacuation Information
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when an alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting
and assembling outside, unless told otherwise by an official representative.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.


Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-
enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
