                                The University of Texas at Austin
                                      Educational Psychology
                              EDP F384C: Multicultural Counseling
                                          Unique # 74294
                                           Summer 2019
Professor:       Delida Sanchez, PhD           Phone:           512-471-0368
Office:          SZB 262G                      E-mail:          delida.sanchez@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours: MW 12:00-12:30 or by appointment
TA:                                            E-mail:
Course Time: Monday-Thursday: 1-4 (June 10-27)
Location:        SZB 268
                                   ADA Compliance Statement
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641) TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester
and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an
exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be
needed. See website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                               Course Description and Objectives
Course Description:
This course is an introduction to topics of cultural diversity and multiculturalism in counseling.
This course will help students to gain basic knowledge of important cultural issues and various
cultural groups as well as foster one’s self- awareness as a cultural being influenced by one’s
own values and experiences.
Course Objectives:
This course is designed to enhance your multicultural counseling competencies for providing
psychological services to culturally diverse populations. Specific objectives of this course
include the following:
    •   Develop an awareness of the ethics of providing culturally competent services
    •   Increase your knowledge of multicultural constructs and theories
    •   Develop an awareness, sensitivity, and understanding of the experiences of diverse
        racial, ethnic and cultural groups
    •   Understand how culture has shaped your worldview and how this impacts your
        understanding of and interactions with others
    •   Facilitate personal growth through increasing awareness of your assumptions, values,
        and biases
Course Expectations:


Attendance policy: As this course will be didactic and experiential and only meets for 11 days,
attendance at all classes is critical. Participation by every student is crucial for psychological
“safety” and personal growth. An excused absence includes illness, family emergencies, or
other unavoidable situations such as your car breaking down on the way to class. You will need
to provide documentation for the missed absence (e.g., doctor’s note, tow truck receipt). These
should be cleared with me in advance or as soon as is possible.
An excused absence will not result in a five-point deduction if you e-mail me a quality two-page
thought paper on the readings you missed that day within 24 hours of the class you missed
(unless you make other arrangements with me in advance). The thought paper should include
your reactions to the class readings for the day you missed and will be graded on a five point
scale (0 – unsatisfactory, 5 = excellent). Please consult me if you have questions about this
assignment. Students who are consistently late will also have points deducted from the class
participation grade. Students who miss more than one class, even if they are excused, cannot
receive a grade higher than C for this course, except in extraordinary circumstances cleared
with me such as serious illness or family emergencies.
Coming in to class after a discussion has begun can be quite disruptive. Therefore, students
should make every effort to come to class on time. One point will be deducted from the final
grade for each time a student comes to class after the session has begun or leaves the class
prior to dismissal.
Classroom Decorum: The following rules are intended to improve the quality of the classroom
and enhance learning for all. These are expectations to be adhered to in every class. No cell
phone calls, call answering, texting (or reading of texts), gchat, etc. If you are expecting an
URGENT phone call (e.g., significant family crisis or illness), put your phone on vibrate and
leave the class to answer the call. DO NOT answer in the classroom. Turn off all ringers prior to
entering the classroom, or even better, turn off the phone.
                                         Course Requirements
    1. My Culture Paper:
         This paper is an exploration into the nature of your own family history, personal values
         and cultural identity. Using Hays’ ADDRESSING framework, please write a 7-8 page
         cultural autobiography that addresses the components of the your cultural identity (e.g.,
         age, ethnicity, race, culture, spirituality, class, gender identity, sexual orientation, ability,
         etc.). The paper is to be written from a multigenerational perspective and should address
         how your familial, ethnic, and cultural influences and life experiences have led to your
         current sense of self, your self as a counselor, and your ability to work with different
         groups in counseling. When writing the paper, please include the following:
             1) Attach (or insert within text) a photograph of yourself to the paper and answer
                 both parts of this question: a) When you look at your photograph, what do you
                 think others see in terms of your cultural background based purely on your
                 physical features? b) What do you see about yourself?
             2) Describe yourself in terms of each component of the ADDRESSING Framework.
             3) How many people are in your family? Where were you born? Where were your
                 parents and grandparents born? What generation (e.g., immigrant, 1st generation
                 U.S. born, etc.) in the U.S. do you represent?
         A) Group Awareness
             1) Describe your earliest recollection of learning your race or ethnicity.


        2) When did you recall learning that you were male or female? How did you learn
            this? What gender assumptions/biases are common in your cultural group?
        3) When do you remember learning about what your sexual orientation is and how
            did you learn this? How did your family help shape your attitudes about sexual
            orientation?
        4) When did you find out what religion your family practiced? How did your family
            feel about people who had a different religion? Did you have similar feelings?
        5) How often did your family talk about your ethnic heritage and in what context?
            What message did you receive about other cultural or ethnic groups?
        6) What cultural values do you currently hold? Are they similar to or different than
            those of your family? Which of these values will be different from the common
            values of other cultural groups?
   B) Social Awareness and Present Views
        1) Discuss your earliest recollections of learning that people are “different.”
        2) How did you first come to understand that racism existed? What did you learn
            from this experience?
        3) What has been the major source of information that has shaped your perceptions
            of ethnic or cultural minorities?
        4) How do you plan to manage value conflicts with your client/students?
        5) What groups do you think that you will have most difficulty working with? The
            least difficulty? Why?
        6) What are the implications of these answers for your work with individuals and
            groups from both similar and dissimilar cultural backgrounds?
   All students must submit a typed, double-spaced paper. It should be in the form of
   question and answer, as presented above. Papers handed in late will be penalized
   (lowered five points per class session late; papers handed in after the class session is
   over and before the next session will still be considered late and lowered by five points).
2. Reaction Papers:
   There will be 2 reaction papers between 2 - 3 pages in length in response to the videos
   Cracking the Codes, and My life in Pink. Your reaction paper should include a discussion
   of your emotional reactions to the video assigned (e.g., did you find yourself feeling sad,
   angry, happy, or anxious during part of the video and if so why?) as well as a reflection
   of how the topic matter relates to your own identity (e.g., race, gender). Reaction papers
   will be graded primarily on your communication skills, and only secondarily on the
   content and originality of your ideas. Although the reaction paper should not summarize
   the entire video, it should include enough information about the video to make your ideas
   or criticisms well-grounded.
3. Case Conceptualization:
   Please write a 3-page case conceptualization on one of the main characters from the
   movie Pariah (e.g., Alike, Laura, Bina, Alike’s mother) to be shown in class. Your case
   conceptualization should incorporate a multicultural framework that addresses some of
   the institutional, structural and systemic cultural issues (e.g., homophobia, racism,
   sexism) presented in the movie. You may use the following questions as a guide:
   1. Define the presenting problem. What are the salient cultural issues facing Alike (or
        Laura, Bina, Alike’s mother)?


       2. What are some of the racial/cultural considerations that the counselor should be
            aware of in working with Alike? What systemic factors are contributing, sustaining the
            problem?
       3. What might be some of the challenges for a White counselor working with Alike?
            Challenges for counselor of Color? Challenges for a LGBTQ counselor working with
            Alike or a cisgender/straight counselor?
       4. What are some of the gender considerations that should be examined? What are
            some of the sexual orientation considerations that the counselor should be aware of
            in working with Alike? What might be some of the challenges for a counselor with
            very religious views to work with Alike?
       5. How would the therapist intervene using multicultural counseling theory?
   4. Take Home Final Exam: There will be a final exam based on the Cornish et al.
       textbook, the canvas readings, and the powerpoint presentations. The exam will consist
       of multiple-choice questions and two-three short essays.
   3   Attendance and Participation:
       The process and outcome of this class will depend on each of your contributions. Thus,
       each student is asked to be ready and committed to explore their own personal and
       professional self through class discussions, in-class activities, and class assignments.
       More specifically, it is expected that each of you prepare for each class meeting by
       completing the assigned readings and exercises and reflecting upon the material shared.
       Your active participation during each class session will contribute to the learning process
       for all involved. The more each of us gives, the richer the experiences will be for all of
       us.
       Presentations of Daily Readings:
       Beginning June 11th, the class discussion of the readings will be led by pre-assigned
       groups of 2-3 students. Please come prepared with 3-4 questions to guide our
       discussions and engage your peers at the beginning of class. Unless otherwise
       instructed, class discussions will focus on the day’s readings. You are only required to
       come prepared with reflection and discussion points for each day’s required (not
       suggested) assigned readings--if you have multiple readings in one day, you can
       incorporate all readings into your discussion questions. Reflection and discussion points
       should respond to the following three prompts:
       1) What do you think are the 3 main “take-home” points of the week’s readings (or
            exercise, if an exercise is assigned)?
       2) What are 2 questions you were left with or issues you need clarified after completing
            the readings/exercise?
       3) What is 1 (or more) thing(s) that you related to or reacted to (e.g., emotionally) from
            the readings/exercise and why?
Required Text:
Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.) (2010).
Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken: NJ.
Additional required readings will also be posted to Canvas.
Breakdown of Grades:


       Points         Requirement
 15 %                 My culture paper
 10 %                 Reaction Papers (2 worth 5 points each)
 30 %                 Case Conceptualization
 30 %                 Final Exam
 15 %                 Attendance/Participation
Grades: 100 points total:
94-100 = A     90 - 93 = A-    87-89 = B+    84-86 = B        80-83 = B-    77-79 = C+
74-76 = C     70 -73 = C-     67-69 = D+     64-66 = D       60-63 = D-     Below 60= F
                     CLASS SCHEDULE/READING AND ASSIGNMENTS
                                      (Subject to Revision)
June 10       Introductions and Syllabus Overview
              Overview of multicultural counseling competencies
              Required Readings: Sue Chapter 2. The superordinate nature of
              multicultural counseling and therapy. In Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2012).
              Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Ventura, CA:
              John Wiley & Sons. (Canvas)
June 11       Practitioners’ self-awareness of values, beliefs and biases
              Understanding the constructs of multicultural counseling and social justice in
              counseling
              Required Readings: Hays (2008) (Canvas); Sue & Sue, Chapters 3-4.
              Multicultural Counseling Competence for Minority Group Counselors/Therapists
              & The Politics of Counseling and Psychotherapy: Social Justice in Counseling
              (Canvas)
June 12       Becoming a Racially Competent Therapist: Multicultural Counseling Broaching
              Skills
              Required readings: Sanchez & Davis III (2010) in Cornish et al. chapter 9
              Day-Vines, N. L., et al., (2013) (Canvas).
              The Broaching Attitudes and Behavior Survey
              Suggested readings: Dixon-Peters (2010). In Cornish et al., chapter 8
              Film: Cracking the Codes
              Assignment for June 14: 3-page reaction paper to video.
June 13       White Identity and Privilege
              Required Readings: Dressel, Kerr, & Stevens. In Cornish et al. chapter 15
              DiAngelo, R. (2011). White fragility. International Journal of Critical Pedagogy,
              3(3), 54-70.
              McIntosh, P. Unpacking the Invisible Knapsack (Canvas).


        Suggested readings: Applebaum, B. (2003) White privilege, complicity and the
        social construction of race. Educational Foundations, 17, 5-20.
        Devos, T. & Banaji, M. (2005). American=White? Journal of Personality and
        Social Psychology, 88, 447-466.
        Wise, T. The Audacity of Truth: A Call for White Responsibility (Canvas).
        Movie: Tim Wise: On White Privilege, Racism, White Denial & the Costs of
        Inequality
        REACTION PAPER #1 DUE
June 17 Acculturation & Ethnicity: Competencies with immigrant communities and
        linguistically diverse populations
        Required Readings: Sanchez, del Prado, & Davis (2010). Broaching Ethnicity
        Competently in Therapy. In Cornish Chpt 4:
        Nassar-McMillan, S. C., Nour, M. D., & Al Qimlass, A. M. Counseling:
        Settings, clinical considerations, and counselor cultural competence. In Amer &
        Awad. (Chpt. 21)
        Schwartz, S. J., Unger, J. B., Zamboanga, B. L., & Szapocznik, J.
        (2010).Rethinking the concept of acculturation: Implications for theory and
        research. American Psychologist, 65(4), 237-251.
        Suggested Readings:
        Viruell-Fuentes, E. A., Miranda, P. Y., & Abdulrahim, S. (2012). More than
        culture: Structural racism, intersectionality theory, and immigrant health. Social
        Science & Medicine, 75(12), 2099-2106.
        El-Jamil, F., & Ahmed, S. Psychotherapy Models: Cultural Applications of
        Psychodynamic, Cognitive Behavioral, Family Systems, and culture-specific
        approaches. In Amer & Awad (Chapt. 22)
        Haboush, K. L., & Alyan, H. School Psychology: Enhancing School Climate and
        School Connectedness. In Amer & Awad (Chpt. 23)
        Sam, D. L. (2006).Acculturation: conceptual background and core components.
        In David L. Sam & John W. Berry (Eds.),The cambridge handbook of
        acculturation psychology (11-26). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
        MY CULTURE PAPER DUE
June 18 Social Class
        Required reading: Ming Liu, Corkery, & Thome (2010). Developing competency
        in social class and classism in counseling and psychotherapy. In Cornish


        Chapter12
June 19 Gender
        Required readings: Singh, Boyd, & Whitman (2010), Counseling and
        Psychotherapy with transgender and intersex persons, in Cornish, Chapter 14
        Smart (2010). Counseling competencies with women, in Cornish, Chapter 16
        Stevens & Carlson (2010). Psychotherapy with men, in Cornish, Chapter 7
        Film: My Life in Pink
        Assignment for June 21: 3-page reaction paper to video.
June 20 Sexual Orientation
        Required reading: Schreier & Lassiter (2010). Competencies for working with
        sexual orientation and multiple cultural identities, in Cornish, Chapter 10
        Lemoire, S. J., & Chen, C. P. (2005). Applying person-centered counseling to
        sexual minority adolescents (Canvas).
        Counseling bisexual and transgender clients: The case of Melissa
        Simoni & Walters (2001). Heterosexual identity and heterosexism: Recognizing
        privilege to reduce prejudice. Journal of Homosexuality, 41(1), 157-172.
        Movie: Pariah
        REACTION PAPER #2 DUE
June 24 Microaggressions in Counseling and Psychotherapy
        Required Readings: Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G. C., Bucceri, J.
        M., Holder, A. M., Nadal, K. L., & Esquilin, M. (2007). Racial microaggressions in
        everyday life: Implications for clinical practice. American Psychologist, 62(4),
        271-286. (Canvas); Hook, J. N., Farrell, J. E., Davis, D. E., DeBlaere, C., Van
        Tongeren, D. R., & Utsey, S. O. (2016). Cultural humility and racial
        microaggressions in counseling. Journal of counseling psychology, 63(3), 269-
        277. (Canvas).
        CASE CONCEPTUALIZATION PAPER DUE
        Final exam will open
June 25 Ability/Disability/Ableism
        Required reading: Palombi (2010). Disability: Multiple and intersecting
        identities-developing multicultural competencies, In Cornish, Chapter 3
        Olkin, R. (2001). Could you hold the door for me? Including disability in diversity,
        Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 8(2), 130-137.
June 26 Religion/Spirituality
        Required readings: Savage & Armstrong (2010). Developing competency in
        spiritual and religious aspects of counseling, In Cornish Chpt 13
June 27 Take Home Exam
        You must complete final exam DUE MONDAY, JULY 3rd.


                                               Policies
Religious Holidays:
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day
you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the
absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your
instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to
observe a religious holy day.
UT Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Academic Integrity
You and other students are expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of
individual honor in scholastic work" undertaken at the University (Sec. 11-801, Institutional
Rules on Student Services and Activities). This is a very basic expectation that is further
reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any
assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires
you to: (1)acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts; (2)
complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
assistance in preparing them; (3) follow instructions for assignments and exams, (4) observe the
standards of your academic discipline and (5) avoid engaging in any form of academic
dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
Students found guilty of academic dishonesty (including all forms of cheating) will receive a
grade of 0 (note the academic dishonesty policy refers to all work and tests in the course, not
just exams). For further information about academic dishonesty, please visit:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Course Readings:
Applebaum, B. (2003). White privilege, complicity, and the social construction of race.
        Educational Foundations, 17(4), 5-20.
Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). (2010).
        Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons,
        Inc.
Chapters assigned in Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies:
        Dixon-Peters, A., (2010). Developing multicultural competency in clinical work with
                 people of mixed ancestry. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I.,
                 Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
                 Competencies. (231-265). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
        Dressel, J. L., Kerr, S., & Stevens, H. B., (2010). White identity and privilege. In
                 Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R.,


               (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (443-474).
               Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Ming Liu, W., Corkery, J., & Thome, J., (2010). Developing competency in social class
               and classism in counseling and psychotherapy. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B.
               A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of
               Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (351-378). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley &
               Sons, Inc.
       Palombi, B. J., (2010). Disability: Multiple and intersecting identities – developing
               multicultural competencies. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I.,
               Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
               Competencies. (55-92). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Sanchez, D., & Davis III, C., (2010). Becoming a racially competent therapist. In
               Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R.,
               (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (267-290).
               Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Sanchez, D., del Prado, A., & Davis III, C., (2010). Broaching ethnicity competently in
               therapy. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., &
               Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling Competencies. (93-
               116). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Savage, J., & Armstrong, S., (2010). Developing competency in spiritual and religious
               aspects of counseling. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I.,
               Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
               Competencies. (379-413). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Schreier, B. A., & Dudley Lassiter, K., (2010). Competencies for working with sexual
               orientation and multiple cultural identities. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A.,
               Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural
               Counseling Competencies. (291-316). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Singh, A. A., Boyd, C. J., & Whitman, J. S., (2010). Counseling competency with
               transgender and intersex persons. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni,
               L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural
               Counseling Competencies. (415-441). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Smart, R. (2010). Counseling competencies with women: Understanding gender in the
               context of multiple dimensions of identity. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A.,
               Nadkarni, L. I., Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural
               Counseling Competencies. (475-512). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
       Stevens, M. A., & Englar-Carlson, M., (2010). Psychotherapy with men: Building
               practice competencies. In Cornish, J. A., Schreirer, B. A., Nadkarni, L. I.,
               Metzger, L. H., & Rodolfa, E. R., (Eds.). Handbook of Multicultural Counseling
               Competencies. (195-230). Hoboken: NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Devos, T., & Banaji, M. R. (2005). American = White? Journal of Personality and Social
       Psychology, 88(3), 447-466.
Hays, P. A. (2008). Addressing cultural complexities in practice: Assessment, diagnosis, and
       therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lemoire, S. J., & Chen, C. P. (2005). Applying person-centered counseling to sexual minority
       adolescents. Journal of Counseling & Development, 83(2), 146-154.
McIntosh, P. (2003). White privilege and male privilege. Privilege: A reader, 147-160.


Olkin, R. (2002). Could you hold the door for me? Including disability in diversity. Cultural
        Diversity & Ethnic Minority Psychology, 8(2), 130-137.
Simoni, J. M., & Walters, K. L. (2001). Heterosexual identity and heterosexism. Journal of
        Homosexuality, 41(1), 157-172.
Sue, D. W., Capodilupo, C. M., Torino, G. C., Bucceri, J. M., Holder, A. M., Nadal, K. L., &
        Esquilin, M. (2007). Racial microaggressions in everyday life: Implications for clinical
        practice. American Psychologist, 62(4), 271-286.
Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2012). Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and practice (6th ed.).
        Ventura, CA: John Wiley & Sons.
