	                                        AHC 325D/HIS 351D       	  
	                                              Spring 2020	     	  
                        Alexander the Great and the Hellenistic World
                                          MW 10 am-11 am
                                              WAG 201
Instructor: Dr. Andrea Pittard
Email: apittard@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 217
Office Hours: MW 11-12 pm
TA: Joshua Renfro
Email: jsrenfro@utexas.edu
Office: WAG 111
Office Hours: M 2-3 pm and Fridays 12-1pm
Discussion Sessions
Section Number                      Session Day/Time                   Session Place/Instructor
33395/38810                         Thursdays 10 am-11 am              PAR 210/ Pittard
33400/38815                         Fridays 10 am-11 am                WAG 208/Renfro
33405/38820                         Fridays 11 am-12 pm                WAG 208/Renfro
You MUST attend the discussion session you registered for. If you are not able to attend the
session that your register for, please see your instructor immediately.
Course Description
This course focuses on essential developments in Greek history (social, cultural, and political)
during the Late Classical (ca. 404-338 BCE) and Hellenistic (ca. 338-30 BCE) Periods: from the
aftermath of the Peloponnesian War, a period of hostilities between Athens and Sparta and the
allies of each that lasted almost thirty years, to the conquest of Greece by Rome. The course will
devote roughly equal time to covering major events and personalities, exploring key
developments in culture and society, and examining the various types of evidence available for the
era (both written and archeological sources). We will begin (Part I. Weeks 1-4) with the history of
the Greek city-state (poleis) in the Late Classical period and their subjugation in 338 BCE by
Philip II, king of Macedonia and father of Alexander the Great. Next we will consider (Part II.
Weeks 4-5) Alexander the Great and his creation of the largest empire then known (ca. 356-323
BCE). Thereafter, we will focus on the so-called “Successor Kingdoms” (Part III. Weeks 6-10)
and explore the struggles of Alexander’s generals after his death to carve out for themselves a
share of Alexander’s empire. Historians refer to the time of the successor kings and their empires
(ca. 323-30 BCE) as the Hellenistic Period, a title that reflects the introduction of Greek culture
to Asia and Africa (Egypt) and the development of various shades of hybrid (Greek and native)
society and culture. Part IV. Weeks 11-14 will explore some aspects of the phenomenon of
Hellenization and of the indigenous reactions to it. We will conclude (Part V. Weeks 14-15) with a


	                                         AHC 325D/HIS 351D      	  
	                                            Spring 2020	       	  
brief look at Rome’s developing interest in the east and its conquest first of Greece (146 BCE),
then Asia, and finally Egypt, where the death of Cleopatra VII (30 BCE) brought an end to the
last of the successor kings and their empires.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase
your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and
histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
This course also carries a Writing flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly
during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your
instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or
more assignments, and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing
Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication,
Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education
Coordinating Board.
Required Texts
Austin, M. M., The Hellenistic world from Alexander to the Roman conquest. Cambridge,
2006. 9780521535618
Walbank, F. W., The Hellenistic World. Harper Collins, 2010. 9780006861041
There will also be a considerable amount of material available on Canvas, including
supplementary readings, study guides, and readings/discussion questions for our discussion
sessions.
Course Goals
This course will provide you with a working knowledge of the history of late Classical and
Hellenistic Greece and the Near East. You will also become familiar with the primary sources
that we have for the individuals and events of these periods. You will learn how to read, analyze,
critique and interpret these materials. Through your written assignments and discussion
sessions, you will develop your interpretive, reflective, and critical thinking skills, as well as the
ability to articulate your analyses in a thoughtful and coherent manner.
Grading
Your grade will be based on the following:
Weekly Reading Quizzes: 20%


	                                       AHC 325D/HIS 351D        	  
	                                            Spring 2020	       	  
Discussion Session Participation: 20%
Writing Assignments: 60% (4 total, each worth 15%)
Weekly Reading Quizzes: Every week, we will have quizzes on Canvas that will test your
comprehension of the primary and secondary readings you have for the week. The quiz will be
posted on Canvas on Wednesday; you will have until Sunday at 11:59 pm to complete the quiz.
These quizzed will be timed. You will have 1 minute per question.
Weekly quizzes cannot be made up under any circumstances; however, I will drop the lowest 2
quizzes at the end of the semester.
Discussion Session Participation: Our weekly discussion sessions provide an opportunity for you
to encounter a variety of source material. They are designed to teach you how to read, analyze,
and critique ancient and modern sources. You are required to attend your discussion session each
week. You will be allowed two unexcused absences. You will lose 1% of your possible 20% for
each additional absence. You will also be required to come to each session prepared to
participate. This means you will have read the assigned readings, made notes on the readings and
any discussion questions included with the readings, and prepared additional comments or
questions on the readings. Just attending the sessions WILL NOT fulfill the 20% allotted to
these sessions. Please bring all reading assignments with you to the session.
Writing Assignments: We will have four writing assignments throughout the semester. For each
assignment, you will respond to a different writing prompt that will focus on a particular type of
evidence or a specific topic. Specifics on topic, citations, and formatting can be found on Canvas.
Revision is an essential part of writing-writers rarely get it perfect on the first version. Therefore,
this course will have a rewrite policy and you will have the opportunity to rewrite/revise
assignments 1-3 based on my or the TA’s comments in order to earn a higher grade (you cannot
earn a lower grade on these rewrites). For the first writing assignment, this will be mandatory.
For the remainder, rewriting will be optional. If you choose to rewrite assignments 2 or 3, you
will have 1 week from the day we pass the assignments back to resubmit.
Classroom Policies
The best way to contact me is via email at the address above. I will check my emails and respond
within 24 hours during the week. You are responsible for checking your school/canvas email, this
is where I will send correspondence. I expect professional and proper format on all emails.
Emails without salutations/greeting (Dear…) or without appropriate formatting (punctuation,
etc.) will not be answered. Please make sure to sign your name on all emails.
Attendance is absolutely necessary for success in this class. You will get the most out of this class
if you come every day with all readings completed and ready to ask questions or discuss.


	                                           AHC 325D/HIS 351D         	  
	                                                Spring 2020	        	  
Coming to class late and leaving early is distracting and disrespectful to your fellow classmates
and to me. If you need to leave early or come in late, notify me beforehand. Repeated tardiness
will affect your participation/attendance grade.
Absences may be excused for religious holidays with prior notice (14 days) or for family and
medical emergencies as long as you are able to provide documentation within one week of the
absence.
Etiquette:
     • You must be respectful of your classmates and me at all times. This includes not speaking
         when others are speaking.
     • Laptops, tablets and cell phones are permitted; however they should ONLY be used for
         class participation. If you use your electronics in other, non-class-related capacities, you
         will receive a verbal warning for your first offence. You will be asked to leave if you
         continue to misuse your electronics to prevent disrupting or distracting your classmates.
     • Eating during class is also disruptive and should not be done in class.
Tips for Succeeding in this Class
     •   Come to each class prepared and ready to ask questions and discuss the day’s material.
     •   Keep up with the readings and take careful notes while you read.
     •   DO NOT wait until the last minute to acquire or review the course material.
     •   Begin working on your readings, study guides, and projects early.
     •   Ask questions! If at any point you feel lost in any way (on lecture or reading material, exam
         preparation, while writing or revising your essays, etc), please contact me right away. I am here to
         facilitate your learning and will do everything within my ability to do so.
Academic Dishonesty
Academic dishonesty refers to a variety of practices that will not be tolerated in this class. ANY
attempt to pass off another’s work as your own constitutes academic dishonesty. This includes,
but is not limited to: Looking at classmates’ tests or quizzes in order to use their answers as your
own, discussing answers with another student during an exam or quiz, using notes during a quiz
or test, copying homework either from another student or online answer key, etc. All work done
in this class should reflect your own efforts and comply with the University of Texas Honor Code
(below). Any instance of academic dishonesty will result in zero credit for the assignment, exam,
or test and will be reported to the Student Judicial Services. For more information, contact
Student Judicial Services at 471-2841, or go
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php
University of Texas Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected


	                                       AHC 325D/HIS 351D       	  
	                                            Spring 2020	      	  
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Special Accommodations
The University of Texas provides upon request appropriate accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. You must go through SSD to receive accommodations. Contact the
Office of the Dean of Students for more information at 471-6259 or
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. Once you have the proper paperwork, please let me know
immediately if you need accommodation for disabilities.
If you, or one of your fellow students, are having any troubles, the university provides a variety of
services.
The Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) is a good place to start. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental
Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-
concerns-advice-line
Course Schedule
We will follow the attached syllabus as closely as possible. Please check Canvas for assignments
and study questions and complete the assigned reading before the lecture. There is a substantial
amount of reading for this course. I will supply you with study questions to help you focus your
reading. I strongly encourage you not to fall behind the Syllabus.
    Week 1 (1/21-24)
Wednesday: Introduction (Syllabus and Setting the Stage)
Sessions: No discussion sessions this week
Part 1: The Late Classical Period (404-336 BCE)
Week 2 (1/27-1/31)
Monday: The Aftermath of the Peloponnesian War, Effects and (Im)Balances
Wednesday: 4th century Federations and Leagues
Sessions: The Decree of Aristoteles
Week 3 (2/3-7)
Monday: Enter Philip II
Wednesday: Public and Private Life in Late Classical Athens
Sessions: New Comedy
Part II: Alexander the Great


	                                   AHC 325D/HIS 351D    	  
	                                        Spring 2020	   	  
Week 4 (2/10-2/14)
Monday: The Death of Philip and Ascension of Alexander
       Writing Assignment 1 Due
Wednesday: Alexander’s Campaign against Persia
Sessions: Sources for Alexander the Great
Week 5 (2/17-21)
Monday: Alexander in the Levant
Wednesday: Alexander in Egypt
Sessions: TBD
Week 6 (2/24-2/28)
Monday: Alexander in Asia
Wednesday: Success and Defeat
Sessions: Alexander’s Aims and Aspirations
Part III: The Successors
Week 7 (3/2-3/6)
Monday: Creation of the Successor Kingdoms
Wednesday: Creation of the Successor Kingdoms II
Sessions: Mapping the Successor Kingdoms
Week 8 (3/9-3/13)
Monday: Antigonus the One-Eyed
       Writing Assignment 2 Due
Wednesday: TBD
Sessions: Hellenistic Diplomacy
Spring Break 3/16-3/20
Week 9 (3/23-3/27)
Monday: The Seleucid Kingdom
Wednesday: The Seleucid Kingdom II
Sessions: TBD
Week 10 (3/30-4/3)
Monday: Ptolemaic Egypt
Wednesday: Ptolemaic Egypt II
Sessions: The Family of Dryton
Week 11 (4/6-4/10)
Monday: Alexandria


	                                    AHC 325D/HIS 351D     	  
	                                          Spring 2020	   	  
Wednesday: TBD
Sessions: Aï-khanum
Week 12 (4/13-4/17)
Monday: Hellenistic Society and Greek Reaction
       Writing Assignment 3 Due
Wednesday: Hellenistic Society and Native Reaction
Sessions: Apocalyptic Literature as Political Resistance
Week 13 (4/20-4/24)
Monday: Hellenistic Philosophy
Wednesday: Hellenistic Religion
Sessions: Ruler Cult
Part IV: Roman Expansion
Week 14 (4/27-5/1)
Monday: Rome and the Eastern Mediterranean
Wednesday: Rome and the Eastern Mediterranean
Session: TBD
Week 15 (4/4-4/8)
Monday: Rome and the Eastern Mediterranean
Wednesday: Rome and the Eastern Mediterranean
       Writing Assignment 4 Due
