               Syllabus: New Media & Entrepreneurialism
                   ADV 332C (05955), PR 332C (06485)
Day & Time Thursday, 12:30 – 3:30 p.m.
Location       BMC 2.106
Professor      Mark Bunting markb@skytv.net (Office hours: upon request)
Teaching Assistants
    •   Robyn Archer
        RobynArcher@utexas.edu | (713) 447 - 4886
    •   Maris Moreno
        marismoreno@utexas.edu | (484) 798 - 2611
PLEASE CONTACT ASSISTANTS FOR ANY QUESTIONS CONCERNING ATTENDANCE,
GRADES, ET.
Enrollment Course is designed as an elective for students in the schools of
Business, Engineering and Communication
Facebook       UT AdTech https://www.facebook.com/UtAdTech
The Course Disruption has dramatically redefined the delivery of content and the
financial models around it. This has created an abundance of opportunities for the
entrepreneur within traditional media and the budding start-up alike.
We will bring real-life experience/exposure for those who hope to enter this
important arena with a series of interviews with real-life practitioners from social
media, venture capital, and others with expertise in this important arena.
In addition, we will explore some important trends in digital content and the
business models they are creating. This is NOT a course focused on journalism but
rather a primer for those who wish to learn about entrepreneurialism, technology
and it’s intersection with media. We will also spend 3 weeks with online modules
regarding Entrepreneurship as we work thru case studies.
Taking a cue from Inside the Actors Studio, this weekly 3-hour class will include
guest speakers from a variety of disciplines. Professor Mark Bunting is the former
television host of many popular computer programs from CNBC, The Discovery
Channel and The Learning Channel, https://www.linkedin.com/in/markbunting/


As a serial entrepreneur in both technology and media, Mark will expose students to
a broad spectrum of speakers within the industry. Students will also have an
opportunity to meet each guest and “network” with these highly influential leaders.
Materials (must be purchased by week 2 of class)
Entrepreneurship Modules by G51 at $90.
    • You will select 4 of 8 different cases to work.
    • All students must take the G51 entrepreneurship modules even if you
        have used this material in another class.
    • http://g51edu.com/courses/technology-marketing-and-advertising/
                                     Grading Policy
Attendance - 50%
Students are allowed ONE excused absence for the semester without penalty. If for
some reason you are unable to attend class, the student is expected to inform the TA
assigned to the class via email prior to class. Being absent for class may result in a
reduction of your grade for the course. If a student misses a class for any reason, it
is the student’s responsibility to be informed of the materials covered during the
class. 2 class misses will likely keep a student from achieving an A, 3 or more
missed classes will automatically exclude ANY student from achieving
anything higher than a B.
Exams - 40%
There will be two closed-book exams during the semester according to the
following tentative schedule:
    • Exam 1: Oct 17th
    • Exam 2: Dec 5th
Each exam accounts for 20% of your class grade. The exams will be completed
on a laptop through Canvas and will consist of true/false and/or multiple-choice
questions and/or short answer questions based on course material covered prior to
the exam date.
Entrepreneurship Modules - 10%
We will dedicate 2 class days to learning the basic tenants of entrepreneurialism
with a hybrid online-live workshop. Satisfactory completion of the work generates a
grade equal to your final attendance grade. If you have an A in attendance at
semesters end – you will receive an additional A for 10% of your overall average. If
you have a B in attendance, you will receive an additional B for 10% of your overall
average, et
Grading Schema:


A = 90-100%, B = 80-89%, C = 70-79%, D = 60-69 %, F = below 60%. Fractions of
points will be rounded: .50 or higher upwards, .49 or lower downwards.
Plus/minus will not be assigned to the letter grades.
Course Procedures:
    1. Canvas: (http://courses.utexas.edu): Canvas and classroom
       announcements will serve as communication vehicles for this course. Please
       check Canvas or the Facebook page below for PowerPoint slides for a class
       session, as well as for other session-related materials. In order to ensure that
       you receive all information sent out through Canvas, please update your
       email address on UTDirect (www.utdirect.utexas.edu). Tests will also be
       administered via Canvas, so please bring laptops to class on test days.
    2. Facebook: Please like the UT ADTECH Facebook Page:
       www.facebook.com/UtAdTech This source will list additional information
       such as blog posts, articles and other content which may be relevant to in-
       class discussion. Video content from class lectures as well as PowerPoint
       slides will also be posted on this site.
    3. In Class Conduct: Use of laptop computers, cell phones, mobile tablets and
       other electronic devices during class session is prohibited. NOISE DURING
       LECTURES AND SPEAKERS IS HIGHLY DISRUPTIVE. Quiet is required!
    4. Academic Dishonesty: All students are expected to act within and
       uphold the UT Honor Code fully. You may access the General Information
       Catalog to review specific University policies on scholastic dishonesty or
       refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
       http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
A notice that students with disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement,
Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
