COURSE DESCRIPTION: "Discoverability: Getting Noticed in Hollywood” is a course for students to
learn from a blend of academic research, case studies, and practical applications on how to scale
their projects across a symphony of communication platforms to generate awareness and buzz.
This includes a deep dive into the myriad of new PR, influencer and social media platforms, tools
and strategies that are changing the way business is being conducted in Hollywood. Students will
also garner invaluable insights, practical tips, and techniques from guest lecturers in the field who
are already successfully leveraging digital media and traditional methods for their own projects
and purposes, including:
▪  Henry Jenkins, USC Media Scholar/author of "Spreadable Media" (course textbook)
▪  Co-executive Producer - "Lost in Space" (Netflix)
▪  Co-executive Producer - "The Good Doctor" (ABC)
▪  Producer/Futurist and CEO, Jeff Gomez - Starlight Runner (Pirates of the Caribbean, Men in
   Black, Transformers)
▪  Agent/Partner - United Talent Agency
▪  Exec VP Reality TV Development - Sony ("Shark Tank," "Dr. Oz," "Queen Latifah")
▪  Exec VP Corp Communications (and former UT Alumnus) - CBS Distribution
▪  Senior Producer, “Entertainment Tonight”
▪  Entertainment Editor, Indiewire
▪  Television Editor, LA Times
  . . . and more
                                                                                                  1 of 21


                                           Learning Outcomes
OUTCOMES
By the end of this course, students will acquire expertise and hands-on experience in the following:
 •   Ability to critically evaluate various established and emerging social media platforms, and how their uses,
     limitations, challenges, drawbacks and KPIs can help get their projects or brands discovered.
 •   Analyze how social has impacted marketing and branding in the entertainment industry and how
     entertainment brands are built and enhanced via digital media.
 •   Define and determine how use and content differs contextually across today's popular social media
     platforms for different entertainment products and projects.
 •   Analyze how one develops a consistent brand message and the positive and negative side-effects
     that come with social media.
 •   How to properly prepare, present and manage a potential campaign for a project to generate the
     right message that achieves desired business goals in terms of brand, desired follower behaviors,
     and potential media buzz.
 •   Gain insight into social marketing departments at major corporations via high profile guest speakers
     from various facets of the industry, including producers, agents and marketing/PR professionals in
     different media.
How will I learn?
To achieve these goals, students will be required to analyze case studies and articles, hear presentations
from business leaders and marketers, read articles in both academic journals and business media, and
practice using professional tools and tactics.
Prerequisites for the Course
1. Approach: Come in with an open-mind and have a willingness and excitement for learning learn about all
    the opportunities available to get your project noticed in Hollywood.
2. Assignment: Complete first week’s reading and assignments by the second class on Monday, January 27,
    2020 (see details under “Week One” in syllabus).
3. Social Media Accounts: Ideally, all students will already have a basic understanding of how to use
    core social media platforms such as Instagram, Twitter, Facebook and YouTube. A Twitter and
    Instagram account must set up by each student by Week 2. These can be pre-existing accounts
    that you would like to use in class, or newly set up accounts to be used for the sole purpose of
    this course.
4. Skills: Proficiency with Microsoft Excel and PowerPoint is highly recommended. Photoshop,
    Hootsuite and Canva design would also be useful.
                                                                                                            1 of 21


                                                Course Overview
Each class session will explore concepts central to our understanding of discoverability and fandom for
Hollywood projects through the combination of lectures, readings, and conversations with industry insiders who
are applying these concepts through their own creative practices.
Below is an overview of the main elements of the course:
    •   In Class/Individual Assignments: Bring printed copies of two possible questions each week for guest speakers,
        these are considered in-class graded assignments. There will be other in-class assignments such as short quizzes
        and research-related one-paragraph essays. They will examine issues discussed in the assigned readings,
        specific articles, and lecture content. They are due, in a folder, at the end of each class with your name and
        date included. There are no make-ups allowed for in-class assignments.
   •   Homework Assignments: In addition to the development of a final multiplatform presentation project, there will
       be homework assignments involving analysis and/or engagement of social media and mass communication tools
       that will be assigned on a weekly basis. Be sure to check Canvas announcements and modules regularly for
       assignments and updates.
    •   Quizzes/Case Studies/Discussion Boards: Quizzes, Case Studies, and Article discussion assignments will be
        given based on course content, speakers, and media assignments. Most will be take-home quizzes. Case
        studies and articles will be provided or posted by students and discussion boards with commentary will be
        required.
   •   Social Media: You will be asked to sign up for various social media accounts (i.e. Twitter, Hootsuite, Instagram,
       etc.). We will discuss setting up these accounts in class for each tool. It is recommended that you create a
       separate account specifically for this class.
   •   Twitter Requirement: My class Twitter account is @DigiPsyc, and # #UTLA378 is the class hashtag. You will be
       required to send out at least 2 relevant social media/entertainment marketing tweets per week. Each tweet
       must include @DigiPsyc and #UTLA378. If you do not include these in EVERY tweet, you will not receive credit.
   •   Final Project: The “6 STEPPS to Spreadability” -- In order to fully understand how spreadable media in
       entertainment works, students will be expected to immerse themselves in at least one major media
       franchise for the duration of the term. Teams and course projects will be selected during the second and
       third weeks of class. The Final Project will be created based on these 6 “STEPPS” from the textbook,
       “Contagious,” plus readings from “Spreadable Media,” course assignments, lectures and guest speakers.
       •   Social Currency: “We Share Things That Make Us Look Good” ...
       •   Triggers: “Top of Mind, Tip of Tongue” ...
       •   Emotion: “When We Care, We Share” ...
       •   Public: “Built to Show, Built to Grow” ...
       •   Practical Value: “News You Can Use” ...
       •   Stories: “Information Travels Under the Guide of Idle Chatter”
       ** IMPORTANT NOTE: Social media is an ever-evolving field. Although primary reading assignments are
       included in the syllabus, changes based on trends or guest speakers may require additions or
       changes. Therefore, it is important that you check the canvas modules on a weekly basis for the
       most current information.
                                                                                                                     1 of 21


                                          Course Requirements
REQUIRED TEXTBOOKS
       •   Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a Networked Culture
           by Henry Jenkins, Sam Ford, and Joshua Green
       •   Contagious: Why Things Catch On by Jonah Berger
Recommended
       •   Social Media Entertainment by Stuart Cunningham and David Craig
       •   Building a StoryBrand: Clarify Your Message So Customers Will Listen by Donald Miller
CLASSROOM EXPECTATIONS
  •    Make every assignment count. If you do not include your full name and date on EVERY assignment, you will not
       receive credit.
  •    Be respectful. Do your part to maintain a class environment of respect, and civility. This includes being on time,
       staying seated except when asked to form a discussion group, refraining from private conversations, texting, non-
       class computer use, or other disruptive behaviors. You have the right to be treated with respect by me and your
       classmates, and an obligation to respect others even when you disagree with their views.
  •    Attend every class. If you have an emergency or illness, contact your instructor ahead of time to let her or him
       know that you will be absent. If you miss a class, it is your responsibility to meet with the instructor, outside of
       regular class time, to determine a plan to make up the missed work. Outside assignments can be emailed to
       my UTLA account (cynthia.lieberman@austin.utexas.edu), unless otherwise instructed.
  •    Come to class prepared. “By failing to prepare, you are preparing to fail.” (Benjamin Franklin) Please try to
       come to class on time and prepared and do not leave early. Otherwise, your class participation grade will be
       negatively affected. If for some reason you do have to come late and/or leave early, please let me know in
       advance and try to minimize the disruption to your classmates.
  •    Tweet 2 Times a Week about an article related to the course. Each tweet must include @DigiPsyc and
       #UTLA378. If you do not include these in EVERY, tweet you will not receive credit.
  •    Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc): Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important
       with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual
       orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the
       student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with the Gender and Sexuality Center
       (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-resources/). I will gladly honor your request
       to address you by a name that is different from what appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns
       you use (she/he/they/ze/etc.). Please advise me of any changes early in the semester so that I may make
       appropriate updates to my records.
Tips for Success
•   Take responsibility for your education. “The harder you work, the luckier you get.” (anon) College courses are
    rigorous and demanding; you may have to work harder and seek more help in order to succeed. Therefore,
    students are expected to attend the class regularly, arrive on time, take notes, complete reading assignments on
    schedule, and actively participate in discussions and other learning activities.
•   Plan ahead. “It takes as much energy to wish as it does to plan.” (Eleanor Roosevelt) - Students who wait until the
    last minute to do their work usually make lower grades and are more likely to miss deadlines. Study and do your
    assignments every day. Doing so ensures that if a problem occurs at the last minute, such as a computer
    malfunction, you will still be prepared.
                                                                                                                     1 of 21


                                                         Grades
Grading Policies for this Course
  As I hope you can see, flexibility is built into the assignments to support your success in this course. If you miss a
  smaller assignment or don’t do as well on your earlier journal entries, your grade will not be impacted significantly.
  Consequently, the final grades are firm, and no additional curve is available.
  Your work will be graded on the following scale:
       A        93-100
       A-       90-92
       B+       87-89
       B        83-86
       B-       80-82
       C+       77-79
       C        73-76
       C-       70-72
       D+       67-69
       D        63-66
       D-       60-62
       F        0-59
  o    An "A" must be earned by "going the extra mile" to develop professional-caliber work that could be presented
       to a client or CEO. A-level work is mistake-free; reflects a command of the theories, frameworks, and strategies;
       and shows creativity and superlative communications skills. A-level students are also phenomenal teammates
       who go beyond the minimum to make sure their projects succeed.
  o    A "B" reflects college-caliber work that demonstrates a good understanding of the concepts, but needs extra
       polish and creativity before it can be presented professionally.
  o    A "C" reflects amateur-quality work and a superficial understanding of the concepts. Additional study and
       review is strongly recommended.
  o    A "D" reflects
  o    An "F" reflects poor understanding of the concepts or incomplete work. In any cases of plagiarism, an "F" is
       given for the entire course. Note that all course grades are final.
The grades for the course will be computed from the following components:
                  a. “6 STEPPS TO SPREADABILITY” Group Project                      35 points
                  b. Individual Assignments                                         25 points
                  c. Classroom Participation/Guest Questions                        20 points
                  d. Twitter Posts                                                  10 points
                  c. Quiz/Case Study                                                10 points
                  TOTAL                                                             100 points
                                                                                                                     1 of 21


Time-Bank Options
Sometimes we have bad days, bad weeks, and bad semesters. In an effort to accommodate any unexpected,
unfortunate personal crisis, I have built “time banks” into our course. You do not have to utilize this policy, but if you
find yourself struggling with unexpected personal events, I encourage you to e-mail me as soon as possible to notify me
that you are using our grace policy. You may use this policy one of two ways (please choose, and let me know):
                          You may have 1 two-day grace period for one assignment, OR
                          You may have 2 one-day extensions for two different assignments.
                                               CLASSROOM POLICIES
Statement on Learning Success
Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If there
are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as possible.
Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also encourage you to
reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but I am happy to connect
you with a person or Center if you would like.
Electronic Devices
Electronic devices may be used for in-class purposes only… and due to the nature of the course content, which is
primarily gleaned through nuanced case application and discussion, all electronic devices, including cellphones,
tablets, and laptops must be on silent. Please do not engage in any “cybersurfing” (e.g., messaging, social media,
eCommerce, email, etc.) during class from either your smartphone, tablet, or laptop. Students “cybersurfing” during
class lectures have been proven to decrease awareness, understanding and comprehension, especially in analytical and
critical reasoning domains (Psychology Today, 2015). Moreover, there is a high correlation of cybersurfing and below
average course grades (Flipd, 2014, 2015, 2016).
ABSENCES
If you are absent on the day that your team meets, you are responsible for providing your team with the necessary
information to compensate for your absence. It is crucial to keep in communication with your team members; you are
responsible for letting both us and your team know if you cannot make it to a class.
Excused Absence: The only absences that will be considered excused are for religious holidays or extenuating
circumstances due to an emergency. If you plan to miss class due to observance of a religious holiday, please let us
know at least two weeks in advance. You will not be penalized for this absence, although you will still be responsible for
any work you will miss on that day if applicable. Check with us for details or arrangements.
If you have to be absent, use your resources wisely. Ask your team and other classmates to get a run-down and notes
on any lessons you miss. If you find there are topics that we covered while you were gone that raise questions, you
may come by during office hours or schedule a meeting to discuss. Email specific questions you have in advance so
that we can make the most of our time. “What did I miss?” is not specific enough.
                                                                                                                        1 of 21


GUEST SPEAKERS
      DATE      COURSE LECTURE          SPEAKER        TYPE       COMPANY                    TITLE
WEEK
      1/24/2020 COURSE OVERVIEW
1
WEEK                                                              USC / ”SPREADABLE MEDIA”
      1/27/2020 Participatory Culture   Henry Jenkins  In Class                              USC Provost/Professor/Media Scholar
2                                                                 AUTHOR
WEEK
      2/3/2020  Creating Content        Sal Calleros   In Class   "Good Doctor"              Co-Exec Prod, "The Good Doctor"
3
WEEK
      2/10/2020 Adv/PR/Promo            Scott Grogin   In Class   CBS                        EVP Corp Comm.
4
WEEK
      2/17/2020 Influencers             Ann Donahue    In Class   IndieWire                  TV Editor
5
WEEK
      2/24/2020 Sales Funnel            Matt Brennan   In Class   Los Angeles Times          TV Editor
6
WEEK
      3/2/2020  Target Audience         Holly Jacobs   In Class   Sony                       EVP Reality Development
7
WEEK                                                   Via Remote
      3/9/2020  Transmedia              Jeff Gomez                Starlight Runner           Pres/Writer/Transmedia Prod
8                                                      - NYC
BREAK 3/16/2020 SPRING BREAK
WEEK                                                                                         USC Prof and Book Author, "Social
      3/23/2020 Final + Viral + STEPPS  David Craig    In Class   USC
9                                                                                            Media in Entertainment"
WEEK
      3/30/2020 Social Media Audit      Beau Avril     In Class   Google/Famebit             Head, Influencer Brand Mktg.
10
WEEK                                                   Prometheus
      4/6/2020  Production Field Trip   Kevin Burns               Prometheus Prods.          Exec Prod, "Lost in Space"
11                                                     Offices
WEEK
      4/13/2020 Final + Visual + STEPPS Claudia Cagan  In Class   "Entertainment Tonight"    Supvg Producer
12
WEEK            Branding in Ent. +
      4/20/2020                         Debbie Brunner In Class   Digital Inbound            Digital Agency Owner, UCLA Instructor
13              Blogging
WEEK            Wrap up Final
      4/27/2020                         Babette Perry  In Class   United Talent Agency (UTA) Partner/Talent Agent
14              Preparations
WEEK
      5/4/2020  FINAL CLASS
15
                                                                                                                               1 of 21


                                              Course Outline
 All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
 https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
 Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to
 note these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as
 much advanced notice as possible).
FINAL PROJECT
The Final Project Will Be Based On Campaign Involving These 6 “STEPPS” Found In The ‘Contagious’
Book
•    Social Currency: “We Share Things That Make Us Look Good” ...
•    Triggers: “Top of Mind, Tip of Tongue” ...
•    Emotion: “When We Care, We Share” ...
•    Public: “Built to Show, Built to Grow” ...
•    Practical Value: “News You Can Use” ...
•    Stories: “Information Travels Under the Guide of Idle Chatter”
                                                                                                              1 of 21


FINAL PROJECT OBJECTIVE
The objective of the group final project is to demonstrate how an entertainment entity used the “6 STEPPS”
and “spreadable media” to scale their startup project from pitch to screen in a way that differentiates it
from the pack and lead down the path to success.
POV
The team in this project will a serve as the writer/producer or agent who pitched their project through the lens
of spreadable media to a desired outlet (i.e. production company, distributor, streaming network, TV outlet
…even a retail outlet!). What STEPPS and considerations did they have to determine to ensure their story and
concepts would be spreadable across a myriad of platforms? How did they determine and prove that their project
was viable to a specific, targeted audiences?
For example, imagine what STEPPS executive producer Kevin Burns had to take to prove that remaking LOST
IN SPACE for Netflix would be a viable and potentially long-lasting franchise. What STEPPS did writers Paul
Attanasio (screenplay), Jordan Roberts (earlier screenplay) have to take to convince Warner Bros. and
Mattel that they should produce a Hot Wheels movie?
ASSIGNMENT OVERVIEW
Option #1: Each group will select a product from the 2020 Golden Globes Nominees List and develop a “6 STEPPS
to Spreadability” Campaign for the project.
Option #2: Each group will select a product in development and create (subject to approval) a “6 STEPPS to
Spreadability” Campaign for the project.
The final paper and presentation should examine both the commercial and grassroots expansion of
narrative platforms that contributed to a multi-modal mode of storytelling, one which is based on exposure
to targeted audiences that resulted in emotional connections (and success) with audiences across the globe.
In order to fully understand how spreadable media in entertainment works, students will be expected to
immerse themselves in at least one major media franchise for the duration of the term.
Each team will need to reveal as many different instances of concrete (official or unofficial) evidence in support
of (a theory, concept, claim, or the like) in the presentations’ STEPPS. This is an encyclopedic expanse of
information which gets put together differently by each individual, as well as processed collectively by the
collaborative gathering.
                                                                                                             1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
1.0 - WEEK ONE: Overview and Introductions                                1/24/2020
1.1 - OUTCOMES
• Learning Outcomes
• Define what is Social Media and What it is not
• Discuss Usage of Social Media in Business
• Highlight strengths & Weaknesses of SM usage
• Identify Challenges/opportunities with SM
• Identify Platforms
• Twitter Course requirement
1.1.1 – LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
• Welcome and Introductions
• Course Outline & Expectations
• Final Project
• “Social” media Explained
• Spreadable Media: The Big Picture
• Evolution of Participatory Culture
• Platforms
• Case Study: Susan Boyle (or other TBD)
• Twitter Course Requirement
1.2 –*DO “SPREADABLE MEDIA” READING BY MONDAY & BRING QUESTIONS FOR AUTHOR!
1.2.1 - MEDIA ASSIGNMENTS
• Read: Spreadable Media: Introduction (“Why Media Spreads”) - Introduction
• Read: Jenkins, Henry. “The Revenge of the Origami Unicorn: Seven Principles of Transmedia Storytelling (Well, Two
    Actually. Five More on Friday).”
• Listen: Social Media Entertainment: The New Intersection of Hollywood and Silicon Valley
1.2.3 - GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
• Make sure you have a Twitter and Instagram Account set up by Monday, January 27.
• Make sure you have done the following by Monday’s (1/27) class
• Introduce yourself on Canvas
• Take the Tech Survey
• Submit 2 intelligent, thoughtful questions for consideration for Monday’s guest speaker, Henry Jenkins. Post on
    Canvas and bring print out to class (1/27). [Note: This is a mandatory graded assignment, worth 5 points.]
• Identify Golden Globe Nominee/Winner for future Classwork and Final Project
• You will have until week three to critically summarize at least one Social Media marketing article and post it to
    Canvas; be prepared to discuss in class.
                                                                                                                  1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
2.0 - WEEK TWO: Marketing in a Participatory Culture                      1/27/2020
*DO “Spreadable Media” READING BEFORE CLASS AND BRING QUESTIONS FOR AUTHOR! *
2.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
      • Media Scholar Henry Jenkins, Author (Spreadable Media: Creating Value and Meaning in a Networked
         Culture) and USC's Chief Advisor, Annenberg Innovation Lab / Provost Professor
2.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
      • Current Event Discussion
      • Social Media Marketing (SMM) In Entertainment
      • The Importance of Fandoms in Worldbuilding
      • Stickiness vs Spreadability
      • Final Group Project: “SIX STEPPS”
      • Platform Presentation
2.3.1 - MEDIA ASSIGNMENTS
      • Read: Spreadable Media: Chapter 1: “Where 2.0 Went Wrong”
      • Read: Contagious: Introduction (“Why Things Catch On”)
      • Read: The Bricks of Breaking in: Sal Calleros on Mentorship
2.3.2 – GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
      • Read and Post: “The Real Reason You Won't Find Freddie Highmore On Instagram; Critically assess the impact
         of this may or may not have on the show in terms of consumer engagement and interest, the network’s
         ability to create spreadable media for the show, it’s impact on social listening and Highmore’s potential
         marketability for future career projects inside and outside of the network.
      • Define 2 ways Stickiness is used in your preferred Golden Globe nominee or winner selection
      • Define 2 ways Spreadability is used in preferred Golden Globe nominee or winner selection
      • Define 1 way Social Currency has been used for the show “The Good Doctor”
      • Post and bring to class 2 relevant question considerations for Sal Calleros
      • Tweet: 2 tweets on Social Media Marketing
      • (TBD): Quiz or Case Study Assignment
                                                                                                                   1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
3.0 - WEEK THREE: Creating Quality Content                                2/3/2020
3.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
        • Sal Calleros, Co-Exec Producer/Writer, “The Good Doctor” (ABC)
3.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS:
        • 6 STEPPS: WHY Things Catch On (Introduction)
        • Current Event Discussion
        • Content is KING – Context is QUEEN – But They Must Be Married Together
        • Types of Content
        • STEPPS Final Term Project: Group Assignments/Project Overview
        • Video: How Great Leaders Inspire Action (Simon Sinek) via @TEDTalks
        • Platform Discussion
3.3.1 - MEDIA ASSIGNMENTS
         • Read: Contagious - Chapter 1: SOCIAL CURRENCY (aka “We Share Things That Make Us Look Good”)
         • Read: Selected Content from Spreadable Media
         • Read: The 11 Best Corporate Storytelling Examples of All Time: https://ozcontent.com/blog/best-
            corporate-storytelling-examples/
3.3.2 – GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
         • Identify 2 ways an entertainment product(s) have used SOCIAL CURRENCY to spread information and ways
            it has or could become “spreadable.”
         • Research and Post: Use of Instagram Marketing or PR for your Golden Globe Selection and explain how it
            impacts Spreadability. Did it help get the project a nomination or win? Was there a better way to present
            the information? Post and bring to class 2 relevant question considerations for Sal Calleros
         • Tweet: 2 tweets on Social Media Marketing
         • Possible Quiz or Case Study Assignment (TBD)
4.0 - WEEK FOUR: Getting the Word Out – PR                                2/10/2020
4.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
        • UT Alum Scott Grogin, Executive VP, Communications, CBS TV Dist.
4.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
         •    STEPPS #1: SOCIAL CURRENCY (aka “We Share Things That Make Us Look Good”)
         •    Current Event Discussion
         •    PESO (Paid, Earned, Shared and Owned) Marketing
         •    24/7 New Cycle: Broadcast/Print/Digital
         •    Trending
         •    Entertainment PR / Crisis Communications
         •    Types of Entertainment PR jobs
         •    Case Study: Anatomy of a Discoverability Campaign: Bates Motel
         •    Platform Talk
                                                                                                                 1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
4.3.1 – MEDIA ASSIGNMENTS
         • Read: Contagious - Chapter 2: TRIGGERS (aka “Top of Mind, Tip of Tongue”)
         • Read: Spreadable selected text
         • Read: 10 of the best brand storytelling campaigns of 2020 http://bit.ly/2TJFvIh
         • Read: Core Principles of Transmedia Storytelling
4.3.1 – GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
         • Social Currency: Research and provide commentary on an article written by Ann Donahue for IndieWire,
            on how it impacted spreadability through SOCIAL CURRENCY; include examples of where and how the
            article was shared on social media.
         • Using “Psycho” Finale/Bates Motel Campaign as a model, submit a complete set of PR examples that are
            related to a particular news angle or event such as a debut, a finale, launch of a fashion line, celebrity
            relationship breakup or faux pas, etc.
         • Possible Quiz or Case Study Assignment (TBD)
         • Tweet: 2 tweets on Social Media Marketing
5.0 - WEEK FIVE: Influencers                                              2/17/2020
5.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
        •    Ann Donahue, IndieWire TV Editor
5.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
        •    STEPPS #2: TRIGGERS (aka “Top of Mind, Tip of Tongue”)
        •    Current Event Discussion – Types of Press
        •    Influencer Marketing
        •    The Truth About Influencers
        •    Influencer Marketing and/or PR?
        •    Transparency and Ethics
        •    Fame vs Being “Known”
        •    Platform Talk
5.3.1 – MEDIA ASSIGNMENTS
         • Read: Contagious – Chapter 3: EMOTION (aka ” Emotion: “When We Care, We Share”
         • Read: Relevant Article or Case Study Provided, analyze and comment
         • Read: Spreadable selected text
5.3.2 - GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
         • Influence: Critically summarize a Social Media marketing article about your group project title or
            something other celebrity postings (i.e. a movie or TV show or special event) that used Influencer
            marketing to TRIGGER audience attention. Post it to Canvas for discussion; comment on one fellow
            student’s article
         • Work with group on drafting STEPPS #1 and #2
         • Case Study: Read Matt Brennan’s story on “Chernobyl” and summarize how EMOTION impacted the
            success of the film’s critical notoriety
         • Possible Quiz or Case Study Assignment
         • Tweet: 2 tweets on Social Media Marketing
                                                                                                                     1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
6.0 - WEEK SIX: Sales Funnel/Market Segmentation                          2/24/2020
6.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
        •    Matt Brennan, LATimes TV Editor
6.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
        •    STEPPS #3: EMOTION (aka Emotion: “When We Care, We Share”)
        •    Current Event Discussion - Journalism
        •    Sales Funnel -What Hollywood Can Teach You
        •    Market Segmentation in the Entertainment Industry – National, Local, Mobile, In-home
        •    Chernobyl and Discoverability
        •    Platform Talk
6.3.1 - MEDIA ASSIGNMENTS
         •   Read: Contagious - Chapter 4: PUBLIC (aka” Public: Built to Show, Built to Grow”)
         •   Read: Spreadable selected text
         •   Read/Post: Relevant Article or Case Study about “Shark Tank” and analyze and post 2-3 sentences about
             how it uses any of the “6 STEPPS” to gain attention
6.3.2 - GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
         • Individual: Break down ideal sales funnel process for your own project; print out and be prepared to
            discuss in class
         • Public: Research and summarize an example of an entertainment stunt or campaign that used Twitter to
            inspire public visibility and awareness for your Group Project
         • Submit Draft for review of STEPPS #1 & 2
         • Possible Quiz or Case Study Assignment
         • Tweet: 2 tweets on Social Media Marketing
7.0 - WEEK SEVEN: Target Market and Audience                              3/2/2020
7.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
        •    Holly Jacobs, EVP Reality TV Development, Sony
7.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
        •    STEPPS #4: PUBLIC (aka” Public: Built to Show, Built to Grow”)
        •    Current Event Discussion
        •    Target Market: How To Uncover The Proper Target Audience For a Film
        •    Target Audience: Hollywood Storytelling Techniques in the Customer’s Journey
        •    Group Project Class Time: Work on Funnel/Audience/Market and STEPPS
        •    Platform Talk – Virtual Reality
                                                                                                                1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
7.3.1 - MEDIA ASSIGNMENTS
    • Read: Contagious – PRACTICAL VALUE (aka “Practical Value: News You Can Use”)
    • Read: Spreadable selected text
    • Read: Relevant Article or Case Study Provided, analyze and comment
7.3.2 - GRADED ASSIGNMENTS
   •      Influence: Critically summarize a Social Media marketing article about your group project title or something
          other celebrity postings (i.e. a movie or TV show or special event) that used Influencer marketing to TRIGGER
          audience attention. Post it to Canvas for discussion; comment on one fellow student’s article
   •      Case Study: Read Matt Brennan’s story on “Chernobyl” and summarize how EMOTION impacted the success
          of the film’s critical notoriety
   •      Possible Quiz or Case Study Assignment
   •      Tweet: 2 tweets on Social Media Marketing
8.0 – WEEK EIGHT: Transmedia Storytelling                                   3/9/2020
8.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
•      Jeff Gomez, President, Writer, Transmedia Storyteller, Starlight Runner
8.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
•      STEPPS #5: PRACTICAL VALUE (aka “Practical Value: News You Can Use”)
•      Current Event Discussion
•      Transmedia Storytelling
•      In Class Assignment: Identify two existing Transmedia opportunities (or suggest two of your own)
       for your Golden Globe final project
•      Class Time for Final Project – STEPPS 3 & 4
•      Platform Talk – Augmented Reality/360 Videos
Assignment: FOCUS ON COMPLETING STEPS 1-4 FOR GROUP PROJECT BY END OF WEEK NINE
Rough drafts of steps 1-4 are due on the first day of class after Spring Break, no exceptions.
Additional assignments for week 9-14 will be determined based on course assessment of progress.
                                         WEEK OF 3/16/20: SPRING BREAK
9.0 – WEEK NINE: Viral Content                                              3/23/2020
9.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
•      David Craig, USC Prof / Author, "Social Media in Entertainment”
9.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
•      STEPPS #6: STORIES (aka “Stories: Information Travels Under the Guide of Idle Chatter”
•      Marketing Viral Content
•      Remarkable Facts
•      Clickbait
•      DISCUSS: Case Study
•      Submit Rough Draft of STEPPS 3 & 4
•      Platform Talk – YouTube
                                                                                                                    1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
10.0 - SOCIAL MEDIA AUDIT                                              3/30/2020
10.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
•     Beau Avril, Director, Global Head of Business
10.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
•     Social Media Auditing
•     Current Event Discussion
•     Building a Facebook Funnel
•     Social Media Listening
•     DISCUSS: Case Study TBD
•     Class Time for STEPPS 5 & 6
•     Platform Talk - YouTube
11.0 - WEEK 11: Field Trip To Prometheus Productions                   3/30/2020
11.1 - GUEST SPEAKERS
•     FIELD TRIP to Prometheus Studios to meet with Kevin Burns, President /Exec Producer “Lost in Space” on Netflix
11.2 - *READ ABOUT KEVIN BURNS AND HIS COMPANY. BRING QUESTIONS!*
• Submit Rough Draft of STEPPS 5 & 6
12.0 - WEEK 12: Visual Marketing                                       4/3/2020
12.1 - GUEST SPEAKER
•     Claudia Cagan, Supervising Producer,” Entertainment Tonight”
12.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
•     Power of Visual Marketing
•     Video Marketing and PR
•     Big Data Visualization
•     The Infographic
•     Blogging – an Overview
•     Class Time For Final Project – The Infographic
                                                                                                              1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 COURSE OUTLINE - Continued
13.0 – WEEK 13: Branding & Advertising + Blogging                         4/20/2020
13.1 - GUEST SPEAKERS
•     Debbie Brunner, Flip Creative
(Note: I will be out of town this week and Debbie Brunner, a UCLA instructor and business
colleague, will guest lecture. I am also posting a lecture and assignments on blogging.)
13.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
•     In-Class Lecture: Branding
•     Online (Narrated) Lecture: Blogging
•     Class Time for Final Project
14.0 - WEEK 14: Final Review                                              4/27/2020
14.1 – GUEST SPEAKER
•     Babette Perry (UTA), Partner/Talent Agent
14.2 - LECTURE AND DISCUSSION TOPICS
•     Blog Assignment Review
•     Class Time For Final Project
15.0 - WEEK 15: Final “STEPPS” GROUP PRESENTATION                         5/4/2020
IN CLASS GROUP PRESENTATIONS
                                                                                          1 of 21


                                                     RESOURCES
Moody Writing Support Program
The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3322, offers one-on-one assistance without charge to
students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. They have specialists in
Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, they offer workshops to strengthen core writing skills
in each field and to inspire students to strive for excellence. Students may book half-hour appointments on our
website or drop in for assistance during all stages of the writing process.
University Writing Center
Individualized assistance to students who want to improve their writing skills is available at no charge through
The University Writing Center (512-471-6222) at no charge.
University Resources for Students
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
     All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
     available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for
     support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
     depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Services For Students With Disabilities
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities and this class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you
need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me
know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss
your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student
with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. For more information, visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
                                                                                                                      1 of 21


                                           INSTITUTIONAL POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic
records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also
includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension on
a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
the prior permission of the instructor.
Academic Integrity
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you
have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject
to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonesty damages both the student’s learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a work-
career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For more information on
scholastic dishonesty, please visit the Student Judicial services Web site
at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
University Q Drop Policy
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Religious Holidays
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss a work assignment or other
project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed
within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of the University of Texas at Austin that you must notify
each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a
religious holy day.
                                                                                                                    1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 UNIVERSITY POLICIES - Continued
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student’s
responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to
check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are
available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html. (Optional: In this course e-mail will be used as a
means of communication with students. You will be responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class work and
announcements.)
Classroom Evacuation Procedures
Occupants of buildings on the UTLA campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm
activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall
inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Burbank Fire Department, The University of Texas
at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line
BCAL: 512-232-5050
Grading Procedures
Faculty members are free to develop their own methods of evaluating the performance of students in their classes,
but they are required to make the methods of evaluation to be used known in writing before the end of the fourth
class day each semester and the second class day each summer term. Responsibility for assuring adequate methods of
evaluation rests with departmental faculties and is subject to administrative review. In courses with multiple sections,
departments should provide for necessary coordination. Materials used in evaluating a student’s performance must be
collected by the instructor at or before the regularly scheduled final examination. The final examination is a common
method of final evaluation in courses.
Letter grades are used to record the instructor’s evaluation of students’ performance in a course. The following grades
are used: A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-, D+, D, D-, and F. It is your choice whether you want to use +/- grades, or whole
letter grades. Your choice must be stated on the syllabus. There is no University scale for =/- grades (you determine
what grade earns an A- versus an A, for example.) Members of the faculty are not authorized, without the academic
dean’s approval, to withhold a final grade or to defer reporting a final grade at the end of the semester other than by
the use of the symbol X. If a grade is withheld without the dean’s approval, the grade may not be added to the official
records later without the written approval of the academic dean. After a grade has been reported to the registrar, it
may not be changed unless an error was made by the instructor.
Copyright and Fair Use: For Production Classes Only
You may find the need to use copyrighted material this semester: music, photographs, movie clips, or any other
expression. For many of your uses, you need to find the copyright holder and negotiate a license. You own the
copyright to the work you produce in this class. As a copyright holder yourself, you understand the importance of
                                                                                                                      1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 UNIVERSITY POLICIES - Continued
copyright ownership. It is your responsibility to secure music and archival footage licenses as well as artwork, location
and personal releases. You will find release templates on the RTF website.
For some uses, however, neither you nor anyone else needs to license copyrighted material. This is because copyright
law exists to encourage and support creativity. Copyright law recognizes that creativity doesn’t arise in a vacuum. As
creators, we all stand on the shoulders of giants. New works of art (such as films, books, poems, paintings) all make
use of what has gone before. Thus, copyright law not only protects authors with a copyright that lets them decide who
can use their works, but also offers exemptions from the author’s control. For filmmakers, the most important
exemption is the doctrine of fair use. You can rely on fair use, where appropriate, in the film and video projects you
undertake for this course. If you are making a documentary film, consult the influential Documentary Filmmakers
Statement of Best Practices in Fair Use which was created by a group of national filmmaker organizations, has been
endorsed by the University Film and Video Association, and is now relied on by film festivals, insurers, cable-casters,
distributors and public broadcasters. Fair use also applies in the fiction film environment, but not necessarily to the
same extent or in the same way. As always, the central question is whether the new use is "transformative" - i.e.,
whether it adds significant value by modifying or recontextualizing the original.
Use of UT Trademarks and Landmarks in Films and Photographs
You may not film identifiable UT landmarks, signage, logos, and uniforms without prior permission. Examples of UT
Landmarks include the Tower and the Stadium. Email trademarks@utexas.edu to request approval and include the
following in your request:
• Course title, course number, and name of the class instructor.
• Stills or links to clips of the landmarks, signage, logos or uniforms you propose to film.
• Information about future plans for the film (e.g. possible submission to film festivals).
It normally takes 3-5 days to receive a reply. If approval is not granted, please see Bert Herigstad in the RTF office or
call him at 512-471-4071 to discuss other options.
Note regarding “in-class” exercises and non-screened class assignments:
• Most areas around campus are OK to film.
• Incidental shots of campus landmarks may be OK so long as they are used for educational purposes only, i.e., class
     assignments, and are not publicly screened.
Important Safety Information
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/. Occupants of buildings on the UTLA campus are required to
evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
•    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
     exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
•    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
                                                                                                                       1 of 21


#UTLA ADV378 UNIVERSITY POLICIES - Continued
•    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
     given instructions by the following: Burbank Police Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
     Department, or Fire Prevention Services Office.
•    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
     www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault,
sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is
committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual
misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
          involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory Reporters,”
which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible
Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before
talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a
responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to
the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
                                                                                                                       1 of 21
