                                                                                        VERS 1_18_19pstvs
                     ADV 373/PR 377K INTEGRATED COMMUNICATION CAMPAIGNS
                                  (Spring 2019 -- Unique No. ADV 06460/PR 06925)
                                          MW 8:00a.m.-9:30p.m. (BMC 4.206)
Professor: Dr. Patricia Stout, Ph.D.               TA: Jay Yisoo Kang
Email: pstout@mail.utexas.edu                      Email: jayjisukang@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Wednesday                            Office Hours: TBA
1:30-2:30pm and by appt
Office: BMC 4.344                                  Office: BMC 4th floor 4.386
COURSE DESCRIPTION
ADV 373 and PR 377 are the capstone courses in the Stan Richards School undergraduate degree
program in advertising and in public relations. Prerequisites for this combined course include
introduction to advertising/PR and IBP; research; media; and communication management. This class
integrates all of the course work in both majors. This is THE course in which students learn the most and
have the most fun working in agency teams on a real project.
 To provide students with an appreciation of what should be included in an integrated brand promotion
(IBP) campaign plan, a major campaign development project and a series of individual and task group
projects are completed during the semester. The major focus of the course is on the development of an
IBP campaign plan for a real client.
In this class, students work on a range of projects as members of agency account teams. Experiencing
the rewards and learning to cope with the problems of working in small groups is an important part of
the class.
In addition to an emphasis on developing and presenting a complete campaign, the course includes
client meetings, lectures, handouts, presentations, recommended readings, and guest speakers. Further,
a set of task group assignments focusing on various aspects of campaign planning is spread across the
semester.
COURSE OBJECTIVES
-To provide students with an in-depth understanding of the process of planning, presenting and
implementing a complete IBP campaign.
-To improve students’ ability to gather information about industry and marketplace trends to assist in
the design of effective integrated communication campaigns.
-To increase each student’s level of competence and professionalism.
-To help students sharpen the following skills: strategic and critical thinking; planning; organizational;
written and verbal communication; time management; interpersonal; and, task group/account team
(bringing out the best in others in a diverse group work setting).
                                                                                                           1


                                                                                     VERS 1_18_19pstvs
COURSE STRATEGY
To accomplish these objectives, the emphasis in the course is on each individual learning-by-doing. That
is, by working with other students to develop and present a complete campaign for a real client.
Students will utilize:
-A major account team campaign development project, as well as several smaller projects, to mirror the
work environment on both the client and agency sides of the advertising and public relations business
-Task group assignments and other projects to help focus on key components of the strategic planning
process and personal development
-Supplemental readings, examples, and speakers to provide a common framework to structure
understanding of the strategic IBP planning project
COURSE MATERIALS
One textbook is required for this course. Other optional books and resources are recommended.
Readings will be posted to the Canvas website http://courses.utexas.edu to be read prior to class for in-
class discussion, exercises and/or for online comments during the semester. These materials are
mandatory unless specified otherwise. Students are expected to stay current with Adv/PR trade press
news relevant to IBP. Additional details will be provided.
Required text: Advertising Campaign Planning (5th Edition), Jim Avery & Debbie Yount, 2016. Melvin &
Leigh, Publishers (available at the UT Coop).
While it is not required reading for the course, I highly recommend you read Jon Steel’s Perfect Pitch. The
book provides valuable insights into making presentations and winning new business. It will be useful not
only for making presentations in this class, but for other presentations you make as you advance in your
career.
COURSE GRADING
In general, team members receive the same grades for group exercises and projects. The individual paper
assignment offers a chance for personal distinction, since you will have time to work on it and can use
essentially all the resources at your command. Late work will be penalized. Plus/minus grades will be
assigned for the final grade.
The assignments for this class include:
     •   Crash Exercises: These will be short exercises to develop campaigns and to present those ideas.
         These are tasks you must respond to under time pressure (and typically involve rescheduling other
         activities already planned or underway).
     •   Campaign Development: The account team’s development and presentation of a campaign to
         the client.
                                                                                                          2


                                                                                       VERS 1_18_19pstvs
    •    Individual Paper: This written assignment will provide an opportunity to reflect on your personal
         approach to and viewpoint of advertising/public relations and how it may have evolved over your
         experiences while an undergraduate student.
    •    Class Participation: Your participation in class is a key element of completing the course. For
         full credit, you must be in regular attendance (both in class and online), punctual, and have
         a professional demeanor. It is important to show up prepared for class discussions and
         presentations and to thoughtfully participate and engage consistently throughout the entire
         course. Participation includes active engagement in discussions, exercises, and other in-class
         activities, some of which will have specific grade point values. Effective participation includes a
         balance of quality and quantity of your contributions throughout the semester. Late and missed
         assignments will also be factored into this grade. Being successful in this class requires that
         you demonstrate that you can work productively and respectfully with colleagues.
    •    Peer Evaluations: Your teammates will evaluate your performance for group work. Their
         evaluations will be averaged and included as a component of your final grade.
COURSE GRADING AND GRADE SYSTEM
Each student’s performance will be assessed by evaluating:
-Your problem solving and applications skills through assignments, crash projects, research projects and
participation
-Your account team’s performance based on the plans book, team presentations, and meeting reports
-Your contribution to team performance through peer evaluations
Your final grade will be calculated as follows:
   Assignment                      Weight
   Crash Exercise #1                 15%
   Crash Exercise #2                 15%
   IBP Campaign-50/50 Book &         30%
   Presentation
   Individual Paper                  20%
   Class Participation               15%
   Peer Evaluations                  5%
                                                                                                             3


                                                                                       VERS 1_18_19pstvs
The following grade scale will be used at the end of the semester for final grades. I do not round grades
(e.g., a 92.89 is an A-).
   Letter Grade       Number Grade
   A                  93-100
   A-                 90-92.9
   B+                 87-.89.9
   B                  83-86.9
   B-                 80-82.9
   C+                 77-79.9
   C                  73-76.9
   C-                 70-72.9
   D+                 66-69.9
   D                  63-66.9
   D-                 60-62.9
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from
attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of observance of a religious
holy day.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT
If you have a documented disability that requires academic accommodations, please contact Services for
Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or (512)-410-6644 (video phone) or contact:
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/ Faculty are not required to provide accommodations without an
official accommodation letter from SSD.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
                                                                                                          4


                                                                                       VERS 1_18_19pstvs
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. For
more information visit: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check
your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily —to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions
at: http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy
UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
COUNSELING & MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support: Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p, SSB, 5th
floor, 512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu OR CALL CMHC Crisis Line:
24/7, 512.471.2255, cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW (M-F 8-5pm, BMC
3.390, 512-471-7642) https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
                                                                                                           5


                                                                                      VERS 1_18_19pstvs
TENTATIVE Course Schedule (NOTE: In addition to the textbook assignments below, supplemental
readings and viewings will be posted on Canvas)
It is expected that readings for each class day have been read prior to attending class. Additional
reading and class materials will be provided in class and on Canvas throughout the semester. The class
schedule is subject to change. *Chapter readings in Avery & Yount text. [Read all material associated
with each chapter.]
Week Date                Class Topic                                              *Chap. Readings
1        Jan 23          Introductions, course overview
2        Jan 28 & 30     Mon – Get Acquainted                                             Intro;
                         Wed – Account Team Pitch
3        Feb 4 & 6       Situation Analysis                                               Ch 1
4        Feb 11 & 13     Research -- Secondary Research;                                  Ch 2 & 3
                         Problems & Opportunities (SWOT)
5        Feb 18 & 20     Primary Research; Objective Setting                              Ch 4
6        Feb 25 & 27     Crash Exercise #1
7        Mar 4 & 6       Creative & Media                                                 Ch 7 & 8
8        Mar 11 & 13     Budget Considerations; Strategic Decision-Making                 Ch 5 & 6
                         DUE: Individual Paper (Friday, March 15 by noon)
9        Mar 18 & 20      SPRING BREAK (NO UT CLASSES HELD)
10       Mar 25 & 27     Crash Exercise #2                                                Ch 9
11       Apr 1 & 3       Mon – Group work
                         Wed -- Project consultations
12       Apr 8 & 10      Mon – Group work
                         Wed -- Project consultations
13       Apr 15 & 17     Mon – Group work
                         Wed -- Project consultations
14       Apr 22 & 24     Mon – Group work
                         Wed -- Project consultations
                                                                                                       6


                                                                         VERS 1_18_19pstvs
15 Apr 29 & May 1 Final Pitch;
                  DUE: Plansbook & Slide Deck (Sunday, April 28 by noon)
16 May 6 & 8      Final de-brief and course wrap up
                  [Friday, May 10 Last day Spring Classes]
                                                                             ###
                                                                                         7
