                              The Ancient Mediterranean World
                                 AHC 319/CC 319D/HIS 319D
Instructor: Christy Schirmer                              TA: Hayley Barnett
Office: WAG 207                                           Office: WAG 7
Office Hours: M 10-11, W 10-12, and                       Office Hours: W 12:30-1:30, F 11-12, and
  by appointment                                           by appointment
email: schirmerc@utexas.edu                               email: hayleybarnett@utexas.edu
“The Ancient Mediterranean World” (AMW) is an introductory survey of the major civilizations of
Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, and Italy, from around 3000 BCE to the 400s CE. Each had its
distinctive character, but vigorous cultural exchange in the region and beyond led to the assimilation,
adaptation, or rejection (or a combination) by one culture of the ideas and practices of others. A
major theme will be cultural interaction and its implications for understanding the historical
development of the various peoples living in this region. Other themes include: the systems of
government and political authority, social structures (class, gender, generational), religion, war and
violence, and the ancient economy. The lectures and discussion sections will introduce you to many
of the sources and analytical methods of the ancient historian. The evidence is wide-ranging and
includes literary texts, documents written on papyri and inscribed on stone, artifacts (such as coins,
vase painting, sculpture, burials, personal adornment, and houses), and more. This class will give you
experience in interpreting these primary sources and constructing historical arguments based on
reason and evidence.
Unique numbers for this course include: AHC 319: 33250, 33255, 33260, 33265; CC 319D: 33435,
33440, 33445, 33450; HIS 319D: 38835, 38840, 38845, 38850.
Lecture times:                   M & W 9-10am, WAG 101 (all sections)
Discussion section times:        Th 9-10am, CAL 200 (33250, 33435, 38835)
                                 Th 10-11am, CAL 200 (33260, 33445, 38845)
                                 F 9-10am, PAR 210 (33255, 33440, 38840)
                                 F 10-11am, PAR 310 (33265, 33450, 38850)
You must attend your assigned section. You are not permitted to attend another section.
I. Flags
This course carries a Global Cultures Flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. Your grade will be based on assignments
dealing with the practices, beliefs, and histories of the ancient civilizations of the Mediterranean
basin, informed by literature and archaeology.
II. Required Texts
     ● D. Brendan Nagle, The Ancient World. A Social and Cultural History (8th ed.).
     ● John Haywood, The Penguin Historical Atlas of Ancient Civilizations (Penguin).
                                                                                              AMW S2019 1


There will be additional readings or electronic resources posted to Canvas for the discussion
sections and occasionally for lectures.
III. Course Requirements
Exams: You will have three exams: two during the semester and one on the university’s scheduled
final exam date. Each exam will count for 20 percent of your grade.
Quizzes: We will give you five map quizzes, which are intended to test your familiarity with
geography and place names relevant to the course. Additional short quizzes may be given if needed.
Course participation and attendance: You are expected to be present at all lectures and section
meetings unless you have prior permission to miss class. Attendance is part of your participation
grade. One way we assess your degree of preparation is by the level of your active participation in
class discussions and exercises.
Assignments: You will be expected to have completed each reading assignment—or any other kind of
assigned exercise—by the day for which it assigned. Some of your reading will be from the textbooks,
but other readings will be available as PDFs under the “Files” folder on the course Canvas page.
Reading assignments may vary somewhat from what appears on the syllabus; we will give adequate
advance notice of any changes.
Written assignment: You will be required to write a short (2-page) source analysis paper during the
semester. You will receive more instructions for this as the class progresses.
IV. Evaluation and Grading
Your final grade will be determined by the following:
         Three exams: 60 % (20% each)                    Source analysis (written): 10%
         Quizzes and assignments: 20%                    Discussion and participation: 10%
A 93-100; A- 90-92; B+ 87-89; B 83-86; B- 80-82; C+ 77-79; C 73-76; C- 70-72; D+ 67-69; D 63-66;
D- 60-62; F 59 and below.
We will not grade on a curve for this course. All grading, even on short quizzes, will be done on a
100-point scale: A = 90-100, B = 80-90, etc. Your final grade will be on a plus / minus scale based
on your cumulative numerical score. In the final calculations, I will round up a grade if the numeric
score falls just short of the next letter grade. However, I will not negotiate a grade unless there
has been a demonstrable error, either in calculation or content.
If you feel that you are having problems in this class, please come talk to your instructor or TA and
we will work together to address the things that are causing problems. It is up to you, however, to let
us know if you need help.
V. Lectures
There will be two weekly lectures (MW 9:00-10:00, Waggener Hall 101). These will combine
historical outline, discussion of major themes, and exploration of problems in the interpretation of
historical evidence. In order to get the most out of the lectures, you should complete the reading
                                                                                            AMW S2019 2


assignment in advance of the lecture. The lectures will amplify the reading materials by placing them
in a broader narrative.
VI. Discussion Sections
The assignments for discussion section will usually include a set of questions concerning the
readings. You should come prepared to discuss these questions in an informed and respectful
manner. The main purpose of the discussion sections is to learn how to analyze ancient sources and
how to evaluate the interpretations of others. Please bring the assigned readings/images with you to
section, either printed out or available on your laptop. Not bringing materials to class will adversely
affect your participation grade. (Please do not bring assignments on your phone as they do not
afford for easy navigation either of images or long texts).
These weekly sections are required. Repeated tardiness or early departures will contribute to your
absence count. For absences due to illness or accident, notify us of your situation as soon as possible
and be prepared to provide adequate documentation if asked. In the event of an excused absence,
you may attend a different discussion section, but only with advance permission. The upshot is
that attendance in discussion sections is critically important—you cannot discuss if you are not
present at the discussion section. Take the lectures and section meetings seriously. If you miss a
class session, you will have to get notes from another student.
VII. General Information
Email and Office Hours
The best way to contact your instructor or teaching assistant is via email. We will do our best to
respond to your emails within a 24-hour period of time. We typically will not return email after
5:00pm on weekdays or during the weekends, unless the matter is urgent.
You are also expected to check email on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University and course-related communications, recognizing that some emails may be time-critical.
Remember to set your Canvas conversation and announcement notifications to “ASAP.” Please be
aware that you will be held responsible for whatever information/deadlines I include in
emails or on Canvas regardless of whether you read them. It is your responsibility to maintain a
functioning email account linked to Canvas. Read the UT email policy here:
https://cio.utexas.edu/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy
You are welcome and encouraged to come to office hours if you are having any problems with the
course material. If you are unable to make it to scheduled office hours, please let us know and we
will schedule another time to meet. Always come to office hours prepared with an agenda for the
discussion.
Class Etiquette
Please, arrive on time and remain for the duration of the class. Late arrivals and early departures are
disruptive and rude to the lecturer and your classmates. Leaving and returning during the middle of
class is equally disruptive. Please attend to your personal needs prior to the beginning of class.
                                                                                            AMW S2019 3


Refrain from using electronic devices in the classroom. This pertains particularly to cell phones,
which should be turned off and put away at the beginning of the class, but also includes tablets and
laptop computers, which are often more distracting (to you, me and your fellow students) than they
are useful. An exception to this policy is during discussion sections, when you may bring readings in
electronic format (see above). Laptops and other keyboard devices are NOT allowed for note
taking unless you get special permission from the instructor. You must take notes by hand, either
on paper or on an electronic tablet. Comprehension and retention are greatly improved when taking
notes (and sketching!) by hand rather than with a keyboard. There is ample literature on this topic.
Many students have difficulty initially processing projected images and spoken words
simultaneously, but they soon get the hang of it. If you feel you need help with these kinds of skills,
visit the Sanger Learning Center in JES A332: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc.
VIII. University Policies
Scholastic Dishonesty
Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in an “F” in the course. Scholastic
dishonesty includes any kind of cheating or collaboration on tests, or submitting work that is not
either your own or accurately attributed to its source. This includes material copied from the
Internet. For more information, contact Student Judicial Services at 471-2841, or go to:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php
Academic Accommodations
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. Students must present a UT “accommodation letter” (well in
advance of the assignment for which you are requesting it) authorizing specific accommodations.
For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 or 471-4641, or view
the information online at: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
UT Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold
these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Religious holidays
If you need to miss a discussion section, midterm, final exam, or other required class activity for the
observance of a religious holiday, you must notify me at least 14 days in advance so we can make
alternative arrangements for your absence. The University's Religious Days Policy is online:
http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/
Late Work and Make-Up Tests
Make-up exams will be arranged only in the event of documented illness or other emergencies, and
you must let me know as far in advance of the exam as possible. In all cases proper documentation
must be provided.
                                                                                            AMW S2019 4
