Prof. Mirka Beneš          UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L           Spring 2019          p. 1
LAR 388L, lecture course                                            Prof. Mirka Beneš
Spring semester 2018                                                Office hrs: Wed 12-2pm.
Mon-Wed 9:30-10:45am
Room: SUT 2.112
                        LAR 388 L / ARC 342 F / ARC 395 F / URB 353
                    History and Theories of Landscape Architecture--II:
                     Modern Gardens and Public Landscapes: 1750 to the 1990s.
                                        Spring Semester 2019
                                                   *
Course Unique Numbers
LAR 388 L [01675], ARC 342 F [00815], ARC 395 F [01240], URB 353 [37375].
Course Description
LAR 388L is a lecture course that continues History and Theories of Landscape Architecture I
(Antiquity to 1750), but it also functions perfectly as a stand-alone course. It covers the formal
and cultural history of gardens, parks and public landscapes from 1750 to the 1990s. The course
thus ranges from the theories and practices of the Picturesque in 18th-century English landscape
gardens to contemporary urban parks, worldwide. The focus is on understanding the critical
components of design language, as well as contemporary discourses on landscape architecture. It
seeks to identify and discuss the theoretical frameworks that structured and enriched the
imaginations of the designers and their publics, the observers and users of the landscapes. We
situate the formation of theories and conceptualizations of modern designed landscapes in
specific historical contexts. The multivalent forms of modern and contemporary landscape
architecture, which cross borders with art, architecture and urban planning, technology,
philosophy and geography, amongst others, are examined in the contexts of public and private
spheres, relations between city and countryside, the rise of technology, social reform and
ecological concerns during industrialization, urbanization, and modernization. Attention is given,
in each historical period, to landscape representation and the development of publishing and
visual strategies to diffuse knowledge and perception by the public of landscape architectural
work.
The course charts in particular the rise of public landscapes--from the early 19th-century
landscaped, "picturesque" parks of England and Germany to the public park movement in
America, to contemporary developments. Attention will be given to the evolution of modernism
in landscape architecture, its origins in Europe and America from the 1910s to its later expression
in the 1960s and 1970s. Lectures will analyze the typologies of designed landscapes and the
notion of the profession of landscape architecture from "Capability Brown," Humphry Repton,
Karl-Friedrich Schinkel, Frederick Law Olmsted Sr., to Gertrude Jekyll, Beatrix Farrand, and on
to Leberecht Migge, Le Corbusier, Mies van der Rohe, Thomas Church, Garrett Eckbo, Dan
Kiley, Lawrence Halprin, Dieter Kienast, Günter Vogt, among others. Comparisons will also be
made with contemporary designers, for example, Martha Schwartz, Kongjian Yu, George
Hargreaves, Michael Van Valkenburgh, and Kate Orff. The historical material that we cover
helps us to interpret the work of contemporary designers from the period called "Post-
Modernism" to recent times.


Prof. Mirka Beneš          UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L           Spring 2019         p. 2
Throughout the course, we will consider the new thinking about landscape and landscape
architecture that has occurred in professional and academic circles particularly during the last
several decades, a period characterized by interdisciplinary thinking in both professional practice
and academic research--in which contemporary landscape architects play an increasingly
important role. Landscape, by definition, refers always to other categories in addition to itself,
and the interdisciplinary nature of modern and contemporary landscape design will be analyzed
through critical reference to methodologies used in fields akin to the history and criticism of
landscape design, such as geography, social and urban history, art and architectural history;
histories of science, technology, and botany; and studies of landowning, planning, and
stewardship. As the history and criticism of contemporary landscape architecture are always
emerging fields, as new design work is produced, the last part of the course has an exploratory
methodological cast and seeks to define the methodologies and historical periodization
appropriate to the specific content of the developing contemporary fields.
Goals and Objectives of the Course:
On a broad level, the course encourages the student to situate designed sites and their
conceptualization in historical or modern contexts; to recognize their multivalent character and
the fundamental social and interdisciplinary nature of their production, which engages
variously with the spheres of art, architecture, urbanism and planning, ecological and
geographical systems, among others. On a theoretical and methodological level, the course
readings encourage an evaluation of the new thinking about landscape and landscape architecture
that has occurred in professional and academic circles particularly during the last several decades,
a period characterized by interdisciplinary thinking in both professional practice and academic
research, which brings together landscape architecture and other disciplines--geography, history,
sociology, art, architecture, and science.
Above all, the course seeks to train students in understanding the designed works of modern and
contemporary landscape architecture as design. Through the study of history and theories, the
course structures the range of conceptual categories and contexts, which are specific to the
designing of works of landscape architecture. The key underlying question is: how does one
conceptualize the design of a work of landscape architecture? what are the relevant issues and
contexts at hand? Four frameworks are engaged to structure the course material:
         1. Historical and Theoretical Frameworks: Categories of Reference.
         2. The Formation of Landscape Architecture as a Discipline and as a Profession.
         3. The Inscription of Meanings in Landscape Architecture: Theoretical-Cultural
                  Interpretation.
         4. The Relevance of History for the Contemporary Field of Design.
Lectures, Discussion, and Discussion Sections:
Handouts:         Handouts with sites and dates will be distributed to accompany lectures.
Discussions:      Discussion takes place in the classroom, and students are encouraged to ask
                  questions. Some sessions are devoted to reviewing previously seen material.
Sections:         Discussion Sections (one meeting of 45 min about every other week, or as
                  needed, for discussion-preparation of assignments and exam, and to go over
                  lecture material) will be scheduled for undergraduate students. The T.A. will
                  organize these sections. Graduate students should signal to the T.A. if they wish
                  to attend sections.


Prof. Mirka Beneš          UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L                                       Spring 2019                   p. 3
Field Trips:      Depending on class size, one or more lectures (field trips on campus) will have a
                  seminar format making use of the university's rich resources in rare book rooms,
                  museums, and archives, among them the Harry Ransom Center (rare books and
                  maps). Such field trips vary from year to year.
Class attendance is mandatory, and forms part of your grade for this course.
It is mandatory, unless exemption has been given in advance by the instructor for excusable
absences. Studio travel or trips are excusable, but you must contact the T.A. in advance. Students
with three (3) or more unexcused absences are subject to lowering of the final grade for the
course: for example, if your final grade is a B, you will receive a B- for more than three absences,
followed by a C+ if you accrue an additional three unexcused absences, etc. Please contact the
T.A. or the instructor by email in advance, if you expect to be absent. Attendance will be
taken in class.
Time Commitment of Students:
Includes class time (lectures and discussions), plus about four (4) hours (varies) of weekly
reading. Additional time for study, reading and preparation for projects. The course assignments
are spaced across the semester, and the instructor attempts to accomodate deadlines for the class
in view of specific studio deadlines that students may have.
Basis of Final Grade and Assignments:
Class Participation:      Discussions, questions, and extra effort on assignments overall and
                          engagement in the course material.......................................................5 %
1. Short Project:         Studies in the Picturesque: 18th & 19th centuries. TWO OPTIONS:
                          Option 1: Short Essay of 6 pages, plus Images, Endnotes to Sources,
                          Bibliography.
                          Option 2: Short Essay of 3 pages and 3 Watercolored Drawings (Plan,
                          Section, Bird's-eye View or Elevation), plus Images, Endnotes to
                          Sources, Bibliography –the drawings may be on one sheet.
                          ............................................................................................................25 %
2. Mid-Term Exam:         Take-Home Exam with 4 questions to answer in short essays, 1.5 pages
                          of text for each question, 6 typed pages total, plus Endnotes to Sources)
                          and Bibliography of References to your readings...........................25 %


Prof. Mirka Beneš        UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L             Spring 2019                  p. 4
3. Final Project:       This Research Essay project trains the student in conducting scholarly
                        research in Contemporary Landscape Architecture; Essay of 12
                        pages, plus Images, Endnotes to Sources, and Bibliography of at least
                        7 items in print (scholarly books, articles).....................................45 %
There is no Final Exam in this course; the Final Essay serves as the concluding project.
Three weeks are given for Assignment 1 (Short Project), three weeks for Assignment 2 (Mid-
                        Term Exam), and four-five weeks for Assignment 3 (Final Project).
Due Dates of Assignments:
1. Short Project::      due 2/18/19 (Mon), in class, hand to T.A. [handed out 1/28/19]
2. Mid-Term Exam:       due 3/13/19 (Wed), in class, hand to T.A. [handed out 2/20/19]
3. Final Project:       due 4/17/19 (Wed), in class, hand to T.A. [handed out 3/13/19]
Grading Policy and Grade Descriptions:
Grades given will include A, A-, B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-, D+, D, D-, and F. Grading will follow
these principles:
A = excellent work that displays conceptual rigor, original research, and insights and ideas that
                        tend to go beyond those presented by the readings or by the instructor in
                        class; excellent writing and superb presentation of the project in terms of
                        Bibliography, Notes, Images. The assignment or essay has a rigorously
                        supported argument. Readings are strongly engaged in the assignment,
                        and the student takes a position with respect to them, successfully
                        critiquing or building on them.
B = good work that displays thorough understanding of the material and successful completion of
                        the assignment, very good writing, diligent research, fine presentation of
                        the project in terms of Bibliography, Notes, Images. The assignment or
                        essay has an argument that is clear to the reader. Readings are very well
                        engaged in the assignment.
C = satisfactory work that meets the minimum requirements of the assignment, displays no
                        further pursuit of ideas presented in class and in readings, displays
                        limitations in skills, writing, conceptualization, and presentation of
                        project. The argument of the essay or assignment is not clearly presented.
                        Readings are minimally brought into the assignment.
D = poor work that does not meet the minimum requirements of the assignment and does not
                        meet the level of skills required to complete the assignment in terms of
                        conceptualization, writing, and presentation. No attempt to structure an


Prof. Mirka Beneš           UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L           Spring 2019        p. 5
                           argument is made. Readings are not well understood and are not even
                           minimally brought into the assignment.
F = unacceptable, failing work that includes incomplete assignment or major parts of it,
                           unacceptable delays in turning in the work, unsuccessful performance
                           overall.
Important Guidelines and Rules:
        All assignments not done in class must be typed. Bibliography, End- or Footnotes, and
        Images must ALWAYS be included.
        All submissions must be paginated.
        All submissions must be preceded by a title-page with:
        --name of student
        --title of project submitted
        --name and number of course
        --name of instructor
        --date of submission.
        All assignments must be submitted in hard copy:
                  --some pdfs will be requested for the course archives and emailed to the T.A.
                  --The instructor will NOT accept assignments sent only by email.
        NO late work will be accepted: A "Fail" Grade will be given for any late
        assignment.
        NO work that copies or plagiarises without citation from another source or
        from the internet will be accepted: A "Fail" Grade will be given to an
        assignment with any plagiarism. See HONOR CODE FOR THIS COURSE,
        below. All work must be the student's original work, and 90% of the writing must
        be the student's own words. Avoid using extensive quotations from your readings,
        books, and articles. Voice the ideas in your own words.
Honor Code for the University of Texas:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
New Student Honor Code, in effect from September 2013:
"As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the
University and uphold academic integrity."
Honor Code for this Course:


Prof. Mirka Beneš           UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L           Spring 2019        p. 6
Each student in this course is expected to abide by this Honor Code, and any work submitted by a
student will be the student's own work. You are encouraged to study together and to discuss
information and concepts covered in this course, but you should never copy from one another
or from anyone else, be it from printed and/or published work, or from any digital form
or from the internet. All writing must be your own, and quotations from other works should be
short and always end/footnoted or referenced. Any transgressors on an assignment shall receive a
"Fail" Grade for that assignment.
It is of the utmost importance, that what you write in your assignments be your own thinking and
not excerpts from various texts, gathered together. In other words, we want you to do original
thinking and to train in original thinking. This kind of exercise will stand you in good stead
throughout your careers. Copying paragraphs or even sentences from books and articles
and from Wikipedia or other websites, without proper citation (footnoting or
endnoting) is strictly forbidden. 90% of your essay texts on assignments must be your
own words, your own thinking, and your own summary or synthesis of readings you have
done. We will closely monitor for any such copying activities.
Academic Accomodations:
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, please contact the Office of the
Dean of Students, the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
with Disabilities as soon as possible, at (512) 471-6259 or (512) 471-6441 TTY, also to request
an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. The website is at:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability
Readings:
Readings consist of Required Readings (in Syllabus) and Recommended Readings (a separate
document on CANVAS).
1. Required Readings are located under MODULES on CANVAS at http://canvas.utexas.edu.
The course readings have been very carefully chosen and balanced with each other, in order to
provide the greatest range of historical, aesthetic, design, philosophical, geographical approaches
that regard the periods studied. Most of the readings have become "classics" in the literature.
          Students may wish to supplement readings with a textbook, and the following is
          recommended:
          Rogers, Elizabeth Barlow. Landscape Design: A Cultural and Architectural History
                   (New York, 2001). [in paperback]
          Students are responsible for information and concepts in the Required Readings, which
          are posted on CANVAS under MODULES. Required readings are to be used in
          assignments.
          The instructor appreciates the fact that, given many students' commitment to design
          studio time, not all Required Readings can be done immediately, at the time of the
          lectures. Therefore, on this Syllabus, the priority readings are highlighted in bold; the
          other Required Readings can be read as soon as time permits, but should be read within a
          week's delay and before exam and assignment due dates.


Prof. Mirka Beneš          UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L            Spring 2019         p. 7
2. Recommended Readings: these are your bibliographies for your Assignments!!!:
          The Recommended Readings form a very important part of this course. They are very
          extensive for each lecture's topic, and they provide a wide range of readings for research
          on your assignments and for future use in your professional lives. Explore them! The
          Recommended Readings list is posted on CANVAS.
Appendix of Suggested Readings:
At the end of this Syllabus is an APPENDIX ON REFERENCE MATERIALS & TEXTBOOKS,
as well as Suggestions for Readings on Theoretical and Methodological Issues. Be sure to look at
it! It can be very useful for future research in your careers.
                                                * * *
                                                    *
                        SCHEDULE OF LECTURES & ASSIGNMENTS
                                                    *
          I. The Origins of the Picturesque.
01/23 Wed Lecture 1 Introduction and Overview of the Course.
01/28 Mon Lecture 2 England, I: 1650-1700. Transformation of the English Formal Garden.
          The Landscape Garden: Eclecticism and a New Syntax for the Language of Design.
          Assignment # 1 handed out today in class: Studies in the Picturesque.
          Remember to use the RECOMMENDED READINGS, a file posted on CANVAS under
                  MODULES, for the individual bibliographical suggestions for each of your
                  essays in Assignment # 1.
01/30 Wed Lecture 3 England, II: 1700-1750. William Kent, Lord Burlington, and English
          Palladianism. Rousham and Chiswick. Origins of the Picturesque.
02/04 Mon Lecture 4 England, III: 1750-1770. Two Classes of Memories in Henry Hoare's
          Stourhead and Richard Cobham's Stowe. English landscape painting and gardening in
          the time of "Capability" Brown.
          II. Late 18th and Early 19th Centuries, 1770 - 1830.
02/06 Wed Lecture 5 England & America, IV: 1770-1830. Humphry Repton (1752-1818)
          and the Profession of Landscape Gardener. Politics of the Picturesque and Modernity.
02/11 Mon Lecture 6 France 1770-1830. The Aristocratic Picturesque before and after the
          French Revolution. Girardin, Ermenonville, Monceau. Hubert Robert.


Prof. Mirka Beneš        UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L            Spring 2019        p. 8
02/13 Wed Lecture 7 Germany 1770-1830. The Rise of Capital Cities and the Picturesque
        goes Public. The Urban Public Sphere. Friedrich Schinkel and Peter-J. Lenné in Berlin.
        III. Mid 19th Century, 1830 - 1880.
02/18 Mon Lecture 8 England 1830-1880. Development of the Suburb and the Public Park.
        John Nash, John Claudius Loudon, Joseph Paxton.
        Assignment # 1 due today in class: Studies in the Picturesque.
02/20 Wed Lecture 9 France 1830-1880. Transformation of Paris and Nature in the City,
        Baron Haussmann, Alphonse Alphand, the Parks and Promenades.
        Assignment # 2 handed out today in class: Take-Home Mid-Term Exam.
02/25 Mon Lecture 10 United States 1830-1880. Synthetic Professional Practice: Frederick
        Law Omsted.
        IV. Late 19th and Early 20th Century, 1880 - 1940.
02/27 Wed Lecture 11 England 1880-1940. Modern Gardens and Englishness. William
        Robinson and Reginald Blomfield, Gertrude Jekyll and Edwin Lutyens.
03/04 Mon Lecture 12 United States 1880-1940. The Country Place Era before and after the
        Depression: Charles Platt, Beatrix Farrand, Jens Jensen. Infrastructure up to the New
        Deal (1933-38): Charles Eliot, Garden Cities, Parkways.
03/06 Wed Lecture 13 France 1880-1940. French Modernism. André Vera to Jean Forestier.
        The Expositions Intérnationales of 1925 and 1937.
V. New Paradigms in Design, 1880 - 1945.
03/11 Mon Lecture 14 Germany, 1880-1940. Modern Society, Community, Planning, Political
        Uses of Ecology. Architekturgarten, Naturgarten, Autobahn. Hermann Muthesius,
        Leberecht Migge.
03/13 Wed Lecture 15 Le Corbusier, 1910-1945.
        Assignment # 2 due today in class: Take-Home Mid-Term Exam.
        Assignment # 3 handed out today in class: Final Essay Project.
03/18 Mon NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK.
03/20 Wed NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK.
03/25 Mon Lecture 16 Mies van der Rohe, 1910-1945.
03/27 Wed Lecture 17 Asplund and Lewerentz: the Stockhom Cemetery, 1910-1945.


Prof. Mirka Beneš        UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L         Spring 2019       p. 9
04/01 Mon Lecture 18 United States, 1930-1945. Modernism arrives during the Depression.
        Infrastructure and the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA). Fletcher Steele, Thomas
        Church.
04/03 Wed Lecture 19 International Modernism. The Year 1937--Christopher Tunnard in
        England and the USA. Dan Kiley, Garrett Eckbo, James Rose, 1937-1950.
        VI. Post-World War II, 1945 - 1985.
04/08 Mon Lecture 20 United States, 1945-1965. Modernism, Suburban, Domestic, and
        Urban. Thomas Church, James Rose, Dan Kiley. Philip Johnson and the MoMA Garden.
04/10 Wed Lecture 21 Latin America, 1945-1985. Luis Barragan, Roberto Burle-Marx.
04/15 Mon Lecture 22 Urban Expansion, Environment and Ecology. The Beginnings of
        Environmental Design. Lawrence Halprin. Ian McHarg and his Legacy, 1955-1985-2000.
        VII. Entering the Contemporary Field (1985-2000).
04/17 Wed Lecture 23 The Impact of Conceptual Art and Linguistics, 1965-1985. La Villette
        Park Competition 1982-83 in Paris and its Consequences. The Vietnam Veterans
        Memorial by Maya Lin.
        Assignment # 3 due today in class: Final Essay Project.
04/22 Mon Lecture 24 Post-Modernism in Landscape Architecture? The 1980s in the United
        States and Europe.
04/24 Wed Lecture 25 Contemporary Landscape Architecture, I, 1990-2000.
04/29 Mon Lecture 26 Contemporary Landscape Architeture, II, 2000-2015.
05/01 Wed Lecture 27 Conclusion to the Course: Our Digital World: Representation and
        Reality in Contemporary Landscape Architecture, 1990-2015. Urban Nature and Urban
        Agriculture in History and Today. FINAL CLASS MEETING IN THIS COURSE.
NO CLASS ON MAY 6 MONDAY AND MAY 8 WEDNESDAY: FINAL STUDIO
        REVIEWS IN THE UT SCHOOL OF ARCHITECTURE.
                                            * * *
                                                *


Prof. Mirka Beneš         UT School of Architecture: LAR 388 L            Spring 2019        p. 10
                                          Information Sheet
Name:
Telephone:
Email address:
Mailing Address:
Graduate Students: Program and Year:
Undergraduates: Major and Year:
Background and courses in any of the following:
        Art (painting, graphics, sculpture, etc.):
        Theory (of architecture, art, literature, film, landscape, etc.):
        History of architecture and art:
        History of landscape architecture:
        History (circle one or more): India, Turkey, Iran (Persia), Japan, China, other regions in
        Asia.
        History (social, economic etc), antiquity - 1850, 1850 - present:
Travels abroad:
Languages (reading knowledge):
Experience in graphic analysis and/or model making:
Reasons for taking this course, or areas of particular interest in it:
                                                *       *
                                                    *
