                                      J311 Reporting: Images
                                      Summer 2019 July 15th –
                                             August 16th
Instructor: David Schneider
Email: david.schneider@utexas.edu
Cell phone: 610-574-1774
Office Hours: Mon – Thu, 1:00 pm – 2:00 pm and by appointment
               HSM 4.108 Advisor's Office
Class meets: Mon – Fri, 9:30 am – 11:00 am, BMC 3.208
Lab meets: Mon – Fri, 11:00 am – 12:30 pm, BMC 3.208
Course description:
This course will develop visual literacy and build fundamental visual-reporting skills
required for digital video journalism. We will cover critical ethical issues that unite and
differentiate the practices of video journalism as it applies to journalism content and to
print, web and broadcast journalism platforms.
Students will learn how to discern the different strengths which these various visual and
multimedia approaches have for communicating different kinds of reporting content.
What are the most effective ways to tell the story, grab the attention of the target
audience or provoke and interactive response from that audience? It provides students
some basic skills in order to develop their own visual stories, a mini documentary (2-2:30
minutes) and a longer documentary (2:30-4 minutes).
We will cover basic aspects of constructing combined sound and visual narratives using
audio, still and moving video images. Labs will cover practical direction for camera
handling and sound gathering as well as video editing.
Lectures will cover narrative structure, interviewing techniques, awareness of sensory
effects and qualities of sound. Students will become aware of different documentary
genres of storytelling how each works for specific kinds of stories as well as new media
interactive examples of documentary. These will serve to spark inspiration and give
students a sense of the range of possibilities without reliance on simple formula.
Learning Objectives: By the end of this unit students will:
     •  acquire and practice their knowledge of basic skills in the use of both video and
        audio equipment
     •  have a fundamental understanding of basic reporting research and interviewing
        techniques
     •  understand the importance of the storyboard to plot out narrative structure
     •  develop an awareness of sensory effects and sound quality need for successful
        multimedia production
     •  learn how to combine audio with digital still or moving images for multimedia
                                               1


         productions
     •   learn some basics for judging among potential visual genres when thinking about
         how to reach a specific audience with the story or subject matter they wish to
         communicate
     •   become familiar with the ethical codes and standard conventions used by NPR,
         the NYT and others in relation to editing of audio and visual material: from
         cleaning up sound bites to moving audio and images out of sequence on the
         timeline to issues of copyright and the emotional impact of music
Course Requirements:
Equipment: You will need a MAC-compatible hard drive of at least 100 gigs to store
your video. A THUMB DRIVE WILL NOT BE SUFFICIENT. You will be editing on Adobe
Premiere Pro, which is available on all labs. You can also get personal access through a
student membership to Adobe’s Creative Cloud.
The core component of this course is multimedia storytelling. You are required to attend
all lab sessions. Open lab time will be also available. This is a production-type course
and you will need to budget extra time in addition to lecture and scheduled labs in order
to complete your assignments on deadline.
The grading system will be based on journalism criteria related to publish-ability. Would
a major media outlet pay you to run it? If the answer is a wholehearted “yes” without
revisions then you get an A. Each assignment will have an associated rubric for judging
strengths and weaknesses so that students have a clear idea of where improvement is
needed.
Course materials (books, readings, other instructional material):
It is recommended that students acquire their own laptops and digital still and video
cameras with some manual controls. There will be some camera and audio equipment
available on a first come first served basis for a limited number of days that can be
checked out from the College of Communications checkout located in HSM 2.102. You
can see the options at this website and your instructor will recommend equipment on the
first day of lab.
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/comm/Equipment+Comparison+Charts
Check-out policies are available here:
https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/comm/College+of+Communication+Equip
ment+Checkout+Policies
All software required for the course will be installed on CMA and BMC lab computers
and if you are shooting tape and require decks for digital transfer you can use the CMA
digital media labs on the 4th floor west side of elevators.
Optional Texts:
Video journalism: Multimedia Storytelling by Ken Kobre is not required but is highly
recommended to any student serious about Multimedia reporting and storytelling. Some
lectures will draw from material in this book. It offers a wealth of reference material and
                                               2


resources for the beginner and the professional and is well worth the investment for your
future career.
Recommended weekly listening to NPR’s THIS AMERICAN LIFE, viewing audio
slideshows and video projects at the NYT site and at NYT Lens Blog and viewing
projects on Media Storm.
Grades and assignments
5-shot sequence exercise:                       10 points
Script for SHORT video assignment:              5 points
Final SHORT video assignment:                 25 points
Script for LONG video assignment:              5 points
Final LONG video assignment:                   35 points
Attendance/Quizzes:                            20 points
Rubrics and more specific information regarding assignments will be posted on Canvas
and discussed extensively during class.
Methods of evaluation:
You must meet benchmark deadlines in order to get feedback that will help you improve
the piece by deadline. No late work will be accepted.
A (100%-94%)/A- (93%-90%): Excellent work that shows creativity, control and
understanding of the module assignment objectives. Subject matter and storytelling form
display originality and creativity and are well matched. Design is well thought-out and
executed. Publishable work with no revisions.
B+ (89%-86%)/B (85%-83%)/B- (82%-80%): Good work which meets the requirements
of the assignment occasionally going beyond the requirements. Publishable work with
several minor revisions.
C+ (79-76%)/C (75%-70%): Work has some strengths but also at least one serious flaw
that will require substantial work to be publishable.
D (70-65%): Critical errors could not be considered publishable without very dramatic
changes.
F (65% and below): Unacceptable or incomplete lacking overall merit.
Use of Canvas for this Class
In this course, Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-
protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu —is used to distribute course materials,
to communicate and collaborate online and to submit assignments.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore you are
                                               3


responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to
your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—to stay
current with university related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You
can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
*****************************
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized
collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating
honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited
to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an extension
on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to
them. Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and
readiness for the future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules
on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
For information on academic integrity and plagiarism, see
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
Students with Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to
accommodate a disability-related need. You will be requested to provide documentation
to the Dean of Student's Office in order that the most appropriate accommodations can
be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through Services for
Students with Disabilities. http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
This course qualifies for the following flags:
Independent Inquiry
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are
designed to engage you in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester,
providing you with the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem,
                                               4


or project related to your major. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from the independent investigation and presentation of your own work.
Writing
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive
feedback from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be asked to read and
discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core
Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and
Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board.
                                             5


                          Course schedule
                            (Subject to change)
           WEEK 1     Class & Lab:
  Monday, July 15th   • Go over syllabus/Canvas
                      • What is a documentary?
                      • Analyze examples of strong/weak student stories from
                         past semesters
          Tuesday,    Class & Lab:
          July 16th   • Continue discussion about documentaries
                      • Where to find good stories?
                      • How to pitch a story?
                      • Composition and types of shots
          Wednesday   Class & Lab:
          , July 17th Pitch two SHORT video ideas (2:00-2:30 MINUTES)
                      (individual assignment).
                      Note: SHORT videos are due July 30th in lab (2 weeks)
          Thursday,   Class & Lab:
          July 18th       • Shooting strategies
                          • Get familiar with video and audio equipment
          Friday,     Class & Lab:
          July 19th       • How to shoot sequences
                          • Team up and shoot your 5-shot sequence
                      Assignment: Final pitch DUE by 5:00 pm.
           WEEK 2     Class: Interviewing techniques
  Monday, July 22rd   Lab: Adobe Premiere Pro training (5-shot sequence).
          Tuesday,    Class & Lab: Adobe Premiere Pro training (cont.)
          July 23th
          Wednesday   Class: Structuring your documentary
          , July 4th  Lab: TBA
          Thursday,   Class: Editing for Documentaries
          July 25th   Lab: TBA
          Friday,     Class: TBA
          July 26th   Lab: NO Lab
WEEK 3    Monday,     Class: NO lecture
          July 29th   Lab: OPEN
                      Assignment: Scripts due by lab time
                                      6


       Tuesday,    Class: NO lecture
       July 30st   Lab: OPEN
                   Assignment: Rough cut of SHORT video due
       Wednesday   Class & Lab: Presentations
       July 31st   Assignment: FINAL SHORT VIDEO DUE VIA YOUTUBE
                   BY 5PM (Email link to instructor)
       Thursday,   Class: Long form documentary
       August 1    Lab: NO Lab
       Friday,     Class & Lab: Pitch three LONG video ideas (2:30-4
       August 2nd  minutes) (team assignment)
                   Assignment: Final pitch DUE by 5:00 pm.
                   Note: LONG videos are due on August 14th (two weeks)
WEEK 4 Monday,     Class: New frontiers of video journalism
       August 5th  Lab: OPEN
       Tuesday,    Class: New frontiers of video journalism (cont.)
       August 6th  Lab: OPEN
       Wednesday   Class: Video and social media
       August 7th  Lab: OPEN
       Thursday,   Class & Lab: TBA
       August 8th
       Friday,     Class & Lab: Adobe Premiere Pro Advanced techniques
       August 9th
WEEK 5 Monday,     NO Class/Lab
       August 12th
       Tuesday,    Class: NO lecture
       August 13th Lab: OPEN
                   Assignment: Scripts due by lab time
       Wednesday   Class: NO lecture
       August 14th Lab: OPEN, Course evaluations
                   Assignment: Rough cut of LONG video due
       Thursday,   Class: NO lecture
       August 15th Lab: Presentations.
       Friday,     Class: NO lecture
       August 16th Lab: OPEN
                   FINAL LONG VIDEO DUE VIA YOUTUBE BY 5 pm.
                   (Email link to instructor)
                                  7
