                               Sociocultural Influences on Learning
                              ALD 327 (#09505) / AFR 372D (#30640)
                                              Spring 2020
Course Information
Class meets: 1:00-4:00 PM, Tuesdays, George I. Sánchez Building (SZB) 424
Instructor: Julia Echternach             Office Location: SZB 528
Pronouns: She / Her                      Office Hours: M 1:30-3:00, T 11:00-12:30, and by appt.
Email: echternach@utexas.edu             Phone: Shared in class & on Canvas
Course Description
         In this course, we will collectively examine the sociocultural influences on us and on our
teaching work as educators, counselors, social workers, coaches, community leaders, and present
and future parents / other-parents / tíos tías tíxs. We will study the intersecting social structures
of settler colonialism, white supremacy, heteropatriarchy, and capitalism in order to better
understand ourselves in relation to our communities and society, and in order to explore and
imagine what kind of teaching work can meet the challenges of the world in which we presently
live.
Course Objectives
Knowledge Objectives
    o We will learn how to describe and analyze structures of power in school and society.
Skills Objectives
    o We cannot possibly explore in full histories of education and schooling, social
         constructions of race, gender, and sexuality, theories of class inequality, and so on. Thus,
         we will learn how to ask questions about the histories and present experiences of
         marginalized communities in schools and society. We will learn how to ask questions
         about the construction and disruption of unequal power relations and how to imagine
         something different.
Disposition Objectives
    o We will be open to seeking and hearing multiple narratives about our world and our roles
         within it. We will aspire to become “good at learning.”
Methods for Meeting Course Objectives
    o Close Reading & Film Viewing
    o Service Learning in our Local Communities
    o Autoethnography – Study of Personal Experiences & Family History
    o Writing & Online Discussion
    o Creative and Collaborative In-Class Activities
Tips for Success in the Course
                                                                                                      1


    o We will all benefit from approaching the course with openness, humility, good-will, and
        vulnerability, and from making our best effort to be present and prepared. Becoming an
        educator is a personal and collective journey, not a list of finite tasks.
    o Begin service learning as soon as possible.
    o Plan ample time for reading. Mark your text with underlining/highlighting, questions,
        thoughts, connections, etc..
    o When writing, focus first on clearly expressing your thoughts and questions, rather than
        on “sounding academic” or using “correct” grammar, spelling, or punctuation.
    o Communicate with the instructor about challenges and concerns that arise.
Course Requirements
Required Materials
    o Course Reader, purchased from Jenn’s Copies
    o Amanda Lewis (2003), Race in the Schoolyard – Available free at lib.utexas.edu
    o Gloria Ladson Billings (1994), The Dreamkeepers – Available free at lib.utexas.edu
    o Elizabeth Acevedo (2018), The Poet X
Required Technology
    o You will need access to a computer in order to post and reply on Canvas discussion
        boards.
    o Personal computers and campus computers can sometimes fail or shut down at
        inconvenient times. To prevent the loss of your work-in-progress, it is recommended that
        you save your writing online so that you can access it from another computer / device if
        necessary. You have access to a free cloud service on Google Drive with your
        @utexas.edu e-mail account.
Course Outline
All essential information will be on the Canvas website at https://utexas.instructure.com.
Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your
responsibility to note these changes when announced.
 Week     Date    Guiding Question            Readings Due                     Assignments Due
 1        1/21    What is the purpose of      No readings due                  No assignments due
                  schooling?
 2        1/28    How does our mindset        .Weiner, “Challenging            Week 2 Post
                  influence our teaching      Deficit Thinking”
                  work?                       .Geronimus & Thompson,
                                              “To Denigrate, Ignore, or
                                              Disrupt”
 3        2/4     How do social structures    .Ahmed, “Feminism is             Week 3 Post &
                  influence our identities    Sensational”                     Replies
                                                                                                  2


        and mindsets?             .McIntosh, “White
                                  Privilege”
4  2/11 How does white            .Harris, “Whiteness as     Week 4 Post &
        supremacy work? How       Property”                  Replies
        does it affect our lives?
                                                             Finalize Service
                                                             Learning Site
5  2/18 How does colonialism      .Orange, There, There,     Week 5 Post &
        work? How does it affect  “Prologue”                 Replies
        our lives and affect      .Hall, “Navigating our own
        schools?                  sea of islands”            Service Learning:
                                  .Suina, “The Pueblo        Neighborhood Tour
                                  People and the Dominant    Due
                                  Culture”
6  2/25 How does capitalism       .Rogoff, “Firsthand        Week 6 Post &
        work? How does it affect  Learning and Intent        Replies
        our lives and affect      Participation”
        schools?                  .Freire, “The Banking
                                  Concept of Education”
7  3/3  How is race constructed   .Lewis, Race in the        Week 7 Post &
        in “white” spaces? What   Schoolyard, Chs. 1-2       Replies
        are the consequences of   .Dumas, “Losing an Arm”
        color-blind racial
        ideology?
8  3/10 How is race constructed   .Lewis, Race…, Ch. 3       Week 8 Post &
        in “urban” spaces? What   .Valenzuela, Subtractive   Replies
        are the consequences of   Schooling excerpts
        aesthetic caring?
-- 3/24 NO CLASS
9  3/31 How is race constructed   .Lewis, Race…, Chs. 4, 5,  Week 9 Post &
        in “progressive” spaces?  &6                         Replies
        How does white
        supremacy persist “in                                Family History Paper
        spite of our best                                    Due
        intentions”?
10 4/7  How are gender and        .Renolds, “Coming Out”     Week 10 Post &
        sexuality constructed in  .García, “Now Why Do       Replies
        schools? How does         You Want to Know About
                                                                                  3


                 intersectionality work?      That?”
 11       4/14   Literary bridge: What        .Acevedo, The Poet X        Week 11 Post &
                 intersecting structures      .Solórzano & Delgado        Replies
                 shape Xiomara’s              Bernal, “Examining
                 identity? Where does she     Transformational            Schooling
                 find meaningful              Resistance”                 Autobiography Due
                 education? How does she
                 engage in
                 transformational
                 resistance?
 12       4/21   How do we re-define          .Ladson-Billings,           Week 13 Post &
                 effective teachers and       Dreamkeepers, Chs. 1-2      Replies
                 authentic learning?          .Yosso, “Whose Culture
                                              Has Capital?”
 13       4/28   What do effective            .Ladson-Billings,           Week 14 Post &
                 teachers do? How do          Dreamkeepers, Chs. 3-5      Replies
                 effective teachers
                 address challenges?                                      Service Learning:
                                                                          Self & Other
                                                                          Reflection Due –
                                                                          Modified Instructions
 14       5/5    What future do we want       .Simpson, “Land &           Week 15 Post &
                 to build?                    Reconciliation”             Replies
                                              .Boggs, The Next
                                              American Revolution, “A
                                              New Paradigm in
                                              Education”
                                              .Gumbs, “Evidence”
Assignments
Service Learning
You are no longer required to complete additional service learning hours. Please submit
documentation of any hours you have completed so far and do not worry about completing the
rest.
This course requires a 15-hour service learning component. Over the course of the semester, you
must complete 15 hours of service with a local university, community organization, or school
that promotes social justice in education. A list of recommended local organizations will be
provided in class and on Canvas, and you may only work with another organization with the
instructor’s permission. You may continue service with a relevant organization with which you
                                                                                                4


have previously worked, but you may not count paid work as your service learning. If you do not
complete the service learning requirement, you will receive a failing grade in the class.
Consequently, you must make contact with an organization and confirm a start date by February
11th. Please contact me early within the first one to two weeks of class if you are having
difficulty finding a site that meets your schedule and transportation needs. You will not receive
points for completing the service learning, but will complete two assignments, making up 25% of
your final grade, related to your service learning site.
 Assignments                        Percent of Total Grade
 Weekly Discussion Board            40%
 Posts
 Service Learning:                  12.5%
 Neighborhood Tour Paper
 Family History Paper               12.5%
 Schooling Autobiography            12.5%
 Paper
 Service Learning: Self &           12.5%
 Other Reflection Paper
 Preparation & Participation        10%
All papers should be typed double-spaced, in 12 pt. Times New Roman, with one-inch
margins. All papers should have a heading/header that includes the student’s name and the
name of the assignment on a single line. Attempts to artificially lengthen the paper by
changing the spacing, margins, typeface, or length of header will result in a lowered grade
at the instructor’s discretion.
Weekly Discussion Board Posts (40% of grade)
Each week, the instructor will post a series of questions about the assigned readings on the
Canvas site. Students must read the assigned texts and write a response that is a minimum of
one page. This response must be posted by 7 PM Saturday. Then, students must read the
responses of the other members of their assigned group, and respond to each with a personal
connection, textual connection, or question, by 7 PM Monday. Responses will be graded based
on completion and punctuality. Late responses may be turned in up to 1 week late for 60% credit
and up to 2 weeks late for 40% credit; responses will not be accepted more than 2 weeks late.
Service Learning: Neighborhood Tour Paper (12.5% of grade)
The purpose of this paper is to gain an appreciation of what the service learning site and its
neighborhood mean for the community you are working with. For this paper, you will ask a
person who is closely involved with the service learning site – such as a program leader, an
involved teacher, or a parent – to either walk with you on a brief (30 min.) tour of the
neighborhood, or to write down a brief list of places that you should visit on your own (3 to 4
                                                                                                  5


spots) and explain their value and significance. Some service learning sites serve people across
the city rather than people in the local area. In this case, please prioritize visiting the
neighborhood that is meaningful to the person you ask, rather than the neighborhood
immediately surrounding the site. See Canvas for full assignment instructions.
Family History Paper (12.5% of grade)
The purpose of this paper is to explore how immigration, race, gender, and class have influenced
your family’s educational experiences over the past several generations. For this paper, you will
plan an interview with a family member who can share knowledge about the experiences of
some of your great-grandparents or of a previous generation further back. If possible, you should
audio-record the interview so that you can return and listen to key details and not have to worry
about taking notes while listening to your interviewee. If possible and desirable, you may
interview multiple family members. You will design your own interview questions.
        Please communicate with the instructor if specific circumstances would make a family
history paper uniquely difficult or impossible, and you will be given an alternative assignment.
        See Canvas for full assignment instructions.
Schooling Autobiography Paper (12.5% of grade)
The purpose of this paper is to apply our readings of race, class, gender, and sexuality in schools
in order to critically reflect on your own schooling. Rather than only stating where you went to
school and how much you did or did not like school, use this paper to explore aspects of your
schooling that you had not considered previously or to consider new interpretations of familiar
memories. See Canvas for full assignment instructions.
Service Learning: Self & Other Reflection Paper (12.5% of grade)
The purpose of this paper is to reflect on your position, mindset, and decision-making as a
teaching-worker by focusing on your experience at your service learning site or your beliefs
about teaching. See Canvas for full assignment instructions.
How will papers be graded?
Weekly discussion board posts will be graded for completion. I will read all posts, but due to the
volume, will not be able to provide individual feedback.
        Rubrics for each paper are available on Canvas so that you can clearly understand the
expectations in advance. I will assign a grade with the rubric and provide written feedback that
highlights one valuable insight in the paper and one question that you could continue thinking
about. If you would like more detailed feedback, please set up a phone or in-person meeting with
me, as UT does not allow grades to be discussed via e-mail.
Course Policies
Attendance
Attendance at all class sessions is mandatory. You are expected to arrive on time and to stay the
full length of the class (1:00-3:45 PM).
    o If you miss class for any reason, you are still expected to complete the assignments due
        that day, to review any materials covered in class, and to reach out to classmates or to the
                                                                                                   6


        instructor with specific questions about what was covered. If you will not be able to
        complete the assignments on time, see the late policy below.
    o You may have no more than one excused absence (an absence that will not, on its own,
        impact your grade). Absences may be excused due to:
             o Religious holidays: Please provide two weeks’ notice.
             o Emergency: Please provide relevant documentation as soon as you have an
                 opportunity.
    o If you have a contagious illness (e. g. influenza, strep throat, norovirus), you may attend
        one class via video chat (Google Hangouts, FaceTime, Zoom Meeting, etc.) so that you
        can take care of yourself at home and avoid spreading illness to others. Please send the
        instructor a text with your name and make a phone call at least two hours before class so
        that I can check out an extra laptop for the video call.
    o Each unexcused absence will result in a deduction of ¾ of a letter grade (7.5 percentage
        points) from your final grade. More than three absences, excused or unexcused, will
        result in a failing grade in the class. Excessive tardies and early departures (more than 3)
        will be treated as equivalent to an unexcused absence.
Late Assignments
I have selected these course readings and assignments because I strongly believe that they will be
worthwhile in your journey of becoming an educator. If you are not able to complete an
assignment on time, you are still required to complete the assignment. However, it is important
for certain assignments to be completed punctually.
     o Service learning must be initiated as soon as possible at the beginning of the semester.
         You should begin contacting sites during the first week of classes. You need to have a
         site and a start date confirmed by the fourth week of classes (Tuesday, February 11). If
         you have not confirmed a site and start date by this time, it will be difficult to succeed in
         the remainder of the course and we will need to meet in person to make a plan. If you do
         not complete the service learning requirement by the end of the semester, you cannot
         receive a passing grade in the class, even if you have received 100% on all other
         assignments.
     o Discussion board posts are shared with your small group and thus when you do not
         submit a discussion board post on time, you and your peers are not able to learn from
         each other. Additionally, if you do not catch up on readings, you will not be able to make
         as many connections between one week’s readings and the next week’s. As a result,
         complete posts that are submitted on time will receive a score of 100%; posts submitted
         within one week receive a score of 60%; and posts submitted within two weeks receive a
         score of 40%.
     o Papers must be submitted on time unless you request an extension in advance. If you
         request an extension, we will agree on a later deadline by which the paper must be
         submitted. If the paper is not submitted by this later deadline, you will not be granted
         extensions on future papers.
Technological Devices Policy
Unless a specific activity requires it, we will not use cell phones, laptops, tablets, etc. in class.
This course does not require note-taking during class. Please speak with me if you need a device
as an accommodation in order to have an equitable opportunity to succeed.
                                                                                                      7


Parenting Students
I fully support parents and guardians attending school. Infants under 1 year are welcome in class
as often as necessary. In cases of occasional non-contagious illnesses and unforeseen disruptions
in childcare, you are welcome to bring an older child to class, or participate in the class via video
chat (see “Absences” above). When you bring your baby or child to class, I ask that you please
sit close to the door so that if your little one needs special attention or is disrupting learning for
other students, you may step outside until their need has been met.
Grading Scale
For the following scale, decimals will be rounded down. For example, an 89.5 will be a B+.
93+               A
90-92             A-
87-89             B+
83-86             B
80-82             B-
77-79             C+
73-76             C
70-72             C-
60-69             D
<60               F
Please note that continuation in the PDS requires a minimum grade of “C” in each of the PDS
courses.
University Resources for Students
Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If
      there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you
      have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
      arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
      committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do
      so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the
      confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a documented disability who
      requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
      at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
      official letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information, visit
      http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Counseling and Mental Health Center
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many
      helpful resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is
      learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
                                                                                                       8


    If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings
    like anxiety or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
    http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
    Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger
    Learning Center each year to improve their academic performance? All students are
    welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and workshops, private learning
    specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses in
    15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
    or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Other Resources
    Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
    Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
    ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
    Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
BeVocal
    BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have
    the power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the
    power to intervene and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to
    build a culture of care on campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information
    If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or
    Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your
    call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably isn’t. Trust your
    instincts and share your concerns.
    The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of
    Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
    Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
    evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
    requires exiting and assembling outside.
           ● Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
               may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used
               when entering the building.
           ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in
               writing during the first week of class.
           ● In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class
               instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the
               following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police
               Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
                                                                                                9


             ● Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
                  procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Title IX Reporting
     Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
     harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at
     federally funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and
     working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct
     occurs in our community, the university can:
               1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
               2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced
               harm or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
               3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
     “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX
     to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX
     related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking
     with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask
     whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or
     remedies without making an official report to the university, email
     advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources,
     visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
     Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor
     Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core
     values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very
     seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that
     you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be
     guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of
     the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
     University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
     http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy
     If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
     the Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas
     law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas
     institution. For more information, see:
     http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
                                                                                                  10


11