                                                    Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
              Introduction to Computer Music:
                 Visual Programming with Max
                   MUS 329J (22100)| Fall 2019
            Tuesday / Thursday, 2-3:20pm | MRH 4.170 (EMS Studio 2)
              Prerequisite: MUS 329 E & F, or permission of instructor
 class website: https://ems.music.utexas.edu/courses/mus-329j-introduction-to-computer-music/
Instructor:
Dr. Christopher Trapani
Office: MRH 4.156
Office Hours: Tuesday / Thursday 3:30 - 4:00 pm, or by appointment
Email: ctrapani@utexas.edu
Teaching Assistant:
Jinghong Zhang
Email: jinghongzhang@utexas.edu
Course Description:
This course, geared towards musicians as well as students with an interest in programming
and some musical background, provides an introduction to the visual programming
environment Max (formerly known as Max/MSP, developed by Cycling ’74). Students will
learn to create modular patches that can be used to drive MIDI instruments or for live sound
processing. By the end of the course, students will be able to perform using a range of
customizable digital effects created on the computer, and will have acquired the skills
necessary to embark on more adventurous computer music projects.


                                                        Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
The course is divided into three phases, punctuated by four assigned projects. Phase one
focuses on the basics of the programming language: the objects and workspace of the software,
calculations that take place before signal processing is introduced. The first assignment
involves creating a patch that reproduces the behavior of a given Max object — without, of
course, using that object itself. For a second assignment, students will each create a “sine wave
etude” (maximum length: 60 seconds) using any combination of simple manipulations to
sequence events and envelopes, plus only one DSP object: a single tone generator (cycle~).
Phase two deals with MIDI communication and signal processing (DSP). Students will learn
how to inject, treat, and amplify live sound. Assignment number three involves creating a
demo patch that interfaces with MIDI hardware: a MIDI keyboard, controller, or the disklavier.
Several treatments/effects will be introduced, including filters, delay lines, transposition,
harmonizers, and granulation. For a fourth assignment, students are asked to create a “sketch
patch” by applying a series of 8-15 treatments to an excerpt of an existing recording (up to two
and a half minutes long, and preferably monophonic).
The fourth phase of the course deals with the integration of musical notation into the computer
music environment via the bach automated composer’s helper (http://www.bachproject.net/),
a flexible, list-based notation interface written for Max— a tool that allows the familiar and
intuitive interaction with notes on a staff to become a prominent feature of a patch.
The final exam will be in the form of an independent project in Max, geared to the level and
interests of each student, decided upon in consultation with and supervised by the professor
and/or teaching assistant. It is due December 10, 2019.
There is no textbook for the course; the only requirement is a Max student license. Max
(current version 8.0.8) is free for a 30-day trial. A student subscription valid for one year is
available for $59 at www.cycling74.com. The best resource for those who want to supplement
their knowledge, is Max’s own set of tutorials, included with the software.
PARTICIPATION: An alert and active presence is crucial to build the programming skills
necessary to succeed at this course.
EVALUATION:
Assignment 1: Sine Wave Etude — 20%
Assignment 2: MIDI Control — 20%
Assignment 3: Effects Patch — 20%
Final Project — 30%
Class Participation — 10%
Students must submit assignments by email, then come to class with assignments on their
computers (or already loaded onto the studio machine), and be prepared to present them in
class. Students are responsible for checking Canvas for updates, prompts, and deadlines.


                                                Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
                                      Weekly Schedule:
                            PHASE ONE: Building Blocks
Week 1: August 29                                      Max objects introduced
Course Introduction / outlining the semester
Demonstrations
Max Workspace: objects, messages, comments, bangs      bang, button, lock, arguments
                                                       print, max window, help, reference
Week 2: September 3 / 5
Integers and Floats                                    number, float, i, f
Arithmetic/Logic calculations                          +, !-, expr, if, vexpr, round
Order of operations                                    t, b, uzi
Format Data / Hot vs. Cool inlets                      commas, $1, pack, unpack, pak
Timing and sequence of events                          metro, counter, select
Week 3: September 10 / 12
Gates and delays                                       gate, switch, delay, pipe, route
Sending and receiving information                      send, receive, forward
Scaling data                                           scale, max, min
Visualizing data                                       dial, slider, multislider
Introducing random/stochastic elements                 random, urn, drunk, decide
Week 4: September 17 / 19
          — Assignment 1, “duplicate a max object” due September 17 —
Audio Setup                                            dac~, adc~
Levels                                                 gain~, meter~
Sine waves and amplitude envelopes                     cycle~, line, scope~
Week 5: September 24 / 26
Recap and catch-up sessions (details to come)
                          PHASE TWO: MIDI plus Buffers
Week 6: October 1 / 3
                — Assignment 2, “sine wave etude” due October 1 —
Soundfiles                                             playlist, sfplay~, sflist, record~,
Buffers: Recording and Playback                        buffer~, play~, groove~, waveform~
Week 7: October 8 /10
MIDI basics                                            makenote, midiparse, mtof
MIDI in and out                                        midiinfo, ctlin, ctlout, kslider
Creating a basic sampler
External MIDI controllers/triggers


                                             Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
Week 8:
October 15: GUEST PROFESSOR: Jason Thorpe Buchanan, Mahidol University (Thailand)
Network / Exchanging Data                           udpsend, osc
October 17:
MIDI review / Max4Live intro
                          PHASE THREE: Signal Processing
Week 9: October 22 / 24:
                 — Assignment 3, “MIDI control” due October 10 —
Filters                                             onepole~, filtergraph~, biquad~
Delay lines                                         tapin~, tapout~
Synthesis and Envelopes                             function, line~, adsr, poly~
Time-Stretch and Transposition                      fzero~, stretch~, retune~
Week 10: October 29 / 31
Granulation / Concatenation                         munger / CataRT            matrix,
Spatialization / Multichannel output                live.gain~, mc.unpack~, pictslider
assorted MSP effects
                       PHASE FOUR: Advanced Applications
Week 11: November 5 / 7
Patch organization/Encapsulation                    bpatcher, abstractions, presentation
Storing Data                                        preset, coll, pattrstorage   mode
The search path
Week 12: November 12 / 14
                — Assignment 4, “sketch patch” due November 14 —
List operations                                     coll, listfunnel, zl.sort
Introduction to bach                                llll, bach.+, bach.ezmidiplay
Week 13: November 19 / 21
Notation interfaces with bach                       bach.roll, bach.score
Handling microtonality                              midicents, tonedivision
Quantizing Rhythms                                  bach.quantize, minimal units
Week 14: November 26 — TBD
Week 15: December 3 / 5
Review / prepare for EARS concert
                         — Final project due December 9 —


                                                     Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
                                       COURSE POLICIES
Classroom expectations:
All students are expected to participate in class discussion, and are expected to respect the
opinions and statements of their classmates during discussion and classroom activities.
Assignments:
All assignments should be sent by email by the indicated deadlines. Late submissions will be
penalized.
Disability Notice:
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. See “University Policies” for more information.
Student Rights and Responsibilities:
  •    You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
       You have a right to respect.
  •    You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
  •    You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
  •    You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
  •    You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to
       improve your
       learning environment.
  •    You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student
       shall be isolated, excluded or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
  •    You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and
       communicating with the teaching team and with others if things start to feel out of
       control or overwhelming.
  •    You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful
       of others.


                                                      Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
   •   Your experience with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you
       bring to it, and your energy shapes the quality of your peers’ experiences.
   •   You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when
       someone is excluded.
   •   You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each
       other to these standards, and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference and Names:
Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and
topics dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender,
gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the
student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name different than
what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this
preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
                                    UNIVERSITY POLICIES
Academic Integrity:
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a
student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University
and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you
use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous class), you must
cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s
Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web
address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy:
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the
Q-drop deadline, which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you
are only allowed six Q drops while you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more
information, see: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop


                                                             Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
                                UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
Your success in this class is important. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course.
There are also a range of resources on campus:
Services for Students with Disabilities
This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are
circumstances that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information
that you need to share with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be
evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating an effective learning environment for all
students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain
the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also contact Services for Students with Disabilities,
512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and
alcohol, getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope
with stress.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources
available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking
for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or
depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
http:// www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
The Sanger Learning Center
Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each
year to improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger
Center’s classes and workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and
tutoring for more than 70 courses in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://
www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614 (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/


                                                               Introduction to Computer Music / MUS329J
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right –
it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing,
discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX
related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with someone
for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu .
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and
Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in
evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re- enter a
building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency/
