Dr. Pounders                                   Spring 2020
                     Advertising and Public Relations Law and Ethics
                                             Spring 2020
                                 ADV 353 (06560)| PR 353 (07025)
                                   W/W 11:30-12:45 CMA 1.202
Professor: Dr. Kathrynn (Kate) Pounders
Pronouns: she, her, hers
Email: kate.pounders@utexas.edu (Please use this email instead of Canvas)!!
Office: BMC 4.388
Office Hours: Wednesday 2-3 and by appointment
Phone: 636-675-5831 (Cell)
Twitter: krpounders
TA: Shiqi (Susie) Huang                        TA: Nathan Cooper
Pronouns: she, her, hers                       Pronouns: he, him, his
Email: susiehuang@utexas.edu                   Email: nac2678@utexas.edu
Office: BMC cubicle #16, 4th floor             Office: BMC cubicle #7, 4th floor
Office Hours: M/W 1:30PM - 2:30PM              Office Hours: M/W 1:30PM - 2:30PM
Course Description: Many of the courses offered in advertising focus on methods for
developing persuasive communication. This class has a different purpose and examines the
ethical issues related to the practice of advertising and marketing communications. Are some
practices in advertising or public relations unethical? How can we recognize, define, assess,
reprimand, and prevent unethical practices? What impact do these acts have on individuals, the
industry, and society?
Toward answering these questions we will consider ethical principles, industry codes, legal and
regulatory issues, and larger macro societal issues related to the institution and practice of


Dr. Pounders                                     Spring 2020
advertising and public relations. The overarching objectives of this course are to (1) build an
awareness of ethical and legal issues related to advertising and (2) help students learn how to
critically think and assess these issues.
Course Objectives
1.       Identify ethical issues in advertising and public relations by exploring beliefs about human
nature, philosophical perspectives, ethical principles, and industry ethical codes.
2.       Deconstruct the complex interactions among advertising/public relations and individual,
economic, legal, and social issues impacting ethical assessments of advertising.
3.       Think creatively to solve ethical problems facing the advertising industry.]
4.       Recognize how ethical issues impact the advertising and public relations industries, and
you, as both an advertising/public relations professional and as a consumer.
5.       Articulate a sense of your personal and professional ethical beliefs and behavior.
Course Topics
The Legal Environment of Advertising and Public Relations: Topics include an examination of
commercial speech, the FTC, deceptive advertising, puffery, copyright, and trademark law.
Personal Ethics, Heuristics, and Moral Philosophy: Topics include an examination of personal
values, individual ethical perspectives, moral philosophy, human heuristics and behaviors,
personal values, moral myopia and moral muteness.
Advertising/Public Relations & Society: Topics focus on the aggregate effects of advertising and
public relations and their intended and unintended consequences such as the obesity crisis,
creating and/or reinforcing problematic stereotypes, advertising to vulnerable populations,
privacy issues, and advertising controversial products.
Required Reading
●        Controversies in Contemporary Advertising, 2nd edition, 2013, by Kim Sheehan, ISBN-
13:978-1452261072, available from the University Co-op and several other outlets (Amazon,
etc.)
●        Course Packet from Jenn’s Copies on Guadalupe (across from Belo).
●        Additional assigned readings/PDFs will be posted on Canvas throughout the semester. It
is your responsibility to keep updates on the assigned readings and any announcements with
additional readings before class.


Dr. Pounders                                    Spring 2020
Course Evaluation
  Assessment Tool                             Percentage of
                                              Overall Grade
  Quizzes                                     35%
  Team Written Debate Summary                 10%
  Team Debate                                 10%
  Individual Research Paper                   15%
  Individual Law Assignment                   5%
  Participation and Assignments               20%
  Course Peer Evaluations                     5%
  Total                                       100%
Quizzes: Quizzes will include material from assigned readings, in-class discussion, and examples
shared by the professor, your peers, and guest speakers during class. Quizzes will be taken
either in class or online and will consist of multiple choice, true/false, and short answer
questions. Quizzes taken in class will be administered at the beginning of class; latecomers will
not be administered a quiz .
Team Presentation, Debate, and Written Summary: Depending on final course enrollment, you
will be assigned to a team of 5-6 people. Your team will be assigned a presentation topic and
stance (pro/ethical or con/unethical). Your team will engage in a presentation, debate, and
prepare a written summary of your assigned topic and stance. You can find more information
about these assignments on Canvas.
Individual Research Paper: You will write a research paper on one of the macro-level ethical
issues that we will discuss in class. You will choose your paper topic from a list provided on
Canvas. You will be required to submit a short research proposal on your topic for approval.
You can find additional information, the rubric, and the due dates will be posted to Canvas.
No late work will be accepted.
Participation and Assignments: I strongly believe it is important to create an engaging and
dynamic classroom environment. As a result, we will have lots of in-class activities. To facilitate
your learning experience, you will conduct all in-class activities in your assigned teams. It is my
hope that you will have critical and thoughtful discussion with your team members. There is no
opportunity to make up points for any in-class assignment. You must be present in the
classroom to receive credit.
Any attempts to obtain credit when not present will be considered academic dishonesty and
reported. We will often take attendance and verify it via Instapolls in class. These will be
random check ins and not used every class.


Dr. Pounders                                   Spring 2020
Additionally, there will be a few out-of-class assignments throughout the semester. You are to
submit out-of-class assignments on Canvas. Please be sure to include your last name, first
name, and EID. This will assist the TA’s with grading. No late work will be accepted.
You are expected to participate both in class and on the course Facebook page. On the first day
of class you will be provided a name card. Please bring these to each class.
Facebook Page: The purpose of the FB page is to share interesting and current events related to
course material – as well as to keep each other updated on course deadlines, assignments, etc.
Some students do not always feel comfortable discussing some course-related topics in class,
and so this is another outlet to express viewpoints and opinions, which I think some of you will
be more comfortable with.
You are expected to post/comment on current events related to the course. Although you are
not expected to post each week, your online presence should be consistent throughout the
semester. You should aim to have at least one original post every 3 weeks. The TA will complete
random activity reports, which will be counted as part of your participation grade.
Course FB page: https://www.facebook.com/groups/1853089741492859/
 or search ADV/PR 353 Sp20.
Debate Evaluations: Part of your participation grade will be to attend each debate and assist
your assigned team with constructing an evaluation of the debate. Note: It is very important to
attend class for each debate and pay close attention to the debate as this assignment will be
graded for content (not merely completion). The class feedback will also count toward the
debating teams grades.
Professionalism: Arrive on time, do not pack up early, and stay the duration of the class period.
Arriving late and packing up early causes disruption to everyone in the classroom. If you must
come late or leave early, please find a seat in the back of the classroom. You are responsible for
any information missed during an absence. Attitude and professionalism will be considered in
determining final class grades.
Peer Reviews: Two peer reviews will be counted toward your final grade. Each will be worth
2.5% of your grade. One peer review will assess your work on the team debate project. The
other will assess your overall work and contributions to the in-class group projects throughout
the semester.
Final Grades: Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric.


Dr. Pounders                                  Spring 2020
  A                 94-100
  A-                90-93.9
  B+                87-89.9
  B                 84-86.9
  B-                80-83.9
  C+                77-79.9
  C                 74-76.9
  C-                70-73.9
  D+                67-69.9
  D                 64-66.9
  D-                60-63.9
  F                 < 60
Additional Words on Grading:
●       When your work is graded you start with zero points. You earn points based on the
quality of the work and the accuracy, appropriateness and detail of your answers. You do not
start with 100 points and then lose them based on mistakes you might make. Your final points
represent the total points earned for that assignment, not the number of points “taken away”
for errors or omissions.
●       Any disagreements about grades MUST be submitted in writing within seven days of
when the grade is posted on Canvas.
Student Responsibilities
Class Attendance: It is your responsibility to attend class. To reward attendance, exams will
include material: presented in class, from in-class assignments, and examples shared by
students and Dr. Pounders during class.
Be prepared to take notes during class. Laptops may be used for class referencing and note-
taking purposes. All other electronic devices (including phones) should be put away. Any
student caught surfing the Internet, texting, checking e-mail etc. for non-class purposes will
be asked to leave immediately. If the behavior persists, points will be deducted from the
student’s final course grade each subsequent time this occurs. In addition, talking and other
distracting behavior may result in students being asked to leave the classroom.
Email: As e-mail has become a favored way to communicate, you must learn to use it
appropriately. Keep your emails formal; write professionally, as if you are writing to your boss
at work, not to your friend. The TA is your first point of contact for your queries about grades.
I am your first contact about the course material. The TA and I will try to return your e-mail
within 24 hours of receiving it on Monday through Friday, or by Monday evening if we receive it
on the weekend. E-mail is an excellent way to communicate if done appropriately.


Dr. Pounders                                    Spring 2020
Canvas: In this class, you will use Canvas to monitor class announcements, access assigned
readings (in addition to the required books) and check grades. It is your responsibility to check
Canvas regularly.
My Responsibilities
Although this is a large class, my goal is to make it as interactive and participatory as possible.
While there will be days when I have to devote much of the class time to lecturing, I will set
aside ample opportunities for discussion and participation.
I will make myself readily available if you have questions, concerns or just want to chat about
the material. The best way to get a hold of me is to stop by during office hours or to contact me
via e-mail. I also provide my cell phone number on the syllabus and will respond to text
messages (at reasonable times).
I recognize that individuals learn in different ways and will use teaching and testing methods
that acknowledge this. As far as possible and as appropriate, lectures will draw on multiple
media formats, including video, still images and audio, in addition to written texts. Quizzes and
assignments will be structured in a variety of ways, including multiple choice, true/false, and
short answer.
Policy on Lecture Slides: I will post slides on Canvas prior to class; these slides are my
intellectual property. Students who post them or share them online are infringing on my
intellectual property. This activity is prohibited. By accepting this syllabus you must adhere to
this policy.
This course carries the Ethics flag. Ethics courses are designed to equip you with skills that are
necessary for making ethical decisions in your adult and professional life. You should therefore
expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments involving ethical issues
and the process of applying ethical reasoning to real-life situations.
UT Class Related and Other Policies
More information can be found at: http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi09-10/index.html
Counseling and Mental Health Services: Taking care of your general well-being is an important
step in being a successful student. If stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated
or anything else is getting in your way, there are options available for support.
For immediate support:
-       Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th floor
| 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
-       CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html


Dr. Pounders                                    Spring 2020
 CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
-        M-F 8-5p | CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please *leave a message* if she is unavailable)
 FREE Services at CMHC:
-        Brief assessments and referral services
-        Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
-        MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
-        Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Important Safety Information
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): The Behavior Concerns Advice Line is a service that
provides The University of Texas at Austin’s faculty, students and staff an opportunity to discuss
their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the
Employee Assistance Program (EAP) and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). An
individual can either call the line at 512-232-5050 or report their concerns using the online
submission form available at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/b
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harass
ment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally fun
ded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working enviro
nment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our commun
ity, the university can:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
 or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Man
datory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Tit
le IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any and
all Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-
onone. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX related inci
dent, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with some
one for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocat
e@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit titlei
x.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any other kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to
report such misbehavior. Discrimination, harassment, and/or retaliation on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran status,


Dr. Pounders                                    Spring 2020
genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression can be reported
to the Office for Inclusion and Equity. Or tell me and I will report it.
●        Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE)
The Office for Inclusion and Equity (OIE) investigates and helps to resolve complaints of sexual
misconduct and discrimination.
o        File a report of discrimination via online form
o        Call to report discrimination 512-471-1849 or email: equity@utexas.edu
●        Office for Civil Rights (OCR)
The Office for Civil Rights (OCR) in the US Department of Education is responsible for enforcing
federal civil rights laws that prohibit discrimination in programs and activities that receive
federal financial assistance from the Department of Education, including sex discrimination
covered under Title IX. Call the Office for Civil Rights 214-661-9600.
●        Equal Opportunity in Employment Commission (EEOO)
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) is responsible for enforcing federal
laws that make it illegal to discriminate against a job applicant or employee on the basis of a
protected class, including discrimination on the basis of sex. Call the Equal Opportunity in
Employment Commission 800-669-4000.
Religious Holy Days Observance Policy: The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution
of higher education shall excuse a student from attending classes or other required activities,
including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that
purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for
that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from
which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. A student who misses
classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the
absence. Please notify me of your pending absence at least 14 days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day.
Documented Disability Statement: Any student with a documented disability who requires
academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at (512)
471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone). Faculty are not required to provide
accommodations without an official accommodation letter from SSD.
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
(e.g. instructional videos need captioning, course packets are not readable for proper
alternative text conversion, etc.).
Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related accommodations for


Dr. Pounders                                   Spring 2020
field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the arrangement of accommodations on
the given day (e.g., transportation, site accessibility, etc.).
Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone) of reference SSD’s website for more disability-related information:
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating,
plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, falsifying academic records, and any act designed to
avoid participating honestly in the learning process. Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is
not limited to, providing false or misleading information to receive a postponement or an
extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of essentially the same written
assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them.
Scholastic dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the
future demands of a work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University.
Drop Policy: The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007
academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a
total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at
another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping
more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation: Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are
required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or
announcement requires exiting and assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors
of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not
be the one you used when entering the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation
shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an
evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building
unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services office.
