                                      AFR 374D: Black Film at the Oscars
Instructor: Dr. Patrick F. Walter
Email: via Canvas Portal
Office Hours: MWF 3:15 p.m. – 4:15 p.m. GWB 3.200E
Class Time and Location: MW 11:30 a.m – 1:00 p.m. RLM 7.112
         In 1939, at the height of Jim Crow, the first black person to win an Oscar, Hatie McDaniel, did so for
playing a stereotypical black mammie. In 2018, in the wake of the Ferguson Uprising and the emergence of
Black Lives Matter, Jordan Peele took home a Best Screenplay Oscar for Get Out!, his horrifying satire of
American anti-blackness. Each year, when we sit down to watch the Academy Awards, we are not only
witnessing the celebration of the supposed best that cinema has to offer, we are also encountering a barometer
for mainstream American culture’s ideas about blackness. In this course, we will be “reading the Oscars” as
this ongoing weather report on American racism. To “read the Oscars” we will closely view work by black
filmmakers and actors that has been both lauded and snubbed by the Academy. What do these films and
performances say about blackness and whiteness and why has the Academy either embraced or rejected certain
cinematic messages about race at certain historical moments. What does Halle Berry’s 2002 Oscar for her
performance in Monsters Ball say about mainstream notions of black femininity? Why did the Academy
recognize the version of black queerness presented in Barry Jenkin’s Moonlight? Why have Spike Lee’s
incisive cinematic meditations on American racism never received the attention of the Academy? Questions
such as these will guide our inquiry. This class then introduces key ideas about film criticism, black studies,
and cultural studies more generally while also providing a space to work on academic writing skills.
Grade Breakdown
Attendance and Participation: 10%
Essay 1: 25%
Essay 2: 25%
Group presentation: 15%
Viewing and Reading Quizzes: 15%
Revision: 10%
Reading List
Falconbrdige, Alexander. “Account of the Transatlantic Slave Trade”
Fanon, Franz. Black Skin, White Masks (selection)
Snead, James White Screen, Black Images (selection)
Wallace, Michelle. “Oscar Micheaux’s Within Our Gates: The Possibilities for Alternative Visions”
Thaggert, Miriam. “Divided Images: Black Female Spectatorship and John Stahl’s Imitation of Life”
Williams, Linda. Playing the Race Card (selection)
Baldwin, James. The Devil Finds Work (selection)
Sexton, Jared. “The Ruse of Engagement: Black Masculinity and the Cinema of Policing”
Mulvey, Laura. “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema”
hooks, bell. “The Oppositional Gaze”
Wilderson, Frank. Red, White, and Black (selection)
Stallings, L. H. “Am I a Faggot”
Poll, Ryan. “Can One Get Out: The Aesthetics of Afro-Pessimism”
Screening List
Griffiths, D. W. Birth of a Nation (1915): https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nGQaAddwjxg
Micheaux, Oscar. Within Our Gates (1920): Kanopy
Flemming, Victor. Gone with the Wind (1940): Amazon Prime
Sirk, Douglas. Imitation of Life (1959): Amazon Prime
Jewison, Norman. In the Heat of the Night (1967) Streaming Through Library (SWANK)
Parks Jr. Gordon. Super Fly (1972): Amazon Prime


Hill, Jack. Foxy Brown (1974): Amazon Prime
Daniels, Lee Monster’s Ball (2001): Amazon Prime
Fuqua, Antoine. Training Day (2001): Amazon Prime
Jenkins, Berry. Moonlight (2016): Library Streaming
Farrelly, Peter. Green Book (2018): TBA
Peele, Jordan. Get Out! (2017): Amazon Prime
Assignments
Attendance and Participation: See the attendance policy listed below. Along with maintaining your
attendance, you will also receive credit for being an avid and insightful contributor to our class conversations.
This is really a key component of being a professional intellectual.
Group Presentation: Each week, a group will provide a 15-minute presentation that will lead off our
discussion of the week’s film. There are two options for this presentation:
     1) This presentation will include an analysis of one key sequence and one key shot from the film. The
          presentation will also include reference to the week’s readings. The point of this presentation is not
          really to give us basic background or a general plot summary of the film but instead to point our
          analytic lens in a particular direction. What parts of the film and specific ideas do you think the class
          should absolutely discuss when approaching said film? Along with the 15-Minute presentation, the
          group will submit a detailed outline of the presentation.
     2) The presentation will include a five-minute creative video response to the weeks film, and an
          explanation of how this creative video reflects upon important sequences or shots from the film. If
          you choose this option, you need to explain how the creative video you have produced relates the
          film’s presentation of blackness, gender, sexuality or class. You also need to point out how your
          video intersects with particular moments from the film. So five minutes will be spent playing your
          video for the class, and ten minutes will be spent explaining your work to us. Along with this
          presentation, you will provide a two-page, double-spaced summary of your explanation.
Essays: In these 5-7 page essays, you will analyze a particular aspect of one of the films we have watched thus
far in class. You will consider how this feature of the film relates to the dynamics of blackness that we have
discussed in class. Throughout your analysis, you should use one reading from class. In other words, there
will be two secondary sources in your essay, and you will need to cite them properly both in-text and in your
Works Cited page. Note, however, that I don’t want you to simply repeat ideas from these readers or from
lectures/discussions. This essay is a space for you to develop your own unique reading of the film. Your essay
should follow standard MLA formatting criteria, i.e. 12 point font, Times New Roman, with 1 inch margins.
Viewing and Reading Quizzes: There will be occasional quizzes testing your ability to keep up with weekly
screenings and readings.
Final Revision: You will revise your first essay for a new grade. This revision grade will be based upon the
amount of work you put substantive improvements in the structure and cohesion of your first graded draft of
the essay. When you submit your final revision, at the end of the course, you will turn in your original graded
draft and your final revision. Thus, PLEASE SAVE THE ORIGINAL! On the final revision, you should
highlight additions or changes you have made in the revision process.
Course Policies
Attendance: Attendance is mandatory and will be taken at each of these meetings. Success in this course also
depends upon your active participation in discussions.
Technology: There will be no use of laptops or phones in lectures, discussions, or screenings.
Anyone on a phone or laptop will be asked to leave and will not receive attendance credit for the
day.


Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are
not your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action, which will also reflect in their grade. More specifically, intentional plagiarism will result in failure of
the assignment and failure of the course.
Language and Comportment: This course necessitates the discussion of complex and delicate
ideas about race and power. Throughout the semester, in papers and discussions, attempt to use
precise and up-to-date language. For example, rather than “freedom” perhaps “emancipation” or
“manumission” is more appropriate. The use of the terms lesbian, gay, trans, or queer, are more
specific and accurate than homosexual. Either “Black women” or “black men” is preferable to
“the Black Man” or “the Black woman.” Never use the n-word unless quoting in an essay, and
even then, try to avoid it. Use African American rather than “negro” or “colored” and black
where appropriate (e.g. Jimmy Cliff, a Jamaican musician, is black but not African American).
Most importantly, be respectful to your fellow classmates. If you do not feel that what you are
about to say is inappropriate, maybe give yourself some time to work through your thought or
share it with your TA or myself in an office hour before articulating said thought in class.
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, you can speak with me to make accommodations.
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive)
who requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations.
TRIGGER WARNING: This course is about race. We will be dealing with subject matter at times involving
racist language and sexual violence. I will try to provide specific warnings for certain classes or screenings,
but I am also providing this general warning for the entire course.
                                                     Schedule
Week 1: Course Introduction
W 1/22: Introduction of the course, nuts and bolts. What is race? What is Cinema?
Week 2: What We Talk About When We Talk About Blackness
M 1/27: What is race? Discussion of Falconbridge.
W 1/29: Discussion of Falconbridge and Fanon.
Week 3: The Color Line and the Birth of American Cinema
M 2/3 Discussion of Snead and Birth of a Nation
W 2/5: Finish Discussing Birth of a Nation
Week 4: The Color Line and the Birth of American Cinema
M 2/10: Discuss Within Our Gates and “race films”
W 2/12: Finish discussing Within our Gates and Wallace. Quiz 1.
Week 5: Melodramatic Blackness
M 2/17: Discuss Imitation of Life How do we write on film: analytic paragraphs.
W 2/19: Continued discussion of Imitation of Life and Thaggert.


Week 6: Melodramatic Blackness
M: 2/24: Peer review of paragraphs. Begin Discussion of Gone with the Wind
W 2/26: Discussion of Gone with the Wind and Williams
Week 7: Buddies in Law
M 3/2: Discuss In the Heat of the Night
W 3/4: Finish discussing In the Heat of the Night and Baldwin ESSAY 1 DUE!
Week 8: Buddies in Law Continued
M 3/9: Begin discussing Training Day: Thesis statements.
W 3/11: Discuss Training Day and Sexton; Quiz 2
Week 9: Spring Break!
Week 10: Blaxploitation, Black Radicalism and Gender
M 3/23: Thesis statements on Superfly. Discuss Superfly and Mulvey
W 3/25 Finish discussing Superfly and hooks.
Week 11: Blaxploitation, Black Radicalism and Gender Continued
M 3/30: Discuss Foxy Brown
W 4/1: Discussion of Foxy Brown
Week 12: Let’s Solve American Racism!
M 4/6 Discuss Monsters Ball
W 4/8 Continue discussion of Monsters Ball and Wilderson
Week 13: Let’s Solve American Racism Continued!
M 4/13: Discuss Green Book
W 4/15: Continue discussing Green Book. Articles on Green Book. Quiz 3
Week 14: Can Black Lives Matter at the Movie Theatre?
M 4/20 Discuss Moonlight
W 4/22 Finish discussing Moonlight and Stallings.
Week 15: Can Black Lives Matter at the Movie Theatre Continued
M 4/27: Discuss Get Out!
W 4/29: Finish discussing Get Out! and Poll. Quiz 4
Week 16:
M 5/4: Workshop one essay.
W 5/6 Final notes. FINAL REVISION and FINAL ESSAY DUE!
