                                                PR 378/ADV378
Pop Star Activism from the Beatles to Beyoncé
INSTRUCTOR: Dave Junker, junker@austin.utexas.edu; Office Hours T 3:30-4:30, TH 11-12 and by apt
TA: Pratik Shah, pratik.shah@utexas.edu; TBA
Is Beyoncé a committed feminist or a cunning marketer? Why is Sam Smith’s use of the pronoun “he” of
social significance? When pop stars speak out politically, how do they do so without jeopardizing their
commercial appeal? Why does pop-culture and celebrity activism so often come from the music world?
In what ways did music advance the civil rights and black consciousness movements, and how do pop-
star activists of today help identity-based movements and causes? How does a pop-star’s politics factor
into the marketing strategies of brands and causes?
Such questions about the nature of issue advocacy in popular music provide the focus of this class in
strategic communication, an umbrella term for the study of persuasion and influence in public relations,
advertising, marketing, and political and social advocacy. With significant attention to cultural diversity,
this communication and culture class explores the role of popular music at the intersection of commerce
and cultural politics, from the freedom and civil rights struggles of the 1960s, to the celebrity
humanitarianism of the 80s, to the identity politics of today.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     • To provide an engaging and deep historical context for studying strategic communication and
         cultural diversity, specifically elements of issue advocacy, cause marketing, identity-based
         advocacy, cross-cultural communication, and celebrity branding and activism
     •   To sharpen your critical thinking, listening and communication skills
     •   To help you become more critical and empowered as media consumers, and more effective and
         ethical as media producers
     •   To introduce you to some awesome music that will enrich your life
READINGS, TEXTS, MATERIALS
     •   One book. Advertising Revolution: The Story of a Song, from Beatles Hit to Nike Slogan. By Alan
         Bradshaw and Linda Scott. Repeater Books (subsidiary of Random House), 2017. Can be
         purchased via Amazon or publisher website.
     •   Course Reader. Available after the first week of class at Jenn’s Copy and Binding.
     •   Playlists via Spotify. Spotify for Students is only $4.99/month and if you don’t like it you can
         cancel your subscription when the class is over.
     •   Documentary Films. We will watch some films in class, but we won’t have time to watch all of
         them during class time. So some documentaries you will need to access on your own and finish


          watching on your own, and some you will need to view in their entirety on your own. All will be
          available online.
REQUIREMENTS AND GRADE DISTRIBUTION FOR PR378 and ADV 378
  Listening-Room Prompts                               10%
  Quizzes                                              20%
  Two Exams                                            50%
  Final Playlist Project                               20%
FINAL GRADES
Final grades will use the plus/minus grade system and follow this breakdown:
          A        94-100
          A-       90-93.9
          B+       88-89.9
          B        84-87.9
          B-       80-83.9
          C+       78-79.9
          C        74-77.9
          C-       70-73.9
          D+       68-69
          D        60-66
          F        0-59
PROTOCOL AND ASSIGNMENTS
Lectures: You need to come to lecture every day to do well in the class. Questions that will appear on
quizzes and exams will come from lecture as well as the reading, viewing and listening material. In
lecture, I will present new information, review and explain ideas from the readings and other material,
and discuss with all of you the material in question. Much of the content for the course is music, and we
will listen to music EVERY day of class. One of the most valuable aspects of class will be the feedback you
give me and the conversation we have. So come class ready to listen, ready to talk and excited to
engage.
Listening Room: The Listening Room is the weekly playlist you will be required to listen and be prepared
to respond to or answer questions about.
Listening-Room Prompts and Quizzes: Almost every week you will have to take either an online quiz
related to the material of the week, or answer an online prompt related to the music of the week.
FINAL PLAYLIST PROJECT: Finally, for your final project, you will create a curated advocacy playlist and
listening guide of roughly 3-4 pages, with the following sections: issue profile, strategy statement,
annotated list of songs, and closing statement. The final project will be due the last week of class.
HELP and OFFICE HOURS: I love talking about music and I love talking to students. Please visit my office
hours or Pratik’s office hours whether or not you have a pressing question or concern.


UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a
work-career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Please
read more information at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external
site.).
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone).
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
Notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious
holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable
timeframe.
COUNSELING AND MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If stress, test
anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated or anything else is getting in your way, there are options
available for support.
For immediate support: Visit/Call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): M-F 8-5p | SSB, 5th
floor. 512-471-3515 |cmhc.utexas.edu
CMHC Crisis Line: 24/7 | 512.471.2255 | cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
CARE Counselor in the Moody College of Communication is: Abby Simpson, LCSW
CMA 4.134 | 512-471-7642 (Please leave a message if she is unavailable)
FREE Services at CMHC:
Brief assessments and referral services
Mental health & wellness articles - cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html


MindBody Lab - cmhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
Classes, workshops, & groups - cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
COURSE CALENDAR
Exam dates are fixed but the daily calendar may need adjustments. Any changes will be communicated
clearly and with sufficient notice to accommodate preparing for exams.
   Wk     Dates              Topic                  Material        Exams/Assign
   1      Jan 21,23          Intro                  Playlist 1
   2      Jan 28, 30         “Give Peace a Chance”: Playlist 2      Quiz/Prompt
                             The Beatles, John
                             Lennon and the         Documentary
                             Modern Pop Star        Film: “The U.S.
                             Activist               vs. John
                                                    Lennon”
                                                    Pop Star
                                                    Activist
                                                    Celebrity
                                                    Influence:
                                                    Politics,
                                                    Persuasion
                                                    and Issue
                                                    Advocacy
                                                    (reader)
   3      Feb 4,6            Cont.                  Playlist 3      Quiz/Prompt
                                                    from Music
                                                    and Musicians
                                                    in the Service
                                                    of Social
                                                    Movements
                                                    (reader)
   4      Feb 11,13          “Say it Loud”: James   Playlist 4      Quiz/Prompt
                             Brown, Nina Simone     Documentary
                             and the Sound of Black Film: “What
                             Consciousness          Happened,
                                                    Miss Simone?”
                                                    “Letter from a
                                                    Birmingham
                                                    Jail” by MLK,
                                                    “Ballot or the
                                                    Bullet” by
                                                    Malcolm X
   5      Feb 18,20                                                 Exam 1
                                                                    Feb. 20


6  Feb 25, 27  “I Woke up Like This”: Playlist 5      Quiz/Prompt
               Intersectional         Readings TBA
               Feminism from Riot     “The Riot Grrrl
               Grrrl to Beyoncé       Manifesto”
                                      “Becoming the
                                      Third Wave”
7  March 4,6   Cont.                   Playlist 6     Quiz/Prompt
                                      Readings TBA
8  March 11,13 Cont.                  Playlist 7
                                      Readings TBA
   SPRING      BREAK                  SPRING          BREAK
9  March 25,27 “Born this Way”: Gay   Playlist 8      Quiz/Prompt
               Music Advocacy from
               Disco to Drag Race
10 April 1,3                          Playlist 9      Quiz/Prompt
11 April 8,10  International                          Exam 2
                                                      April 10
12 April 15,17 International          Playlist 10     Quiz/Prompt
13 April 22,24 “Revolution” Case      Playlist 11     Quiz/Prompt
               Study
14 April 29    TBA                    Playlist 12     Quiz/Prompt
   May 1
15 May 6,8                                            FINAL PLAYLIST
                                                      DUE
