                                  Nationalism in the Caribbean
                               African and African Diaspora Studies 374E
                                          HIS 363K, LAS 366
                                          (30173, 38386, 38877)
                                                Fall 2019
Instructor: Dr. Mónica A. Jiménez
Email: Via Canvas
                                       Course Description:
This course takes a broad view of the concept of nationalism and seeks to trace its manifestations
throughout the circum-Caribbean during the 20th century. The term circum-Caribbean is defined
broadly in order to include not only the island-nations of the region, but also their diasporic
communities within the United States. Throughout the 20th century the region saw episodes of great
political upheaval and violent tumult. This course will explore the various factors that led to the growth
of revolutionary nationalism in the region as well as the movements that arose as a result of these
tensions. We will discuss nationalism from a theoretical and global perspective as well as through case
studies of specific Caribbean and diasporic communities. Particular attention will be paid to the role
of US hegemony in the rise of nationalist ideology.
This course carries the Independent Inquiry, Global Cultures and Writing Flags.
                                          Learning Goals
Students will encounter the broad arc of 20th century Caribbean history while engaging specific
moments that have helped shape the region’s present. Students will gain a sense of historical
processes of change over time, and a broad methodology for assessing how events and
experiences influence the choices people make, what they believe is possible, and how these
inform human activity today. Through this engagement students will strengthen analytical and
critical thinking skills, while also developing and deepening their reading comprehension and
writing skills.


                                  How to Succeed in the Class
    •   Attend all classes. Come prepared and be on time.
    •   Do all the readings and assignments.
    •   Substantively participate.
    •   Start all assignments in advance of the deadline—especially the final project—and do your
        best!
    •   If you need help, seek it early. We are here to support you and there are many university
        resources at your disposal. (See the “Syllabus Addendum” on Canvas for more information).
Grade Breakdown
Active Class Participation                     20%
2 Response Papers – (15% each)                 30%
RESEARCH PROJECTS                              50%
    • Consultation and planning (10%)
    • Paper (25%)
    • Oral Presentations (15%)
Guidelines for all assignments, including the papers, will be posted to Canvas.
Expectations and Assignments:
ATTENDANCE AND ACTIVE CLASS PARTICIPATION (20%): The success of this course
requires your consistent presence in class as well as your contribution to class discussion.
Each student is expected to attend class, participate in discussions, and complete all reading and
writing assignments by the deadlines indicated in this syllabus or any written addenda. Class
discussions are an important component and students will be graded on their participation,
contributions to discussions and engagement with their peers. Please see the “Course Policies”
section below for class attendance policy.
RESPONSE PAPERS (15% each):
Students are expected to write two thoughtful 3-page response papers to the readings. For response
paper #1, you should choose a reading from weeks 2-7. For response paper #2, you will respond to
the readings, guest lecture and symposium held in week 9.
RESEARCH PROJECTS – (50%)
    • Consultation and annotated bibliography (10%)
    • In-class Presentations (15%)
    • Paper (25%)
Students will engage an in depth research project based on archival research, using primary sources
and centered on a topic of your choice. Your research projects will entail a four-step process: 1)
Submission of a proposed research topic, 2) Submission of an abstract with an annotated bibliography,


3) a 7 minute in class presentation at the conclusion of the semester, and 4) submission of a 12 page
paper.
Deadlines:
Response Paper # 1 (3 pages): October 17 by 2:00 pm
Response Paper #2 (3 pages): November 7 by 2:00 pm
Research Projects:
     • Research Topics: October 4 by 11:59 pm
     • Abstract and Annotated bibliography: October 25 by 11:59 pm
     • Annotated Outline: November 22 by 11:59 pm
     • In-Class Presentations: Nov. 28, Dec. 3 and 5
     • Final Drafts: Dec. 13 by 11:59 pm
** All assignments will be turned in via Canvas.
Readings:
All readings are available on Canvas unless otherwise noted.
                                           Course Schedule
The professor reserves the right to deviate or modify parts of this schedule. All changes will include
notice and any modified syllabi will be posted on Canvas.
NB – Please prepare all readings for Tuesday’s class.
                                               Week One
August 29, Welcome and Course Overview
                                              Week Two
September 3 and 5,
Lillian Guerra, “Why Caribbean History Matters.”
Benedict Anderson, Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origins and Spread of Nationalism, Introduction
and Ch. 8.
                                             Week Three
September 10 and 12,
Max Bergholz, “Thinking the Nation”
José Itzigsohn and Matthias vom Hau, “Unfinished Imagined Communities: States, Social
Movements, and Nationalism in Latin America.”
                                              Week Four
September 17 and 19,
Franklin Knight, The Caribbean: The Genesis of Fragmented Nationalism, Excerpts
Winston James, “Culture, Labor and Race in the Shadow of US Capital”
                                               Week Five
September 24 – Visit the Benson Latin American Collection
We will meet at the Benson Library (SRH 1.109) for a visit with an archivist there.


September 26 – UWC Presentation: Writing the Research Paper
Intro to Research Projects: Citation, Annotated bibliography and Annotated Outline
                                                Week Six
October 1 and 3,
Ronald Harpelle, “Crosscurrents in the Western Caribbean: Marcus Garvey and the UNIA in Central
America.”
Film Excerpt: Marcus Garvey: Look for Me in the Whirlwind
Aime Cesaire, Discourse on Colonialism, Excerpt
                                              Week Seven
October 8 and 10,
Edward Paulino, Dividing Hispaniola: The Dominican Republic’s Border Campaign Against Haiti,
1930-1961, “Introduction”
Ana-Maurine Lara, “A Smarting Wound: Afro-Dominicanidad and the Fight against Ultranationalism
in the Dominican Republic.”
                                              Week Eight
October 15 and 17,
Pedro Albizu Campos, Free Puerto Rico
André Lecours and Valérie Vezina, “The Politics of Nationalism and Status in Puerto Rico”
Jorge Duany, “A Postcolonial Colony?: The Rise of Cultural Nationalism in Puerto Rico during the
1950’s”
                                               Week Nine
October 22
José Atiles, “The Anti-Corruption Code for the New Puerto Rico”
Marisol Lebrón, “The Protests in Puerto Rico Are About Life and Death”
The Intercept Podcast: “Hurricane Colonialism: The Economic, Political, and Environmental War on
Puerto Rico” available on Spotify, Apple Podcast and at
https://theintercept.com/2018/09/19/hurricane-colonialism-the-economic-political-and-
environmental-war-on-puerto-rico/
October 24 – In-Class Guest Lecture
     • Dr. José Atiles, Visiting Assistant Professor University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Saturday, October 26 – Puerto Rican Studies Association Symposium
                                               Week Ten
October 29
Franz Fanon, The Wretched of the Earth, Excerpt
October 31 – In-class Guest Lecture
     • Beth Colon, Doctoral Candidate in African and African Diaspora Studies
                                             Week Eleven
November 5
Jacqueline Lazú, “The Chicago Young Lords: (Re)constructing Knowledge and Revolution”
Iris Morales, Through the Eyes of Rebel Women, Excerpt
November 7


Film: Palante, Siempre Palante: The Young Lords
                                               Week Twelve
November 12 and 14,
Grenada: Revolution and Invasion, excerpt
Maurice Bishop, “We Proudly Share the Noble Dreams of Martin and Malcolm”
Film: House on Coco Road
                                               Week Thirteen
November 19 – Class Discussion: What is Nationalism in 2019?
November 21 – Final Presentations
                                               Week Fourteen
November 28 and 28 – No Class – Happy Thanksgiving
                                               Week Fifteen
December 3 and 5 – Final Presentations
December 13 – Final Papers Due by 11:59 pm
                                      Class Policies and Procedures
Grading Policy and Distribution
Please note that this class will utilize plus and minus options for final grades. Your grade will be
determined based of this scale.
A 94-100; A- 90-93; B+ 87-89; B 83-86; B- 80-82; C+ 77-79; C 73-76; C- 70-72
Policy on Absences
Students are expected to attend all classes, to come prepared, and be on time. 20% of your
grade for this class depends on participation and attendance. The first three absences do not affect
your grade. The fourth unexcused absence and every one thereafter will deduct 2 points (out of the
20 possible) from the attendance grade in the class. You are responsible for keeping track of your
absences. If you are late three times, it will be counted as an absence. If for some reason, you will
miss class or are running late, please let the TA know in advance. Absences will only be excused if you
discuss it with the TA in advance, or you turn in medical documentation.
Readings and Electronic Device Policy
Readings will be posted on Canvas at least one week prior to class. Cell phone use will not be
tolerated in class. Please keep your cellphone silenced and in your pocket or bag. DO NOT text in
class or use social media. If you bring your computer to access the readings, I respectfully request that
you focus on the class content and not on other websites or documents unrelated to our work in class.
Policy on late work


Assignments should be turned in on time. Extensions will be granted for extenuating circumstances
only. If you require an extension speak with the TA or me before the assignment is due. Late work
will be handled on a case-by-case basis. Work that is turned in late will be subject the point deductions.
