                                                    LAT f506-WB
                                                  First-Year Latin I
                                                   Unique #79255
UT Instructor: Caolán Mac An Aircinn (he/him/his)
Email: cpm2245@utexas.edu
Online Zoom Office Hour: M 3-4, TBD
Teaching Assistant: Grace Gibson (she/her)
Email: gdgibson@utexas.edu
Online Zoom Office Hour: Wednesdays, 6 - 7 pm and Thursday, 10 - 11 am
UEX Instructor: Dr. Steven Lundy (pronouns: he/him/his)
Email: steven.lundy@utexas.edu
Online Office Hours: By appt
Office: WAG 227
Course Websites: Canvas, Piazza, Memrise
Required Course Materials
   •M. Wheelock, Wheelock’s Latin, 7th ed. Harper Collins, 2011. ISBN: 978-006-1997228.
   •H. Groton and J.M. May, 38 Latin Stories. Bolchazy-Carducci, 2003. ISBN: 978-0865162891.
   •Email account connected to Canvas: You are responsible for any announcements posted on Canvas.
   •Accounts with the following platforms: Piazza and Memrise
   •Optional: If you want a review of the foundations of English grammar, a good book to purchase is N.W.
   Goldman, English Grammar for Students of Latin: The Study Guide for Those Learning Latin
   •Optional: A Latin dictionary, although phone apps (e.g., SPQR) and online resources (e.g.,
   Archimedes.fas.harvard.edu/pollux) make paper dictionaries redundant.
   •Optional: Liberation Philology Latin App; it costs in and around $5 on the app store, but comes with a built in
   system for studying vocabulary and morphology which will make your life a great deal easier. I've had great
   success using LP apps to learn Greek.
   •Optional: Anki flashcards app. This is excruciatingly expensive for iPhone users, but free for Android users,
   as I recall; it enables you to make your own flashcards and refer to them quickly and easily.
Course Description


This course will introduce the foundations of Latin vocabulary, grammar, and syntax to the beginning Latin
student. We will work our way through Wheelock’s Latin, chapters 1-25, covering around two-thirds of the
textbook and bringing the student around halfway to intermediate competency (when the student becomes able
to read unabridged Latin texts with assistance). Students will be graded according to work in midterms, online
course modules, language and culture assignments, and vocabulary exercises. (To clarify, there are two exams in
this course, and they are both called “midterms” even though the second one is at the end of the semester.)
This is a fully online course. Students are not required to attend class on campus at any time during the semester
except for midterms (which can be taken at a designated testing center with instructor approval). Students will,
however, have opportunities to interact with the instructor and other students in collaborative online exercises and
through Piazza (an online discussion board).
Students who achieve a C or higher (not a C-) in this course will have demonstrated sufficient mastery of the
Latin language to advance to First-Year Latin II (LAT 507) or the equivalent at other institutions.
Course Assessment
a. Assessment Activities (see below for explanations of each activity)
    •Midterms: 40%
    •Quizzes and Worksheets: 30%
    •Language and Culture Assignments: 20%
    •Participation and Vocabulary: 10%
b. Midterms (40%)
Students will complete TWO midterms, which will emphasize translation and comprehension (with some
composition). These will be held fully online. Students are advised to note the midterm dates ahead of time and
anticipate any scheduling conflicts by discussing them with the instructor at the earliest opportunity. Make-ups are
only permitted in the instance of a medical or family emergency or religious holiday (on religious holidays, see
below), or if there is a legitimate, documented time conflict.
Midterm dates
    •Exam 1: Monday, June 22
    •Exam 2: July 10 or 11 (during finals period – the date and time are TBD)
c. Quizzes and Worksheets (30%)
Nine modules will be released and completed throughout the course of the semester. In general, two modules are
due per week, one on Wednesday at 11:59 pm and the other on Saturday at 11:59 pm. (Please see the course
schedule below for more information on due dates). Each module contains two types of quizzes that will count
towards your overall quiz grade:
    •Learning quizzes
    •Module quiz (also called a summary quiz)
There will be several learning quizzes for each module. Learning quizzes do NOT have a time limit,
so you can work at your own pace. However, you will only get TWO attempts to take these quizzes,
and your score for each quiz will be the AVERAGE of your two attempts. Therefore, you should try
your best at each attempt.
There will be one module (or summary) quiz for each module. Module quizzes DO have a time limit and are
meant to test your comprehension of material covered in the entire module. You will have TWO attempts at this


quiz, but you will receive different questions with each attempt. The HIGHEST score that you receive out of the
two attempts will count toward your overall quiz grade.
In addition, there will be one worksheet assignment each week due on Wednesdays that will count toward your
quiz grade. These worksheet assignments will often ask you submit your own translation of a passage of Latin
and answer grammar, comprehension, and composition questions. The student will receive a score and feedback
from the instructor.
(Note: After the module deadline has passed, access to all module content will remain available for students so
that they can continue to review the material throughout the course of the semester. However, additional attempts
at the quizzes made after the deadline has passed will not be considered for grading purposes. See below, “Late
Work.”)
d. Language and Culture Assignments (20%)
Throughout the semester, students will complete assignments which will assess their abilities in reading
comprehension, translation, and composition. These assignments will center around a substantial reading in Latin
and typically will include a collaborative element (web annotations and passage translation) as well as a
worksheet to be completed individually. These assignments are typically due on Sundays at 11:59pm.
e. Participation and Vocabulary (10%)
Active participation in online work will constitute 10% of your overall grade. This grade will calculated based on
your work in weekly collaborative translation assignments, which will be due on Saturdays at 11:59pm each week
and your work learning Latin vocabulary via the Memrise app. The translation assignments will ask students to
collaborate with other students on translating a Latin passage which will be shared with other members of the
class. Vocabulary mastery will be assessed using Memrise, a language app that will help you work on vocabulary
memorization. New vocabulary courses will be released on this app each week and you will have to complete at
85% or higher to get credit for this part of your work.
f. Grade Reporting
All scores will be reported on Canvas’ “Grades” function at the earliest opportunity after the return of the
assessment item. In general, students are responsible for ensuring their scores are recorded correctly, and
informing the instructor if there is a discrepancy.
g. Late Work
Students may submit work late twice in the semester without penalty, as long as the work is submitted within 48
hours of the original deadline. Thereafter, all late work will be given a zero.
h. Grade Allocations
Your final percentage grade will be translated into a letter grade according to the following table. I round to the
nearest full percentage (e.g., 92.5=93). Please note the unusual point allocations in the C-F range.
100-93: A
92-90: A-
89-87: B+
86-83: B


82-80: B-
79-78: C+
77-75: C
74-72: C-
71-70: D+
69-68: D
67-65: D-
Below 65: F
If you are taking this course on a pass/fail or credit/no credit basis, you must earn at least a 65 to receive credit
for the course. Note: If you take the class on a credit/no credit basis or if you are taking the course pass/fail, you
will not be able to advance to the next level of Latin (LAT507) regardless of your overall grade in the course.
Contacting the Instructors
The instructors will check email for this course during designated email hours (M-F, 8am-5pm). Under normal
circumstances, instructors will reply within 24 hours to emails that are received during those times. Emails sent
during the weekend may not receive an answer until Monday, but we will do our best to be responsive to urgent
matters.
The instructors expect professional and proper format on all emails. Emails without salutations/greetings (Dear…)
or appropriate formatting (punctuation, complete sentences, etc.) will not be answered.
Often, your queries can be best addressed by referring them to the class, where they will be most helpful to other
students. Therefore, if you have questions about course logistics (e.g., What is the homework? When is the next
assignment/midterm? What is going to be covered on the midterm?), you are advised to follow this procedure:
     •First, check the syllabus, the Canvas announcements page, and associated pages, like module instruction
     pages.
     •If that doesn’t work, post your question to Piazza for a fellow student or one of the instructors to answer.
     •If your question is not urgent, you can bring it to the instructor’s office hours. If you can’t make these
     sessions, contact your instructor and schedule an alternate meeting time.
     •If you still have a question after pursuing these avenues, or the question is more urgent, email the instructor;
     if your question can be answered by consulting Canvas, the syllabus, etc., the instructor will direct you to
     those resources.
Piazza would also be a great place to discuss content-related issues, as well as any other related course matters
you may have discovered as you work through the course.
Since this is a fully online course, technology-related issues can sometimes be a problem. We invite students
experiencing technology-related issues to report them through the affected platform itself (e.g., Canvas or
Piazza).
Urgent and/or sensitive matters, including issues with grade reporting, should be addressed directly to the
instructor.
Other Course Policies
Conduct
Students are expected to behave in a civil and courteous manner towards other class members, both in face-to-
face and online environments.
To encourage this, we require that you agree to an etiquette policy, stating your willingness to abide by these
standards and awareness of the consequences of their transgression. If you are found to be in violation of these


standards, you will receive a written warning from the instructor. If you continue to violate these standards, we will
ban you from the platform in question (e.g., Piazza), pending a disciplinary discussion with the instructional team.
Further issues will be reported to the relevant authorities.
If you are worried about the way someone is acting, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL) to
discuss your concerns by phone. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and the
University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
                                                                                                                     (
Academic Honesty
                                                                                                                     L
Academic dishonesty in any form will not be tolerated. Please familiarize yourself with the University of Texas’s    i
Code of Conduct: “The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, n
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these    k
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect towards peers and community.”
                                                                                                                     s
Any student caught or facilitating cheating on any assignment will receive an F in the course and immediately be
referred to the Dean of Students. In cases where dishonesty is strongly suspected, I reserve the right to re- t
examine the student(s). I will however, assume absolute integrity on your part until shown otherwise. If you are     o
unsure what constitutes academic dishonesty,
see http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php. It is your responsibility to become familiar
                                                                                                                     a
with the contents of this website.
                                                                              (                                      n
Plagiarism
                                                                              L
                                                                              i                                      e
An important and complicated concern within Academic Honesty is plagiarism.   n        Over time, informal resourcesxand
study guides to our course texts have emerged on the web, and these k
                                           (                             ( are of varying quality and invariably t
contain errors and misconceptions about the work. Nonetheless, students are frequently tempted to copy these
                                           L                             L s
resources and represent them as their own work. This is plagiarism, and is expressly forbidden by UT’s               e
standards of conduct. We have developed    i     sophisticated systems ifor detecting this, and any student caught   r
                                           n
plagiarizing will receive a 0 for that assignment.   A second offense will    t
                                                                         n be considered cheating, and the student   n
will receive an F and be referred to the Dean of Students.
                                           k                             k    o                                      a
                                           s                             s                                           l
Students with Disabilities
                                                                              a
The University of Texas at Austin provides
                                                                              n
                                           t upon request appropriatet academic                                      s
                                                                                       adjustments for qualified students
                                           o
with disabilities. For more information, contact   the Dean of Studentsoat (512)-471-6259 or                         i
                                                                              e
see http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. In order to receive accommodations,      you must be registered with
                                                                                                                     t
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD). This office will document xyour disability, inform me of your situation,
                                           a
and instruct me on the necessary accommodations.          If you chose nota to register with SSD, I cannot make special
                                                                                                                     e
accommodations for you.                    n                             n    t                                      .
                                                                              e                                      )
Religious Holidays                         e                             e    r
                                           x                             x n
According to Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code, students shall          be excused from attending classes or
                                           t                             t a
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for
                                           e exams) to celebrate a ereligious
that purpose. If you will miss class (including
                                                                              l     holiday, you must notify me AT
LEAST 14 days prior to the holiday so that r we can make arrangements    r for you to make up the assignment. All
make-up work must be completed no later                                  n s class.
                                           n than one week after the missed
                                           a                             a i
University Resources
                                           l                             l t
                                                                              e
The University of Texas has numerous resources for students. Here are just a few:
                                           s                             s .
     •Sanger Learning and Career Center: https://ugs.utexas.edu/slc
                                           i                             i )
                                           t                             t
                                           e                             e
                                           .                             .
                                           )                             )


•Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
•Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
                                                       (
   •if you need urgent help, you can call 512-471-CALL L (2255)
                                                             ( 24 hours a day, 365 days a year
   •if you have concerns about a student, faculty, or staff
                                                       i member,
                                                             L    you may use the Behavior Concerns
   Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
                                                       n     i
•Student Veteran Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/veterans/     (
                                                       k     n
•Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
                                                                      ( L
                                                       s     k
                                                                      L i
                                                             s
                                                                      i n
                                                       t
                                                                      n k
                                                       o     t
                                                                      k s
                                                             o
                                                                      s
                                                       a
                                                       n     a            t
                                                                      t o
                                                             n
                                                                      o
                                                       e
                                                       x     e            a
                                                                      a n
                                                       t     x
                                                                      n
                                                       e     t
                                                       r     e            e
                                                                      e x
                                                       n     r
                                                                      x t
                                                       a     n
                                                                      t e
                                                       l     a
                                                                      e r
                                                             l
                                                                      r n
                                                       s
                                                                      n a
                                                       i     s
                                                                      a l
                                                       t     i
                                                                      l
                                                       e     t
                                                       .     e            s
                                                                      s i
                                                       )     .
                                                                      i t
                                                             )
                                                                      t e
                                                                      e .
                                                                      . )
                                                                      )
