      PUBLIC COPY – See Canvas Course Site for Full Syllabus and Detailed Schedule
ANS 302C/HIS 302C Introduction to China                                  Dr. Chiu-Mi Lai
Fall 2019
MWF 11-12
RLP 1.104
               INTRODUCTION TO CHINESE CULTURE AND CIVILIZATION
Office Hours:
Teaching Assistant:
         Required Text: (Available at University Co-op Bookstore)
Charles A. Desnoyers, Patterns of Modern Chinese History (Oxford, 2017)*
         *Readings for Weeks 1-2 only, available on Canvas/Modules
         Focused Discussion and Written Response selected from:
Zheng, Yangwen, Ten Lessons in Modern Chinese History – From the Opium Wars to the
         Olympic Games (available on Canvas) (Oxford, 2018)
[Additional readings on Canvas/Course Documents]
         Recommended:
Rana Mitter, Modern China: A Very Short Introduction (Oxford, 2016)
Evan Osnos, Age of Ambition – Chasing Fortune, Truth, and Faith in the New China (Farrar,
         Straus, and Giroux, 2014)
Jeffery N. Wasserstrom and Maura Elizabeth Cunningham, China in the 21st Century – What
         Everyone Needs to Know 3rd edition (Oxford, 2018)
Course Description:
This course will provide an introduction to major concepts and ideas from Chinese cultural
traditions to construct a course inquiry into understanding Chinese culture and society. A guiding
principle in this course inquiry will be to investigate the past to help inform the present. The
overall course inquiry: How is the present informed by an understanding of the past? How has
the past shaped the present geopolitics?
Lectures and discussion will examine key concepts from art, history, language, literature, and
thought that greatly shaped, and continue to influence, “Chinese” cultural and geopolitical
entities.
Statement on Global Cultures Flag: This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are
designed to increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
                                                                                                                      1


       COURSE EXPECTATIONS
 This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
 There is no written final exam during the Final Exam period.
 Late assignments will not be accepted for credit. There is no make-up of quizzes, assignments or
  presentations. (In legitimate cases for missed exam/presentation, official documentation
  must be provided within 1 week. Acceptable documentation include those for medical
  emergency, sanctioned required organizational absences.)
 Laptop and Other Electronic Devices Use Policy – All devices must be turned off during
  class. Any use of these devices, including texting, websurfing, etc. will lead to dismissal from
  class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat offenders will result in a filing of a
  report of academic problems.
 Academic honesty is imperative. Acts of academic dishonesty will result in a failing grade.
 There is no official class attendance policy for this course but there are unannounced
  quizzes and graded discussion/participation exercises
               Attendance is vital for success in this course, in assimilating assigned readings and
       lectures, and I value your contribution to class discussion especially in the focused
       discussions. As well, lectures will be vital to flesh out ideas and concepts from readings and
       for discussion, all of which cannot be replaced by reading lecture outlines online.
  Religious Holidays – Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
  examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you will be given an
  opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the absence. It is the policy of The
  University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your instructors at least fourteen days prior to the
  classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to observe a religious holy day.
       Final Course Grade will be based on the following (see Canvas course site):
       I. 10%      Class and online discussion, participation and “preparedness”
                   ( unannounced reading quizzes, discussion/participation exercises)
       II. 50%     THREE Section Quizzes (Responses to Discussion and Reading Questions, based
                   on Lectures, Readings, Class Discussion)
       III. 20% ONE Written Response (2 pages) on Ten Lessons in Modern Chinese History
            [5% for attendance/participation in discussion of selected chapters for Focused
            Discussion sessions]
       IV. 15%     Section Quiz on Contemporary Geo-politics (Canvas Quiz)
              Please see Canvas: Course Guidelines (How to Study for This Course)
                                                                                                                    2


IMPORTANT DATES:
         Section Quizzes: 9/20, 10/4, 10/25
         Focused Discussion Sections (on Ten Lessons in Modern Chinese History)
              Attend one session (class time) in each group (sign up on Canvas/Groups):
          Group 1: Qing Dynasty and the Republic: 11/11, 11/13, 11/15
          Group 2: Modern China: 11/18, 11/20, 11/22
         Written Response due 11/25 by 11:59 p.m.
         Canvas Quiz: 12/9
SCHEDULE FOR FOCUSED DISCUSSION*
       *All Focused Discussion sessions are held during class time and in WCH 4.118
Week 12 11/11 Focused Discussion Sessions on the Qing Dynasty and the Republic
Attend ONE session this week (sign up on Canvas/People/Groups)
All chapters for discussion from Ten Lessons in Modern Chinese History (Canvas)
Monday        Discussion – Chapters 1-2 (Opium Wars, Taiping Rebellion)
Wednesday Discussion – Chapters 3-4 (Late Qing Reforms, Self-strengthening Movement)
Friday        Discussion – Chapters 5-6 (May Fourth Era, Warlord Era)
Week 13 11/18 Focused Discussion Sessions on Modern China
Attend ONE session this week (sign up on Canvas/People/Groups)
All chapters for discussion from Ten Lessons in Modern Chinese History (Canvas)
Monday        Discussion – Chapter 7 (Cultural Revolution)
Wednesday Discussion – Chapter 8 (Post-Mao China, Socialism with Chinese Characteristics)
Friday        Discussion – Chapter 9 (Women in Chinese Society)
                                                                                        3


ANS 302C/HIS 302C             Fall 2019 Schedule (See Canvas for Detailed Schedule)
INTRODUCTION TO CONCEPTS AND IDEAS IN CHINA’S CULTURAL HISTORY
      IMPORTANT DATES:
       Section Quizzes: 9/20, 10/4, 10/25, 12/9
       Focused Discussion Sections (Ten Lessons in Modern Chinese History)
       Attend one session (class time) in each group:
       1. Qing Dynasty and the Republic: 11/11, 11/13, 11/15
       2. Modern China: 11/18, 11/20, 11/22
      See Syllabus on Canvas for detailed Course Expectations
      See Weekly “Modules” on Canvas for detailed schedule and access to other
       readings, assignment submission links, and announcements
      Only Lecture Outlines are posted on Canvas/Course Files (link on Modules); full
       Lectures available in class only
      Recommended Lectures for background and supplementary information posted on
       Canvas/Course Files (link on Modules)
      Assignments due on Canvas/Assignments (link on Modules)
       No late submissions accepted. No make-up of quizzes or assignments
       (In legitimate cases for missed quizzes, official documentation must be provided
       within 1 week.)
      Unannounced reading quizzes, in-class informal writing and/or “Canvas video
       comments” on assigned readings and lectures (No make-up)
      “Core Reading” assignments listed by section/chapter in required course text:
       Charles A. Desnoyers, Patterns of Modern Chinese History (Oxford, 2017)
       (abbreviated as Patterns)
       Reading Tip: Consult “Timelines” pp. 4-6 and pp. 108-110; “Glossary” on pp. 403-415
      Focused Discussion Sections based on chapters in: ZHENG, Yangwen, Ten Lessons
       in Modern Chinese History (Oxford, 2018). (Optional text; chapters will be available
       on Canvas.)
      Additional Assigned and Supplementary Readings on Canvas/Course Files (link on
       Modules)
                           WEEKLY CLASS FORMAT (General)
Weeks 2-11
Mondays-Wednesdays: Lectures on Key Concepts for Designated Period
Fridays: Lecture/Discussion; Section Quizzes (with exception of final Section Quiz)
Weeks 12-13
Focused Discussion Sections – Groups of no more than 25 students per session in focused
discussion of assigned chapters from Ten Lessons in Modern Chinese History
Weeks 14-16 Lectures/Discussion – readings and media (contemporary)
                                                                                           4


Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is created for
each course. Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate online, to post
grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys.
You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements. As with
all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notifications
of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work.
However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs
close to the due date.
Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday
through Friday 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
The UT Library
The UT Library offers resource help and many services. The following link is for Undergraduate Students:
     Website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu
The Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing to UT
undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment. Location: PCL 2.330.
          Website: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual
opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these values through integrity,
honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
(Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students)
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is the
student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be
checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating
your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for checking
your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of the University, your e-
mail address in Canvas is your employee address.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an
official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                                                                                                                    5
