                                      Course Syllabus
                          Mindfulness, Compassion, and the Self
                                       Summer 2020
EDP W352K Unique number: 73894
Instructor: Dr. Marissa Knox
Class time: Tuesdays/Thursdays 4:00 - 6:00pm CT
e-mail: mcknox@utexas.edu
Office hours: Wednesdays 3:00 – 5:00pm CT & by appt.
Teaching Assistant:
Office Hours: By appt.
e-mail:
Course Objectives: The goal of this course is to give you an understanding of
mindfulness, self-compassion, compassion for others, and the nature of the self from
both a Western and Eastern perspective. Recent years have seen an explosion of
interest in these topics, as well as a dramatic increase of research studies on the
benefits of mindfulness and compassion for mental health. This course will not only
cover research into mindfulness and compassion, it will also provide you with first-hand
experiential knowledge of these states through meditation and other exercises
(meditation will be taught in a secular context). Because of the relevance of mindfulness
and compassion for our own lives, readings will be drawn from both academic and non-
academic sources, so that topics can be understood from each perspective. Video clips
will also be used to illustrate concepts. You will be expected to take responsibility for
your own learning process, which means taking an active part in making sense of the
readings, practicing the exercises, and participating in class discussions.
Class Format: In general, we will have about 45 – 60 minutes of lecture, a 5-minute
break, then 30 - 45 minutes of experiential exercises and small group discussion.
Class Notes: Notes from class lectures will be posted shortly after each class on
Canvas.
                                        Expectations
Class participation is important. The more you put into this course, the more you will get
out of it. Participation means that you come to class on time, stay until the end, and
contribute to activities and discussions in a professional manner. It also means that you
are not checking your phone or browsing on the web during class at any time, except
during a break. To prepare for class discussions, at a minimum you should complete the
assigned reading and be prepared to discuss it.


5 Agreements for Showing Up:
    1. Challenge yourself: Growth comes from leaving our comfort zones. It’s okay to
        feel confused and uncomfortable as you learn new things and pay attention to
        yourself and the world differently. Push yourself to listen more if you usually
        share, and to share more if you usually listen.
    2. Brave space: The exercises and practices we will explore in class and at home
        require vulnerability and courage to be honest with ourselves. We may make
        mistakes or misunderstand, and that is part of what makes us human.
    3. Speak from your experience. Avoid generalizing your personal experiences
        (i.e., say “I feel this way” or “My experience with X has been…” rather than “This
        is how it is for women”). We all have different intersections of identities that
        inform and influence our relationship with the world.
    4. Respect and accountability. Be open to multiple perspectives and experiences
        that are different from yours. Remember that everyone learns at their own pace
        and will be at different points in their understanding. In discussions, consider that
        the impact of what you share may be different from your intentions. Take
        responsibility for the effect of your actions and be patient with yourself and
        others. Don’t share other people’s stories.
    5. Self-care. This includes self-awareness, self-acceptance, and self-compassion.
        Ultimately, this is about paying attention and knowing yourself better so you can
        give yourself what you need. Make a commitment to care for yourself physically,
        mentally, and emotionally.
Reading Responses: Reading responses will be written responses to 1 – 3 prompts
about the readings that you will submit roughly once a week. These reading responses
are not intended to be overly burdensome. If you have done the readings, a response
should not take more than 10 minutes.
Observation Papers: These will be a series of three short papers that report on the use
of a particular assigned home practice (see home exercises on Canvas). There will be
one paper on mindfulness, one on self-compassion, and one on compassion for others.
In the papers, students will discuss and define the class topic related to the practice,
describe their personal experience of using the practice, and consider how the practice
impacted their daily life experience. (See observation papers assignment on Canvas).
Observation papers will be submitted through Canvas.
Class Exams: The exams will contain multiple choice, fill-in-the-blank, and short
answer questions. The second exam will be mostly focused on material from the second
half of the course but will have a few questions that are drawn from material in the first
half of the course. Study guides will be provided before the exams.


Canvas: All electronic materials used for this course will be available on Canvas.
Grades for all examinations and assignments will also be available on Canvas. Please
access the training for students (http://edutech.ctl.utexas.edu/students/) for help with
setting up your account and navigating the system. You will also be responsible for
checking the Canvas course site regularly for announcements, and copies of the class
notes. As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well
as unanticipated disruptions, so plan accordingly.
Grading System:
    • 10% for class participation - Since there are eleven days (not including the
       introduction day) with live/synchronous classes you can miss one of the eleven
       class days without penalty or else get extra credit.) If you need to make up a
       missed live class due to extenuating circumstances, please email Dr. Knox for a
       corresponding assignment.
    • 10% for completing reading responses and home practice activities
    • 10% for each of the three observation papers (30% total)
    • 20% for the first exam
    • 30% for the second exam
The following scale will be used to determine grades:
    A       93-100      C+          77-79
   A-        90-92       C          73-76
   B+        87-89       C-         70-72
    B        83-86       D          60-69
   B-        80-82       F       Below 60%
NOTE: Decimals will be rounded up (e.g., 92.3% = 93%)
Required text: Neff, K. D. (2011). Self-Compassion. New York: William-Morrow.
(Available from local bookstores (check indiebound.org or bookshop.org), as well as
Barnes and Noble, Amazon, and other booksellers.) All other assigned readings are
available on Canvas as PDFs.
Highly Recommended (but not required): Neff, K. D. & Germer, C. K (2018). The
Mindful Self-Compassion workbook: A proven way to accept yourself, find inner
strength, and thrive. New York: Guilford Press.


         Date               Topic                  Readings              Due this week
  June 4 - LIVE   Introduction             Syllabus
  June 9 - LIVE   What is mindfulness?     Kabat-Zinn, 1994
  June 11 - LIVE  Developing Mindfulness   Siegel, 2010
                                                                    Reading and Home
  June 16         Practice                                          Practice Response due
                                                                    by midnight
                                           Shapiro & Carlson, 2009
                  Research on                                       Observation Paper #1
  June 18 - LIVE                           Hassed & Chambers,
                  Mindfulness                                       Due by midnight June 21
                                           2014
                  What is self-
  June 23 - LIVE                           Neff, 2011 (Ch. 1 – 5)
                  compassion?
                                                                    Reading and Home
  June 25         Practice                                          Practice Response due
                                                                    by midnight
                  Self-compassion:         Neff, 2011 (Ch. 7-8, 12-
  June 30 - LIVE
                  Theoretical Issues       13)
                                                                    Reading and Home
  July 2          Practice                                          Practice Response due
                                                                    by midnight
  July 7          Exam 1
                  Self-Compassion          Gilbert, 2009
  July 9 - LIVE
                  Interventions            Germer & Neff, 2013
                  Self-Compassion
  July 14 - LIVE                           Neff, 2012
                  Research
                                                                    Reading and Home
                                                                    Practice Response by
  July 16         Practice                                          midnight (July 16);
                                                                    Observation Paper #2
                                                                    Due by midnight July 18
                                           Feldman, 2005
  July 21 - LIVE  What is compassion?
                                           Keltner, 2004
                                                                    Reading and Home
  July 23         Practice                                          Practice Response due
                                                                    by midnight
                                           Salzberg, 1997
  July 28 - LIVE  Developing Compassion
                                           Lasater & Kinyon, 2014
                                           Davidson, 2012
  July 30 - LIVE  Compassion Research
                                           Shapiro & Sahgal, 2012
                                                                    Reading and Home
  August 4        Practice                                          Practice Response due
                                                                    by midnight
                                           Batchelor, 1997          Observation Paper # 3
  August 6 - LIVE Empty Self
                                           Kornfield, 1993          Due by midnight Aug. 8
                                                                    Reading and Home
  August 11       Practice                                          Practice Response due
                                                                    by midnight
  August 13       Exam 2
LIVE: indicates we will be meeting synchronously and the expectation is for you to attend the
live class.
NOTE: Exact readings and assignments are subject to change. Any changes will be announced
through Canvas at least 24 hours in advance.


                                 University Requirements
Accommodation Policy: The University of Austin provides upon request appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information,
contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 512-471-6259, TTY 512-471-6441.
Religious Holy Day Observance: If an assignment or exam falls due on a day when
you are observing a religious holy day, we will work with you to find a time to submit the
work.
Plagiarism: As a research university, the University of Texas at Austin takes plagiarism
very seriously. You may read about plagiarism at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/academicintegrity.html.
June 9th - Last day to drop a first-term, nine-week, or whole-session class for a possible
refund. (See https://registrar.utexas.edu/calendars/20summer General
Information, Academic Policies and Procedures and Registration, Tuition, and Fees for
details.)
Behavior Concerns Advice Line: Use this resource to help fellow UT members
about which you have concerns BCAL: 512-232-5050
