          The University of Texas at Austin
        African and African Diaspora Studies
AFR 317D: The Politics of Black Identity – Unique #30585
                       Fall 2018


                                                              This course carries the flag for Cultural
                                                              Diversity in the United States. Cultural
Professor:       Kevin O. Cokley, Ph.D.                       Diversity courses are designed to
Office:          SZB 262N                                     increase your familiarity with the
Phone:           512-471-7498                                 variety and richness of the American
E-mail:          kcokley@austin.utexas.edu                    cultural experience. You should
                                                              therefore expect a substantial portion
Office Hours: T Th 1:00 – 2:00 pm or by appointment           of your grade to come from
Course Time: T Th 11:00 - 12:30 p.m.                          assignments covering the practices,
Location:        CMA 3.114                                    beliefs, and histories of at least one
TA:              Denzel Shabazz kingshabazz94@gmail.com       U.S. cultural group that has
                                                              experienced persistent
                                                              marginalization.
Required Texts and Readings:
1.       Baker, H. (2008). Betrayal: How Black Intellectuals have Abandoned the Ideals of the
         Civil Rights Era. Columbia University.
2.       Kennedy, R. (2008). Sellout: The Politics of Racial Betrayal. Vingate Books.
3.       Toure. (2011). Who’s Afraid of Post-Blackness? What It Means to Be Black Now. Free
         Press.
3.       Canvas Readings
I am black and happy to be so, but my identity is not my master. I’m my master. And I resent this
civil rights leadership telling me what I should think and what issues I should support this way or
that way. And that’s where, in black America, identity has become almost totalitarian... You
[must] subscribe to the idea that the essence of blackness is grounded in grievance, and if you
vary from that you are letting whites off the hook. And we’re gonna call you a sellout. We’re
gonna call you an ‘Uncle Tom’... I was gonna have a life or I was just going to be a kind of
surrogate for blackness... but you enter an exile where the group identifies you as someone who
is a threat, and part of being black is despising or having contempt for people like me.
Shelby Steele
Back during slavery….there were two kinds of Negroes. There was that old house Negro and the
field Negro. And the house Negro always looked out for his master. When the field Negroes got
too much out of line, he held them back in check. He put 'em back on the plantation. The house
Negro could afford to do that because he lived better than the field Negro. He ate better, he
dressed better, and he lived in a better house. And he loved his master more than his master
loved himself. But then you had some field Negroes, who lived in huts, had nothing to lose. They
wore the worst kind of clothes. They ate the worst food. And they caught hell. They felt the sting
of the lash. They hated their master. And today you still have house Negroes and field Negroes.
I'm a field Negro. Malcolm X


Course Description:
While a common bond through skin color is assumed among people identified as Black, there
exists a tremendous amount of diversity based on ethnicity, socio-economic status, values,
political ideology, and beliefs around racial allegiance. Throughout history there has existed a
tradition whereby Black individuals whose attitudes, behaviour, and politics differ from the
Black majority have been labeled as Uncle Toms, negros, sellouts, and various other denigrating
names. Underlying these labels is an orthodoxy of Black identity that prescribes what is, and
isn’t, authentic and normative Blackness. This course surveys the diversity and politics of Black
identities and critically analyzes the idea that the behaviors, attitudes, and philosophies of certain
Black celebrities, leaders, and intellectuals undermine or advance Black progress.
It is critically important that all assigned readings are completed prior to each class in order that
a high-level, scholarly discussion will ensue. The nature of the topics addressed in this course is
such that rote lecturing is minimized so that class discussion can take place. I expect that you
will come prepared every class to engage in a focused exchange of ideas related to the various
readings. I will facilitate these exchanges, making appropriate commentary as necessary.
Course Objectives: Upon completion of this course you will be able to:
          1. Identify the origins and meanings of terms such as Uncle Tom, negros and sellouts.
          2. Provide historical and contemporary examples of the tensions regarding Black identity
          politics.
          3. Identify and problematize representations of Black identity including “Soul Food” and
          notions of “Good Hair.”
          4. Provide a critical analysis of the use of incendiary and pejorative labels regarding
          Black identity politics.
Course Requirements:
1.        Student should come PREPARED TO EVERY CLASS having read class readings.
2.        There will be 2 REACTION PAPERS to the videos “Good Hair” and “Soul Food”. The
          reaction papers should be 2 full pages, double-spaced using Times New Roman 12 pt
          font and will be based on your personal reaction to the video. This paper should not just
          be a summary of the videos. The grading criteria for the reaction paper will be as follows:
                  30 points       clarity, organization, and grammatically correct; proofread!
                  30 points       quality of personal reactions; your reactions should be supported
                                  by specific examples from the video and should be a critical
                                  analysis of the issues presented. For example, a substantive
                                  reaction might be “I think it is problematic that individuals alter
                                  the natural state of their hair” or “I do not think people should be
                                  judged based on their hairstyle”.
3.        There will be 8 pop quizzes. Each quiz will consist of five multiple choice questions
          which will cover readings due for the day.


4.      There will be 4 journals. Each journal should be well-written, between 2-3 pages and
        will include your thoughts and reactions to the topics covered.
5.      In the interest of contributing to research, you are expected to participate in
        one research study. If you do not want to participate in the study, you can complete a
        4 page research paper.
6.      There will be several prominent celebrity case studies involving Black identity politics. I
        will serve as the prosecutor and the class will serve as the jury. After each brief
        presentation of the facts the class will break up into small groups and deliberate. Each
        group will present its verdict supported by its critical analysis of the facts.
6.      Consistent with the collectivistic orientation of Black culture, the final exam will be
        taken in small groups. Groups will be determined by the instructor.
Breakdown of Grades:
Points                  Requirement
60 points               2 Reaction Papers worth 30 points each
80 points               8 Pop Quizzes worth 10 points each
40 points               4 Journals worth 10 points each
10 points               Research Participation
10 points               Class Participation
100 points              Final Exam
Points
285-300 = “A”     270-284 = “A-”
265-269 = “B+”    255-264 = “B” 240-254 = “B-”
234-239 = “C+”     225-233 = “C” 210-224 = “C-”
204-209 = “D+”     195-203 = “D” 180-194 = “D-”
Do NOT ask me for an extra point if you are borderline (e.g., 239, 269) to boost your grade.
Attendance & Participation: This will be strictly enforced!
You are expected to attend and be prepared for every class period. Class discussion is usually
based on the readings in the course. Therefore, you are expected to be an INFORMED
participant in class discussion. You are allowed three absences (excused or unexcused) for the
course. More than 3 absences will affect your final grade:
Fourth Absence: Loss of one letter grade (The best grade you can make in the course is a “B”)
Fifth Absence: Loss of two letter grades (The best grade you can make in the course is a “C”)
Sixth Unexcused Absence: Loss of three letter grades (The best grade you can make in the
course is a “D”)
Seventh Unexcused Absence: Automatic grade of “F”
If you are absent on the day of a pop quiz, you will be allowed one opportunity (no
documentation needed) to make up the pop quiz. If you are absent more than once, you will


receive a 0 for each quiz (unless you have an excused absence from a doctor or some other
authority, or unless you can document circumstances related to a personal tragedy).
Religious Holidays:
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules. If you miss an
examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy day you
will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the
absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your
instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to
observe a religious holy day.
Policies
Carrying of Handguns
Students in this class should be aware of the following university policies:
     Individuals who hold a license to carry are eligible to carry a concealed handgun on
        campus, including in most outdoor areas, buildings and spaces that are accessible to the
        public, and in classrooms.
     It is the responsibility of concealed-carry license holders to carry their handguns on or
        about their person at all times while on campus. Open carry is NOT permitted, meaning
        that a license holder may not carry a partially or wholly visible handgun on campus
        premises or on any university driveway, street, sidewalk or walkway, parking lot, parking
        garage, or other parking area.
Please also review the following information:
     Students in this class who hold a license to carry are asked to review the university
        policies regarding campus carry:
            o Overview - https://utexas.app.box.com/v/cc-info-sheet-students
            o Full Policy - https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/campus-concealed-carry
       The instructor requests that students inform him if they intend to carry a handgun during
        course meetings. This information is requested because knowing which, if any, students
        are carrying handguns will help the instructor to effectively coordinate response to
        emergencies or threats to student safety. Disclosing this information is voluntary and at
        the discretion of the student.
       Per his right, the instructor prohibits carrying of handguns in his personal office (i.e.,
        SZB 538D). Note that this information will also be conveyed to all students verbally
        during the first week of class. This written notice is intended to reinforce the verbal
        notification, and is not a “legally effective” means of notification in its own right.


UT Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Academic Integrity
You and other students are expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of
individual honor in scholastic work" undertaken at the University (Sec. 11-801, Institutional
Rules on Student Services and Activities). This is a very basic expectation that is further
reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any
assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you
to: (1) acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts; (2) complete
your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in
preparing them; (3) follow instructions for assignments and exams, (4) observe the standards of
your academic discipline and (5) avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf
of yourself or another student.
Students found guilty of academic dishonesty (including all forms of cheating) will receive a
grade of 0 (note the academic dishonesty policy refers to all work and tests in the course, not just
exams). For further information about academic dishonesty, please visit:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Canvas:
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-
protected site is created for each course. The readings that do not come out of the texts will be
posted on Canvas. You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class
work and announcements. As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled
downtimes as well as unanticipated disruptions. Notification of these disruptions will be posted
on the Canvas login page. Scheduled downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if
there is an unscheduled downtime for a significant period of time, I will make an adjustment if it
occurs close to the due date. Canvas is available at http://courses.utexas.edu. Support is
provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday through Friday 8 am to 6 pm, so plan
accordingly.
University Email Notification Policy:
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student notification
policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or
her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in
order to stay current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this policy and instructions for updating your e-
mail address are available at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.In this course e-
mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for
checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements.


Disabilities:
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of the
Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641) TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester
and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days before an
exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will be
needed. See website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
TOPICAL CLASS SYLLABUS AND READINGS (*= textbook **= Canvas readings)
        Week 1 (8/30/18) Thursday
                       Introduction
                       “Uncle Tom”
                       ESPN Analyst Jalen Rose Documentary “The Fab Five”
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OlJHCvsSiMs
                        Grant Hill’s Response to Jalen Rose
                       https://thequad.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/03/16/grant-hills-response-to-
                       jalen-rose/
                       “Five ways to fix our community”
                       Don Lemon Agrees with Bill O’Reilly
                       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4z8EA_4YNvw
        Week 2 (9/04/18) Tuesday
                       Black Diversity
                       Reading #1: Black Diversity in Metropolitan America**
                       Reading #2: A Diverse and Divided Black Community**
                       Reading #3: Study Shows U.S. Blacks Trailing**
                (9/06/18) Thursday
                       Black Diversity
                       Reading #4: Toure “Tour(e)ing Blackness” - Foreword*
                       Reading #5: Toure “40 Million Ways To Be Black”*
                       Reading #6: Toure “Keep It Real Is a Prison”*
         Week 3 (9/11/18) Tuesday
                       Black Diversity
                       Video: Two Nations of Black America
                (9/13/18) Thursday Journal #1 Due
                       Video: 500 Years Later
                       Identity


              Education
              Reparations
Week 4 (9/18/18) Tuesday
              Uncle Toms, Negroes and Sellouts
              Reading #7: Randall Kennedy “Preface”, Ch. 1 “Who Is Black?”*
       (9/20/18) Thursday
              Uncle Toms, Negroes and Sellouts
              Reading #8: Randall Kennedy Ch. 2 “The Idea of the Sellout in Black
              American History*
Week 5 (9/25/18) Tuesday
              Uncle Toms, Negroes and Sellouts
              Reading #9: Randall Kennedy Ch. 3 “The Idea of the Sellout in
              Contemporary Black America*
        (9/27/18) Thursday
              Uncle Toms, Negroes and Sellouts
              Reading #10: Randall Kennedy Ch. 4 “The Case of Clarence Thomas”*
              p. 87-117
Week 6 (10/02/18) Tuesday Journal #2 Due
              Uncle Toms, Negroes and Sellouts
              Reading #11: Randall Kennedy Ch. 5 “Passing as Selling Out”*
              p. 118-143
       (10/04/18) Thursday
              Uncle Toms, Negroes and Sellouts
              Reading #12: Randall Kennedy “Epilogue”*
Week 7 (10/09/18) Tuesday
              Moral Dilemmas of Black Identity Politics – Case Studies
              Clarence Thomas and Anita Hill – Alleged Sexual Harassment
              Mike Tyson and Desiree Washington – Alleged Rape
              O.J. Simpson and Nicole Simpson – Alleged Murder
              R. Kelly and Minor – Alleged Child Pornography
              Chris Brown and Rihanna – Physical Abuse
       (10/11/18) Thursday
              BEEF: What Responsibility Do Black Artists Have? – Case Studies
              Spike Lee vs. Tyler Perry
              Angela Bassett vs. Halle Berry
              Aaron McGruder vs. BET


  Week 8 (10/16/18) Tuesday Journal #3 Due
                 Black on Black Intellectual Crime in Prime Time (Debates on Obama)
                 Cornel West and Tavis Smiley vs. Al Sharpton and President Obama
                 Steve Harvey vs. Cornel West and Tavis Smiley
          (10/18/18) Thursday
                 Black on Black Intellectual Crime in Prime Time (Debates on Obama
                 and Trump)
                 Michael Eric Dyson vs. Cornel West 
              https://newrepublic.com/article/121550/cornel-wests-rise-fall-our-most-
                 exciting-black-scholar-ghost
                 Paris Dennard vs. Keith Boykin (Joseph Pinion and Sara Sidner)
                 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zzKFR5aWTKo
  Week 9 (10/23/18) Tuesday
                 Barack Obama
                 Reading #13: Ron Walters “Barack Obama and the Politics of
                 Blackness”**
           (10/25/18) Thursday        
                 The Politics of Black Hair
                 Reading #14: Cynthia Robinson “Hair as Race: Why ‘Good Hair’ May Be
                 Bad for Black Females
  Week 10 (10/30/18) Tuesday
                 The Politics of Black Hair
                 Video: Chris Rock Documentary “Good Hair”
            (11/01/18) Thursday Black Hair Reaction Paper Due
                 The Politics of Black Hair
                 Video: Chris Rock Documentary “Good Hair”
  Week 11 (11/06/18) Tuesday Research Participation Due
                 Black Intellectual Beef: Betrayal
                 Reading #15: Houston Baker “After Civil Rights: The Rise of Black
                 Public Intellectuals*
            (11/08/18) Thursday
                 Black Intellectual Beef: Betrayal
                 Reading #16: Houston Baker “Have Mask, Will Travel: Centrists from
                 the Ivy League*
  Week 12 (11/13/18) Tuesday 7
                 Black Intellectual Beef: Betrayal
                 Reading #17: Houston Baker “A Capital Fellow From Hoover: Shelby
                 Steele”


         (11/15/18) Thursday Journal #4 Due
              Black Intellectual Beef: Betrayal
              Reading #18: Houston Baker “Reflections of a First Amendment
              Trickster: Stephen Carter”*
Week 13 (11/20/18) Tuesday
              Reading #19: Houston Baker “Man Without Connection: John
              McWhorter”*
         (11/22/18) Thursday
              Thanksgiving Break
Week 14 (11/27/18) Tuesday
              Soul Food and Black Cultural Identity
              Reading #20: Laretta Henderson “Ebony Jr! and ‘Soul Food’: The
              Construction of Middle Class African American Identity through the use
              of Traditional Southern Foodways”
      (11/29/18) Thursday Soul Food Reaction Paper Due
              Soul Food and Black Cultural Identity
              Video: Soul Food Junkies
Week 14 (12/04/18) Tuesday 
              Wrap-Up. Course Evaluations.
        (12/06/18) Thursday Final Exam
