                   THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                            SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
     Course Number:              UGS 302         Instructor’s Name:        Dr. Beth Pomeroy, PhD
                                                 TA’s Name:                bpomeroy@mail.utexas.edu
                                                                           Kara Peeples
                                                                           kara.peeples@utexas.edu
     Unique Number:               89015            Office Number:                  SSW 3.106b
         Semester:            Summer, 2019          Office Phone:                 512-232-3405
   Meeting Time/Place:            TWTH              Office Hours:           Tuesday or Thursday
                              11:30-2:00pm                                      before class or
                               SSW 2.116                                       by appointment
                 Separating Fact from Fiction in Mental Illness
                            Through Film and Literature
I. Standardized Course Description
         This course will give students an opportunity to explore and understand their
perceptions and beliefs about mental illness separating facts from fiction. We will
examine the myths and realities of mental illness as portrayed in literature and film
beginning with Lori Schiller’s, “The Quiet Room”. Students will explore the myths and
realities of emotional disorders and critically analyze works of literature and film in terms
of the perpetuation of stereotypes in our society. Prominent mental disorders such as
schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, and addictive disorders will be discussed and the impact
that media has on cultural beliefs about mental illness will be explored. The role of
family and community in caring for persons with emotional disorders will be discussed.
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and to read and discuss your peers’ work.
You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your
written work.
                                               1


II. Course Objectives: At the end of this course, students are expected to be able to:
1. Critically analyze and assess values and ethical dilemma’s regarding mental illness and
    those person affected by mental disorders.
2. Demonstrate and appraise diverse cultural, geographical, spiritual, ethnic, and
    psychosocial factors related to mental illness;
3. Demonstrate strategies designed to reduce discrimination and oppression regarding death
    and dying issues and explore the various determinants of grief and their impact on the
    tasks of mourning with various populations at risk;
4. Compare and contrast fiction from factual information regarding mental illness in film
    and literature.
5. Examine and critically evaluate various community referral networks for mental health
    services and treatment of persons with mental disorders.
6. Identify their own beliefs about mental and emotional disorders and contrast them with
    factual information about various disorders;
7. Critically evaluate and research issues related to emotional disorders.
8. Demonstrate the ability to analyze, synthesize and summarize through written expression
    the myths and realities of mental illness as portrayed through the media.
III. Teaching Methods:
    The teaching format will consist of experiential exercises, lectures, discussions, and
    audiovisual media to help students understand and integrate their own beliefs of death
    and dying into their social work practice. Throughout the course, students will be asked
    to focus on cultural influences that include gender, age, sexual orientation, spiritual
    beliefs, socio-economic, and language differences and individuals with developmental
    disabilities. Ethics and values associated with the dying process, death and grief reactions
    will also be examined throughout the course with a variety of populations.
IV. Required and Recommended Texts and Materials
     1.     Schiller, Lori. The Quiet Room.
     2.     Robison, John Elder. Look Me in the Eye: My Life with Asperger’s.
     3.     Articles on Trauma, (Available on Canvas)
                                                  2


 Course Requirements
This is a seminar, writing emphasis course, which means that contributions from each
student are needed to advance the learning process. In order to count as a substantial
writing component course, this Signature Course requires at least sixteen (16) pages of
written work during the semester. Students will be expected to come to class prepared to
participate in class learning. Here is a brief summary of how the course will work.
Students must accumulate credit for 1 University GEM. See Class Participation and
Attendance portion of the syllabus for more details.
The following course requirements will be completed during the semester, with points
given for each course requirement. Grading will be based on total points accrued by
the end of the course.
Assignment #1: Critical Analysis Paper
To achieve success in academia, you must be able to read, understand, integrate and
critique. Thus, to demonstrate your understanding, and to practice your technical
writing ability, you will submit a critical analysis for each section of work we cover in
class. This paper should be 6-8 pages long using APA formatting including a cover
page. It should cover class discussions, book chapters (and other readings) and films
that have been covered in class and as assignments. Potential analyses that could be
addressed will be handed out in class. You will submit via hardcopy in class the day it
is due.
Details concerning this assignment will be provided in class.           100 points
Assignment #2: Critical Analysis of Trauma Articles: This will be a 2-4 page
analysis paper using APA formatting including a cover page. Include analysis,
reactions and reflections and do not simply summarize the articles. You will submit via
hardcopy in class the day it is due.
                                                                        540 points
Writing Flag
You will also have the opportunity to revise Assignment #1 at the discretion of the
instructor.
Assignment #3: Group Research Presentation on Mental Health Issue
This assignment is designed to learn about a mental illness other than the ones
discussed in class. You will identify a specific disorder that you would like to research
and work collectively on the assignment. You will be required to meet outside of class
to complete the assignment and will receive a grade as a group. Group members will
decide how to divide the assignment as well as how to divide responsibilities for the
class presentation. The idea is to work cohesively as a team to put together the best
                                                3


presentation you can. Think of this as a TEAM CHALLENGE. Each group will have
forty five minutes for their presentation.
Details concerning this assignment will be provided in class.           100 points
Assignment #4: Final Critical Analysis and Integration Paper
This final paper will examine the issue of mental health/mental illness and integrate the
material from “Look Me In The Eye”, as well as other material covered during the
course of the semester. It will also include a section on self-reflection and insights
gained from your understanding and comprehension of the material both in class and
the material you have discovered through research and assignments. The goal of this
paper is to integrate what you have learned and to discuss the issue of societal
stereotypes and social stigma versus the facts about mental illness related to various
mental disorders. You will submit via Canvas the day it is due.
Details concerning this assignment will be provided in class.          100 points
Class Attendance and Participation:
Discussions will have two basic components. Each student will be given a chance to
comment about an aspect of the readings/movie that is important to him or her. This
could mean talking about what part of the readings/movie most impact or resonate with
you. It could mean taking issue with some aspect of the readings/film. I will assume that
everyone has completed the readings and is prepared to respond (we will be watching
films in class). So, come to class each week prepared to speak coherently about the
readings or watch a film with a critical eye. I will act as discussion leader, and
sometimes will provide informative notes and lecture material to supplement class
readings and discussion.
At the end of the semester I will judge your overall contribution to class discussion.
This portion of your participation grade will be based on your: (a) familiarity with
readings; (b) ability to hear and understand what others say; (c) ability to express
yourself clearly; (d) ability to synthesize the thoughts of others to form new insights,
conclusions, or questions; (e) ability to disagree constructively; (f) cooperation in
building a stimulating and supportive intellectual atmosphere in class; (g) ability to use
Socratic questioning; and (h) the accumulation of credit for a total of two University
lectures, other lectures or library session.
University GEMS gives students an opportunity to discovery the educational resources
on campus, as part of your participation grade. You will visit one of the GEMS of the
University (see website http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/sig/essentials/gems for more
information). Choose one educational resource such as The Ransom Center to
                                               4


attend. You are required to write a one-page reaction paper for a lecture or a GEM that
you attend, for which you will receive 10 points once the paper has been received.
In addition, all Signature course students are encouraged to attend one of the library
orientation sessions offered at various times during the semester. Information on the
regular library sessions held during the semester can be obtained from the library
through Sarah Brant, her email is s.brandt@austin.utexas.edu. The dates, times and
locations for the library sessions, time management sessions, Undergraduate Writing
Center sessions are provided at the following link:
http://www.utexas.edu/student/connexus/freshsem/2005thirdhour.html
Because a significant portion of your grade is based on class participation, it is obvious
that attendance is crucial; you cannot participate if you aren’t physically present.
Missed classes will be addressed on a case-by-case basis. If you have to miss a class
and have a good excuse, please let me know as soon as possible.
Writing Center: I strongly encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center,
FAC 211, 471-6222: http://uwc.fac.utexas.edu/). The Undergraduate Writing Center
offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by
appointment or on a drop-in basis. Any undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can
visit the UWC for assistance with any writing project. They work with students from
every department on campus, for both academic and non-academic writing. Whether you
are writing a lab report, a resume, a term paper, a statement for an application, or your
own poetry, UWC consultants will be happy to work with you. Their services are not
just for writing with “problems.” Getting feedback from an informed audience is a
normal part of a successful writing project. Consultants help students develop strategies
to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is intended to foster independence.
Each student determines how to use the consultant’s advice. The consultants are trained
to help you work on your writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your work
IV.      Grade distribution:
Attendance and Participation                      230 points
Critical Analysis Paper #1                      100 points
Trauma Articles Analysis Paper #2                540 points
Group Research Presentation #3                  100 points
Final Paper #4                                  100 points
TOTAL                                            370 points
IIV.     Academic Policies and Regulations
Grading
                                              5


A total of 370 points can be earned for this course, with percentage grading as
follows:
       95 – 100 = A
       90 – 94 = A-
       87 – 89 = B+
       84 – 86 = B
       80 – 83 = B-
       77 – 79 = C+
       74 – 76 = C
       70 – 73 = C-
       67 – 69 = D+
       64 – 66 = D
       60 – 63 = D-
       59 and below = F
Students should note that a considerable portion of your grade involves writing. An
inability to present clear and concise work will have an impact on the grade you
receive for the class. Cheating, plagiarism, and submitting the same assignment or
essay for two or more courses (without the permission of the instructors involved)
are classified as academic offenses and will be dealt with accordingly.
Each student should note that computer disks must be backed–up and you should
have hard copies of any data used/assignments completed. Computer hardware or
software problems WILL NOT be a valid reason for a late assignment. The group
paper and the individual assignments must be typed, as computer facilities are
available for every student.
Classroom Policies
The primary goal of the UT Austin is to prepare you for a beginning professional
career. As a result, it is important that you begin to demonstrate professionalism in
every aspect of your attendance, social interactions and academic performance. The
following guidelines should provide you with a general overview of what is
expected.
Class Attendance
One of the goals of the program is to provide students with a curriculum that will
adequately prepare them for beginning professional careers. In order to model
ethically appropriate practice, please treat coming to classes as you would treat
working at a job. Given the requirements for professional behavior, attendance for
all classes is required. More than one unexcused absence, excessive tardiness, or
patterns of leaving early may result in a reduction of the final grade. Students must
present a written excuse from a health care provider for excused absences due to
illness or other documentation as requested by the instructor for excused absences.
                                               6


If a student misses more than 3 classes - whether or not there is a documented,
excused absence – the student may receive a failing grade. Except in the case of
emergencies, and then only with the permission of the instructor, late assignments
will not be accepted without penalty. Students are expected to turn in all required
assignments on the Scheduled due date at the beginning of class. Students will lose
3 points for each day that an assignment is late. If the due date is a problem, the
student must see the instructor and negotiate another due date at least 24 hours
PRIOR to the regularly scheduled date.
Participation and Professionalism
A crucial component of professional college education relates to an understanding
of and adherence to a set of values and work ethics. Active participation in the
classroom setting facilitates clarification and understanding of these values and
ethics, as well as your comprehension of the materials the class covers. Given that
you are attending one of the top rated colleges in the country, students must practice
professional behavior in class. This includes participating constructively in class.
Students can demonstrate constructive participation in a variety of ways:
1.   Physical attendance at classes;
2.   Verbal involvement in class and group discussions;
3.   Active participation in role plays or other group exercises;
4.   Initiating discussion or bringing in information from assigned readings, other
         readings and/or experiences;
5. One-to-one dialogue with the instructor, inside or outside of class;
6. Written dialogue (email or paper); and
7. Timely submission of assignments.
When considering the quantity and quality of participation, the following issues
should be considered:
 An appropriate level of participation from each student is related to the number
of students in the class, the format of the class (e.g., lecture versus workshop), and
the desirability of conciseness;
 Respect the rights of others in the class, including privacy and safety (physical
and emotional);
 Good questions can include admitting one’s lack of knowledge about a subject
(if one person is feeling self-conscious about asking a question that may be seen as
“stupid”, there are probably several others in the class who want to know the same
thing);
 Students do not need to agree with statements made by the instructor or other
students, however, respect for differences should be shown. Students are
encouraged to think for themselves, ask challenging questions (in a respectful
manner), and arrive at their own understandings;
 Questions/comments which are not relevant to the class or which are stated
clearly in the materials can detract from the class and consume valuable time (e.g.,
                                               7


before asking, “Is that single-spaced or double-spaced?” and “When is the
assignment due?”, please check to see if these types of questions are covered in the
Course Syllabus).
 Students should respect for the dignity and self-worth of all individuals,
regardless of ethnicity, culture, nationality, race, religion, sexual orientation,
gender, disability, political belief, or other aspects of diversity.
 If a student is away due to illness or other reason, it is that student’s
responsibility to obtain notes, handout material, etc. from another student. The
student may also suggest ways that they can make up for time lost (e.g., if you miss
a class and you want to propose an extra assignment, such as a journaling exercise,
to make up for not being able to participate in the class).
 If you have concerns about the class, or recommendations for it, please make
these suggestions early so that they can be addressed and incorporated as early as
possible.
Classroom Conduct
a. Arriving on time for class; returning from break in a timely fashion. It is
important to demonstrate to your clients or colleagues that they are important to
you. Being prompt for all appointments is one way to demonstrate this professional
behavior. You should therefore be prompt for class.
b. Being prepared for class. As a professional you should be prepared for all
appointments and meetings. You can begin to demonstrate you ability to be
prepared by always being prepared for class.
c. Paying attention in class. As a professional you need to be an active listener to
appropriately understand the needs of your clients. This skill can be demonstrated
by being an active listener in class as well.
d. Remaining in class until the class is over or until the professor announces a
break. As a professional you are committed to treating your colleagues with
respect and courtesy. This can be demonstrated in class by treating faculty and
fellow students with respect and courtesy by remaining in class while it is in
session.
e. Handing in assignments in a timely fashion. It is of vital importance to your
clients that you meet deadlines. This can be demonstrated in class by completing
the required readings by the dates listed in the syllabus and turning in papers and
projects by the expected due dates.
f. Demonstrating respect for the opinions of others. Professionals should be
tolerant of different points of view. In practice, this applies to clients and
colleagues. In the classroom, this can be demonstrated by the manner in which we
respect the opinions of faculty and fellow students.
                                                8


Academic Irregularities
The following shall constitute academic irregularities:
1. The use of materials and devices such as notes, books, calculators, etc., while
taking an examination, unless specifically authorized by the instructor from or to
other persons while taking an examination unless specifically authorized by the
instructor--acts defined as cheating.
2. The presentation of works or ideas from any other source as one’s own--an act
defined as plagiarism.
3. Unauthorized obtaining, distributing or receiving material which is purported to
be an examination, or part of an examination, without the consent of the instructor.
4. Taking of an examination for another person or having another person take an
examination.
5. Other activities that interfere with the academic mission within the classroom.
6. Submission of the same or essentially the same paper, project, assignment or
finished project to an instructor which has been submitted to another instructor
unless specifically authorized by both instructors.
Incomplete Policy
A grade of Incomplete will be considered by the instructor to be a privilege, not a
right. Therefore, it must be earned and the following criteria met:
1. The student must be performing a least C-level work on all assignments due to
date at the time that the Incomplete is requested.
2. In addition, evidence of adult responsibility on the student’s part will be
considered in evaluating the request.
3. The student and faculty must complete an Incomplete Contract.
4. Following the completion of the semester, it will be the student’s responsibility to
complete the agreed upon assignments in a timely manner, following the contract
stipulations.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University
of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values
through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The
professor expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should
arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show
respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors
                                               9


as ethnicity, gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national
origins, and sexual orientations, among others. We expect to learn from each other in an
atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect. Social Work also deals with
complex and controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable,
and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not
include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this
environment we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will
not agree with the ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that
students engage one another with civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or
distressing reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so,
students are encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and
supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but
students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If
counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including
the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL
COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are not private. Even when open only to
approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist among the
general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such forums,
please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted,
linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived,
posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (i.e. Facebook, Twitter, etc.) and other forms
of electronic communication (i.e. blogs, etc.) must be mindful of how their
communication may be perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work
students are expected to make every effort to minimize material which could be
considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of this,
social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels
and avoid posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their
professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites
and are obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social
networks. Client material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media,
including any information that might lead to the identification of a client or compromise
client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate any
material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as
certain material could violate the standards set by the Steve Hicks School of Social Work,
the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social
work practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin Steve Hicks School of Social
                                               10


Work program while in the classroom, the university community, and the broader area
communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules
on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of
failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the
Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not
limited to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected
works. Any unauthorized duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law
and may result in disciplinary action being taken against the student. Additionally, the
sharing of course materials without the specific, express approval of the professor may be
a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other
things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those
materials to other current or future students.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for
Students with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement
(471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student
should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed
accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor
of any testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more
information, visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
CAMPUS CARRY. Information on The University’s policy on concealed firearms
(Campus Carry) may be found here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of
a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious
holy day. If the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in
order to observe a religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to
complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of
1972, The University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning
environment that is free from discriminatory conduct based on gender. Faculty,
instructors, agency-based field instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their
supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual violence, or sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents
will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s
                                               11


Title IX Coordinator and/or the Title IX Liaison for the SHSSW, Professor Tanya
Voss. Students, faculty and staff may contact Professor Voss to report incidents or to
obtain information. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX,
may also be found athttp://socialwork.utexas.edu/dl/files/academic-programs/other/qrg-
sexualharassment.pdf.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies,
clients, and personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on
educational supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights
and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals
outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could
result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic
performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work
Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email
is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are
responsible for reading their email for university and course-related information and
announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a
change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—
daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s
policies and instructions for updating their e-mail address
at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments
that involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these
assignments may present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent
to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies
and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify the
professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students are worried about
someone who is acting differently, they may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to
discuss by phone their concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin
campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an
announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
         the building.
                                               12


        If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the
         first week of class.
        In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
        Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services
         office.
GRADING SCALE
94.0 and Above                        A
90.0 to 93.999                        A-
87.0 to 89.999                        B+
84.0 to 86.999                        B
80.0 to 83.999                        B-
77.0 to 79.999                        C+
74.0 to 76.999                        C
70.0 to 73.999                        C-
67.0 to 69.999                        D+
64.0 to 66.999                        D
60.0 to 63.999                        D-
Below 60.0                            F
Use of Canvas in Class
In this class the professor uses Canvas—a Web-based course management system with
password-protected access—to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments. Students can find support in
using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk by calling 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m.
to 6 p.m. Please plan accordingly.
                                              13


                            Course Schedule
  Date  Description                                      Homework Assignments
                                                         (Due day of class)
 June 6 Introduction                                     Begin reading: The Quiet
 Thurs  Overview of Syllabus                             Room
        What is Mental Illness?
        Stereotypes about Mental Illness
        Stigma and Mental Illness
        Sign up for Presentation Topics
June 11 Signs and Symptoms of Schizophrenia              Reading: The Quiet Room
  Tues  Movie: One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, Part 1
        Presentation Groups Announced
June 12 Movie: One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest, Part 2   Finish reading: The Quiet
  Wed   Cuckoo’s Nest Group Reflection Exercise          Room
        Mock Trial of Chief and Nurse Ratchett
        Trivia Game                                      Begin reading: Articles on
                                                         Canvas about Trauma
June 13 Understanding the Schizophrenic Mind             Continue reading: Articles on
 Thurs  Video interviews of 3 persons with schizophrenia Canvas
        Young at Heart song clip
                                      14


June 18 Overview of Depression                       Required Reading for class:
 Tues   Movie: Breakfast with Scot, Part 1           Pomeroy & Garcia (2011).
                                                     Theories of Grief and Loss:
                                                     An Overview. In Children and
                                                     Loss, Chap. 1, p. 1-16. (on
                                                     blackboard)
                                                     Finish reading: Articles on
                                                     Canvas
                                                     Begin reading: Look me in the
                                                     Eye
                                                     DUE: Critical Analysis
                                                     Paper #1
June 19 Movie: Breakfast with Scot, Part 2           Required Reading for class:
 Wed    Fact and Fiction about Depression and Grief  Pomeroy & Garcia (2011).
        Group Reflection exercise                    Theories of Grief and Loss:
                                                     An Overview. In Children and
                                                     Loss, Chap. 1, p. 1-16. (on
                                                     blackboard)
                                                     Reading: Look me in the Eye
June 20 Children: Grief and Loss, Depression         Reading: Look me in the Eye
 Thurs  Movie: The Hedgehog
June 25 Fact and Fiction about Autism and Asperger’s Reading: Look me in the Eye
 Tues   Disorders
        Movie: Adam
June 26 Bipolar and Delusional Disorders             Finish reading: Look me in the
 Wed    Movie: Lars and the Real Girl, Part 1        Eye
                                                     DUE: Critical Analysis
                                                     Paper #2: Trauma Articles
                                      15


   June 27   Work on group presentations                            Work on presentations
    Thurs    No formal class; groups will have the opportunity
             to get together and work on their presentations.
    July 2   Movie: Lars and the Real Girl, Part 2                  Start working on final paper
     Tues
    July 3   Overcoming obstacles and developing resilience
     Wed     What REALLY makes us content?
             Strengths and challenges
             Discuss Look me in the Eye
             Movie: K-Pax Part 1
    July 4   NO CLASS, Happy Fourth of July!
    Thurs
    July 9   Assignment #3: Group Research Presentations
     Tues
             Movie: K-Pax Part 2
   July 10   Assignment #3: Group Research Presentations
     Wed
             End of Class Celebration!
   July 11   No Formal Class                                        DUE: Final Assignment #4
    Thurs                                                           (via Canvas)
                         Assignment #1: Critical Analysis Paper
Due Date: June 18th
To achieve success in academia, you must be able to read, understand, and critique. Thus,
to demonstrate your understanding, and to practice your technical writing ability, you will
turn in one critical analysis paper related to the material covered in class, films and
readings. This paper should be a minimum of 5-8 pages, double-spaced in 12 font type.
                                             16


Critical Analysis papers are an opportunity to express critical thinking and your opinions
based on what you have learned in lecture, the film and readings. Your paper should not
be a summary of the material. Instead, you should integrate your analysis and
knowledge of the topic along with the class material. Again, a critical analysis paper
should be more than a simple summary of the material; it should contain your opinion or
critique of the material. This may take on a variety of forms: you may compare the work
to other related material (including but not limited to other readings from the class); you
may hypothesize about ways in which the work could have been improved; you may
think about ways to expand on the work, or extend it to cover new domains; or you may
argue against the work, questioning its assumptions, or value. Your personal insights and
awareness can be integrated into these papers, also.
Critical Analysis papers will be graded on your communication skills, and on the content
and originality of your ideas. The ability to express oneself clearly is an important skill in
college (and in life!). Therefore, your paper, like all good essays, should include an
introductory paragraph stating your main premise, a body where you detail your ideas,
and a brief concluding paragraph. Although the paper should not summarize the material,
it should include enough information about the book, movie or lecture to make your ideas
or criticisms well-grounded. Try to avoid the temptation of having two sections: (1)
summary, and (2) critique. Instead, it is best if you can interweave these two components
(while being clear about which is which, of course).
Although all writing rules are subjective and heuristic, here are a few editing pet-peeves
of mine:
1) Use active voice. Passive tense sounds amorphous and wishy-washy. The use of first
person ("I") is appropriate for these papers.
2) Avoid overly complex sentences. In scientific writing, these often are a death-knell for
comprehension. If you do have a complex sentence, make certain it uses parallel
construction.
3) Use paragraphs appropriately as partitions for your ideas. Each paragraph should
generally have at least three sentences.
4) Obviously, correct spelling and grammar are necessary components to any well-
written essay and improve the clarity of your paper.
                                      Assignment # 2:
                           Critical Analysis of Trauma Articles
Due Date: June 26th
A handout will be distributed in class with further information.
                                              17


                                      Assignment #3
                   Group Research Presentation- Mental Health Issue
Due date: July 9th and 10th
Eating Disorders
Conduct Disorder/Antisocial Personality Disorders                                             Formatted: Tab stops: 3.4", Left
Narcissistic Personality Disorder/Borderline Personality Disorder
Obsessive Compulsive Disorder
The goals of this assignment are:
1) To encourage you to seek information about issues related to mental illness and mental
health,
2) To provide a forum for the class to benefit from the information and knowledge that
you have gained.
3) To encourage all of us to remember that our cultural background can influence our
perception of other cultures' expression of mental health and illness.
Part I:
Identify a specific mental health issue that will not be discussed in class (I will provide a
handout of potential subjects). You will work as a team of students collaboratively on this
assignment. You will be required to meet outside of class to complete the assignment and
will receive a grade as a group. Group members will decide how to divide the assignment
as well as how to divide responsibilities for the class presentation. Each group will have
45 minutes for their presentation. Consider this a TEAM CHALLENGE!!!!
Part II:
Research the mental health issue that you choose. What are the signs, symptoms,
populations affected, controversial issues and most common treatment options for the
specific disorder. Examine the common beliefs and misperceptions about the mental
health issue. Find one scholarly journal article per student in your group and integrate it
into your presentation.
You may want to reflect on geographic, generational, or gender differences regarding the
issue you choose. For example, depression is more frequently diagnosed in women vs.
men but doesn’t necessarily mean more women than men become depressed at some
point in their lives. Remember to use cultural humility throughout--recognizing that your
cultural/ ethnic/ spiritual background will inform your understanding of this disorder.
You may also want to discuss the pros and cons of pharmacological versus counseling
treatments.
                                              18


Part III:
 You are required to hand in a detailed written outline of the information, including
 references. The outline should have enough information on it to communicate your key
 points in this presentation. Follow the content outline from the assignment. Bring copies
 of your outline and handouts to distribute to the class. Include a list of references or
 sources of information in APA format.
 As always, you are encouraged to be creative with this assignment! Feel free to include
 photography, artwork, poetry, popular culture, videos, food, visual aids, music or
 anything that will illustrate your points about the mental health issue that you are
 researching.
 Here is the breakdown of the group presentation:
 Effort rating (10 points): You will rate the contribution of all group members (including
 yourself) in the planning, preparation, and presentation of your topic.
 Handout (10 points): Your group must prepare a handout for the class of the key points
 to give to your classmates on the day of your presentation. In your handout, you should
 cite the sources of your information and include a page of references in APA format. I
 will photocopy your handout if you can get it to me (either via email or in my mailbox)
 by 5pm the Wednesday before your presentation.
 Summary (30 points): Your group must hand in a summary of your presentation (4-5
 pages, double-spaced, typed, in Times New Roman font, 12 point, with 1” margins) on
 the due date. It should include the main issue of your presentation, a discussion of how
 theories, research findings, etc apply to your mental health issues, and a list of outside
 references (cited using APA format). Do not go over or under the page limit.
 Presentation (50 points): The presentation will be evaluated on (a) quality of
 preparation (e.g. level of organization and thoughtfulness), (b) the content of the
 presentation (e.g. have you interpreted and presented the issues correctly?
 Have you provided more than one viewpoint? Have you related your topic to theories,
 concepts, and research? Have you given attention to how these issues operate for people
 from diverse groups? How well have you done outside research on the topic?) and (c) the
 extent to which you engage the class in a meaningful discussion of your topic.
                          Assignment #4: Final Integration Paper
 Due Date: July 11th (via canvas)
 This final paper will be an integration of the material you have read and learned about in
 class through readings, lectures and films. It will involve your creative ability to integrate
 the material from class and develop an informed understanding of mental illness and your
 own ideas about how it is portrayed in the media and how it is for real people
                                               19


experiencing real emotional problems. A handout for this assignment will be provided in
class to guide your discussion.
                                          20
