                                             RELIGIONS IN CONTACT
                               ANS 340 / R S 373 · Spring 2019 · TTh 12:30–2pm · MEZ 2.118
                                            Instructor: Dr. Oliver Freiberger
                                               E-mail: of@austin.utexas.edu
What happens when religions come in contact with each other? This course discusses the ways in which religious
actors respond to challenges posed by the encounter with people, beliefs, or practices which, for them, do not
belong to their own religion. Such responses range from curiosity, dialog, or acceptance to apologetics, hostile
polemic, or persecution. Examining case studies from several geographical regions and time periods, we will
discuss various forms of rhetorical and practical responses to the “religious other.” Part of this discussion is an
analysis of the respective motives, which are sometimes related not only to religious conviction but also to
competition over economic resources, social status, and political power.
          The course will introduce students to relevant theories and scholarly categories, such as religious
othering, conversion, reinterpretation, appropriation, subordination, eclecticism, syncretism, intersection,
tolerance and intolerance, dialogue, inclusivism, pluralism, and more. These will be critically discussed and tested
on the case studies. The goal of the course is to gain a deeper understanding of the ways in which religious actors
grapple with religious plurality, draw boundaries – or ignore them –, and form religious identities.
          At the end of the semester, students (1) will have gained insights about important features of the religions
discussed in the case studies (especially Buddhism, Hinduism, Jainism, Islam, Christianity, Greek and Roman
religion); (2) will have learned to analyze various aspects and dimensions of religious encounter in a systematic
way; and (3) will be able to suggest alternative perspectives that may help to resolve conflicts related to religious
encounter.
Readings
Course packet, available at Paradigm Books: https://squareup.com/store/paradigmbooks. Order it online, and the
course packet will be delivered to your postal address within 1–3 days. For questions contact Paradigm Books at
info@paradigmbooks.com. The discussion in class will be based almost exclusively on the readings from this course
packet. Optional readings for each week are provided in the Files folder on Canvas.
Grading
Attendance/participation: 25%
Reading journal: 20% (10 at 2% each)
Oral presentation and moderation of class discussion: 20%
Individual case analysis: 25% (essay 15%, presentation 10%)
Response to two case analyses: 10%
Writing Center
I strongly encourage you to use the University Writing Center (PCL 2.330; http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). It offers
free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. Any
undergraduate enrolled in a course at UT can visit the UWC for assistance with any writing project. The consultants
there work with students from every department on campus. Their services are not just for writing that has
“problems.” Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project.
Consultants help students develop strategies to improve their writing. The assistance they provide is intended to
foster independence. Each student determines how to use the consultant's advice. The consultants are trained to
help you work on your writing in ways that preserve the integrity of your work.
Scholastic dishonesty
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual,
all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
“Scholastic dishonesty” includes, but is not limited to, cheating, plagiarism, collusion, falsifying academic records,


and any act designed to give unfair academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor, providing
false or misleading information in an effort to receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other
assignment), or the attempt to commit such an act. For further information please visit the Student Judicial
Services Web site: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
Students with disabilities
The Faculty Council's Educational Policy Committee states, "Providing a quality educational experience for all
students includes adapting the instructional environment to accommodate the educational needs of students with
information about Services for Students with Disabilities through the course syllabus." At the beginning of the
semester, students should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) Office (phone: 512-471-6259),
which will prepare an appropriate letter to the instructor to guide you. See also the SSD website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/
SCHEDULE
Week 1: Introduction
Week 2: Religious Boundaries: From Individual to Global Dimensions
Week 3: Persecution and Polemics: Greek/Roman Religion and Christianity
Week 4: Conversion: Christianity and Roman Religion
Week 5: Cultic Practice and the State: Roman Religion and Christianity
Week 6: The Proximate Other: Buddhism and Other Ascetic Religions
Week 7: Reinterpretation and Appropriation: Buddhism and Brahmanism
Week 8: Mutual Subordination: Hinduism and Buddhism
–– SPRING BREAK ––
Week 9: Eclecticism: Jainism, Buddhism, and Hinduism
Week 10: Political Dimensions: Islam and Hinduism
Week 11: Syncretism: Hinduism and Christianity
Week 12: Intersections: Hinduism, Islam and Other Religions
Week 13: Tolerance and Intolerance: Buddhism and Hinduism
Week 14: Dialogue and Pluralism: Christianity and Other Religions
Week 15: Concluding Discussion
