 UID​: 20730                                    Instructor: ​Tyler Coleman
 Meetings​: MW 3:30-5                           Office Hours: ​T/TH 12:30-2
 Location​: RLP 0.130
Abstract
Computational Thinking and Logical Processes to approach technical problems with creative solutions.
Applying creative coding techniques to Games, Viz, Projection & Lighting, and Music & Sound using
languages and tools including Processing, Touchdesigner, Unity, and C#.
Assessment
Challenges 1 - 8 are graded pass/fail for 3- 5 points each, Projects & the Review Quiz are graded out of
10-15 points. The remaining 15 points of the final grade is based on professionalism and attendance.
Challenge 1: Colors, Shapes & Random ( 3 points )
Challenge 2: Variables, Loops, If-Else ( 3 points )
Challenge 3: Functions, Datatypes ( 4 points )
Challenge 4: Objects, Debugging (Gamemod) ( 4 points )
Challenge 5: Classes ( 4 points )
Challenge 6: Algorithms ( 3 points )
Challenge 7: Libraries ( 5 points )
Challenge 8: OpenProcessing ( 4 points )
Review Quiz ( 10 points )
Project 1: Processing Final, complete game, audio experience, or interactive story ( 15 points )
Project 2: SuperCollider ( 10 points )
Project 3: Touchdesigner ( 10 points )
Project 4: Unity / C# ( 10 points )
Attendance & Professionalism ( 15 points )


Required Equipment
All students MUST have access to a portable computer, either Mac or PC. All software used in this class
is available for free.
Units of Study
     ●   Foundations
            ○ Logical Processes
            ○ Programming Basics
     ●   Application
            ○ Solving problems with code
     ●   Systems
            ○ Games & Viz, Projection & Lighting, Music & Sound
            ○ Processing libraries
            ○ Other creative coding tools for:
Overview of Schedule
Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be altered to
accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design program workshop
opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be announced via Canvas.


Calendar
      Content
Week
1     Course Intro
      Processing Basics
2     Understanding Code
      Demo: Shapes, Colors, and Animation
      LAB - Building Things with Primitives
3     Challenge 1 Due
      Demo: Variables, Loops, If-Else
      LAB - Building Things with Variables
4     Challenge 2 Due
      Demo: Functions, Data Types
      LAB - Make our own functions
5     Challenge 3 Due
      Demo: Arrays, Classes, Debugging
      LAB - Working with source code
6     Challenge 4 Due
      Demo: Classes & Algorithms
      LAB - Classes
7     Challenge 5 Due
      Demo: Images, Sprites, Video
      LAB - Add Libraries to Project
8     Challenge 6 Due
      Demo: Additional Libraries
      Lab - Animation and Video


 9            Challenge 7 Due
              Demo: OpenProcessing
              Lecture: Demoscene & Proc Gen
 10           Challenge 8 Due
              Review Quiz
              LAB - Processing Final
 11           Processing Final Due
              Demo: Audio Tools and Application
              LAB - SuperCollider
 12           SuperCollider Final Due
              Demo: Touchdesigner
              Discussion: Projection & Lighting
              LAB - Touchdesigner
 13           TouchDesigner Final Due
              Demo: Unity
              Discussion: Game Design & Viz
              LAB - Unity
 14           Demo: C# in Unity
              Discussion: Game Design & Viz
              LAB - C# in Unity
 15           Unity Final Due
              Finals Showcase
              LAB - Portfolio
Process
We will work through demonstrations and a number of technical and creative challenges to learn about
multimedia and interactive system programming.


Grades
8 Challenges: 3% to 5% each
Review Quiz: 10%
4 Projects: 10% to 15% each.
Attendance and Professionalism: 15%
Bonus: 5%
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B- will
be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the grade
of A+.
      A        A-      B+         B       B-      C+          C        C-       D+       D         D-      F
                                                 77-79                        67-69    64-66 60-63
  94-100 90-93 87-89 84-86 80-83                           74-76 70-73                                    0-60
Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns professionalism credit.
Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to attend class meetings. If attending a
scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are expected to promptly notify the instructor of
extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six
(6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher
education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including
any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student
shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy
Days


By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu, http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644).
Please provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make
the necessary accommodations promptly.
Academic Integrity
The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide
by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to maintain
absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University.
At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the
utmost honesty, which requires you to:
    ●   acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
    ●   complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
        assistance in preparing them;
    ●   follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic
        discipline;
    ●   and avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
(adapted from​ http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an external site.)​)
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic dishonesty
as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
    ●   Cheating
    ●   Plagiarism
    ●   Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
    ●   Falsifying Academic Records
    ●   Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended
        deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
    ●   Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses without
        authorization to do so)
    ●   Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
(adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)


Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
(from​ http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php (Links to an external site.)​)
Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by
any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas,
illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting that material as
one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement
(from Sec. 11-402,
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/).
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided
through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health
Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department
(UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. • If you require
assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. • In the event of an
evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re
given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention
Services office.
Student Support Services
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They include (but
are not limited to) the following:
Fine Arts Career Services​ (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full range
of services and resources to support students and alumni.
The Undergraduate Writing Center
(512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments for


their courses.
The Sanger Learning Center​ (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
time-management, and note-taking courses.
University Health Services​ (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical and health
promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
officially enrolled in certain University programs.
The Counseling and Mental Health Center​ (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with their
personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to students.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be
time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes in his or
her official e-mail address (do so at https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX).
Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for
missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a
spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the University or instructor.
(see​ http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy (Links to an
external site.)​)
