David (D.S.) Cohen       ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu  Office Hours:                                    Spring 2020
                                                     Tues/Thurs 11 - 12:30 (By Appointment)
                                                          Department of Arts and Entertainment Technologies
                                                                     School of Design and Creative Technologies
                                                         College of Fine Arts | ​The University of Texas at Austin
AET 318c FOUNDATIONS OF VIDEO GAME DEVELOPMENT - Spring 2020
Course Sections
 Instructor             TA                  UID       Meeting Times                         Room
 David (D.S.) Cohen                         20754     Tues-Thurs                            DFA 4.112
                                                      12:30 to 2:00pm
Abstract
        An introduction to the process of creating games from concept through launch, including
        aesthetics, design, production, and publishing.
Objective
        Learn the fundamentals of design and development for the screen based interactive medium of
        video games.
Prerequisites
        None
Learning Outcomes
        In this course, students will:
              ●  Develop awareness of professional game development
              ●  Define concepts, terminology, and approaches to game design
              ●  Develop interactive game levels and challenges from concept to final product
Required Equipment/Course Material
        All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running Unity Hub with ​Unity
        2018.2 (or higher)​ game engine. Either Mac or PC is fine.
Assessment/Grading
        This course is project based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on successful completion
        of project objectives....
        Professionalism is worth 30% (​See Professionalism​)
        Assignments are worth 40%
        Final project is worth 30%.
                                                                                                                 1


     No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able to
     complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before the
     deadline for doing so passes.
     Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
     fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a B-
     will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not recognize the
     grade of A+.
     Letter grade equivalents:
      A = 94-100                          C+ = 77-79                      D+ = 67-69
      A- = 90-93                          C = 74-76                       D = 64-66
      B+ = 87-89                          C- = 70-73                      D- = 60-63
      B = 84-86                                                           F = 0-59
      B- = 80-83
Attendance/Absences
     ATTENDANCE IS MANDATORY - Regular attendance is necessary for successful completion of
     the class.
     Your professionalism grade will be impacted for each unexcused absence. After your first three
     unexcused absences your final grade will be lowered by one letter grade, and continue to be
     lowered with each subsequent unexcused absence. Seven unexcused absences or more will
     result in a failing grade for the course.
     An excused absence is granted on a case-by-case basis as determined by your instructor. For an
     excused absence to be considered, the student must notify the instructor and TA that they will be
     absent in advance of the class, or within a reasonable period afterwards. Waiting until you attend
     the next class to ask for an excused absence will not be accepted.
     However, if a serious medical or personal crisis (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.) impacts
     your attendance, please inform your instructor and TA as soon as possible. In addition, see the
     exception below for religious holy days.
     Please be on time for class. ​Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after
     a break, leaving class without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count
     as being tardy and have an impact on your professionalism grade.
     Three tardies equals an absence.
     https://catalog.utexas.edu/undergraduate/fine-arts/academic-policies-and-procedures/
     Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send an
     email to your instructor and TA, attaching any class work as needed.
Professionalism
     Each class you attend, you will receive professionalism points that equate to an A for the day. If
     professionalism is maintained by the etiquette as listed below, you will maintain your points. If any
     unprofessional behavior is exhibited, points will be deducted.
                                                                                                           2


      Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and the
      instructor. These will have an impact on your professionalism grade, so it is important that you
      follow these guidelines...
      1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late at the
      beginning of class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and unobtrusively as
      possible. And please don’t hold up the entire class by failing to return promptly at the end of an
      announced break, since often the second part of the class period is when we will engage in
      group activities.
      If you have a class beforehand that is on the other side of campus, you must inform let your
      instructor know on the first day of class so adjustments can be made.
      2) Come to class prepared with your laptop computer with power cord and assignment materials.
      A dead laptop battery or forgetting your class materials is not acceptable.
      3) Turn your cell phone off or on silent, and put it away. Looking at your cell phone during
      lectures, exercises and discussions is not acceptable. Use your computer for taking notes, not
      your cell phone.
      4) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of distracting sights,
      sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook page, talk to your friends, listen to
      loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies, Sleep etc., please do so outside the
      classroom during breaks.
      5) Headphones and sunglasses are not allowed to be worn during lectures, exercises or
      discussions. Even if your headphones are not playing music, they should never be in your ears
      during these times.
      6) Arrive to class prepared, with your required equipment (IE: Computer), assignments completed,
      and reading/tutorials reviewed and ready to discuss.
      7) Be prepared and willing to participate in class discussions and present your work (in progress
      or completed) when called upon.
      8) Do not distract other students by socializing or being otherwise disruptive in class.
      9) No bullying or discriminatory behavior will be acceptable under any circumstances.
      10) Do not fall asleep in class.
File Format and File Naming Convention:
              Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, concept art, etc. File Format: PDF;
              Game Builds – File Format: Executable file (PC and Mac) with supporting files.
      File Naming Convention:
              If submitting as an individual…
              FirstInitialLastname_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
              Example: dcohen_project01_07042018
                                                                                                         3


     IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it may not
     read correctly.
     REQUIRED File Format:
     Both Windows and Mac builds must be submitted for all digital games. It is important to test your
     builds before submitting.
     Documentation and images must be submitted as a single PDF per each assignment.
     See individual assignments for additional details of required file formating.
Use of Class Materials
     The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and homework
     assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class materials is a
     violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the student.
     Additionally, the sharing of class materials without the specific, express approval of the instructor
     may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
     which could result in further disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading
     class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
     students. For more information, go to:
     https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Management+of+Course+Materials%3A+Copyrig
     hts+and+Class+Recordings
Q Drop Policy
     The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
     reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an
     institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six
     dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of
     higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Academic Integrity
     The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall
     abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” You are expected to
     maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work undertaken
     at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other
     scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
         ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
         ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain
              assistance in preparing them;
         ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
              academic discipline; and
         ● avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
              student.
              (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
                                                                                                         4


Academic Dishonesty
   ●  In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines academic
      dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage,
      such as:
           o Cheating
           o Plagiarism
           o Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
           o Falsifying Academic Records
           o Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an
               extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
           o M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses
               without authorization to do so)
           o Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
           o (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)
           o Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
               penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
               University.
               (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
Plagiarism
      Plagiarism is a serious crime. According to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, to plagiarize
      means:
      1) to steal and pass off (the ideas or words of another) as one's own
      2) to use (another's production) without crediting the source
      3) to commit literary theft
      4) to present as new and original an idea or product derived from an existing source.
      Plagiarism is a serious crime. According to the Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary, to plagiarize
      means:
      “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or
      obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another source,
      including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other expression or media,
      and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
      conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
      http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-con
      duct/).
      "Self-plagiarism":​ it is an offense against University rules to turn in the same work for credit more
      than once unless all involved instructor's consent in advance. (from
      https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/ams/about/academic-integrity.php).
                                                                                                           5


Copyright and Fair Use
      Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical importance to designers.
      Many of the uses we will make of texts, images, and videos this semester will be covered by the
      doctrine of fair use. However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other copyright
      holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your own and others’ works. We will
      discuss these issues during the semester as needed, but when you have questions about
      whether or when you can appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K.
      Harper’s Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
Classroom Policy
      Devices
            ● Must be kept in silent mode unless an emergency notification is expected (please discuss
               this with me prior to class).
            ● Can be used for research and class note taking, but not for social media (unless related to
               class activities)
      Food/Drink
            ●  Food is not allowed in class.
            ●  Drinks in closed containers are permitted but must be kept on the floor or out of sight
               when not in use.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
      Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor communication to
      students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay
      current with University- and course-related communications, recognizing that certain
      communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a
      minimum, twice per week.
      It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of changes
      in his or her official e-mail address. Consequently, e-mail returned to the University with “User
      Unknown” is not an acceptable excuse for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable
      messages returned because of a full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered
      without further action required of the University or instructor. For further information, go to:
      http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-policy​.
Religious Holidays
      Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused from attending
      classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy
      day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
      may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete
      an assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
      University policy requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to
      the date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day. For more
      information, go to:
      https://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/​.
                                                                                                            6


Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
       The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations
       for qualified students with disabilities. Please provide documentation of your needs during the
       first week of class, if possible, so that the necessary accommodations can be made promptly. For
       more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259,
       ssd@austin.utexas.edu​,​ ​http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/​, or videophone 512-471-6644).
Title IX Reporting
       Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual
       harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
       funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working
       environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our
       community, the university can:
            1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
            2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or
                have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
            3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
       Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
       “Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the
       Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents
       that are disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty
       or staff member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible
       employee. If you want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official
       report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting
       options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
       titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Student Support Services
       There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT. They
       include (but are not limited to) the following:
            ●   Fine Arts Career Services (512-232-7333,​ ​utexas.edu/finearts/careers​) provides a full
                range of services and resources to support students and alumni.
            ●   The Undergraduate Writing Center (512-471-6222,​ ​uwc.utexas.edu​. helps students with
                every phase of writing assignments for their courses.
            ●   The Sanger Learning Center (512-471-3614,​ ​utexas.edu/ugs/slc​) provides study skills,
                time-management, and note-taking courses.
            ●   University Health Services (512-471-4955,​ ​healthyhorns.utexas.edu​) provides medical and
                health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students who are
                officially enrolled in certain University programs.
            ●   The Counseling and Mental Health Center (512-471-3515,​ ​cmhc.utexas.edu​) helps students
                with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
                                                                                                           7


Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
        If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
        Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
        is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
        Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
        Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Procedures
        Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will be used to provide
        students, faculty, and staff with information regarding potential threats to the safety and security
        of the campus community. E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff
        of emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation. Emergency officials also have
        the ability to disseminate important information via text message directly to the cell phones of
        users subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
        https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
        (adapted from
        http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagementPlan2013a.pdf
Overview of Schedule
        Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course schedule may need to be
        altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor illness, student needs/interests, and design
        program workshop opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will be
        announced via Canvas.
        Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted to Canvas.
                                                    Calendar
Note – The outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor, without
notification in certain cases.
 Week 1           In Class:
 Tues: 1/21           ● Course Intro
                      ● What is game development?
                      ● Claim your UT email
                  HW​:
                      ● I Have No Words and I Must Design
                      ● Install Unity
                      ● Required Unity Tutorial:
                               ○ Using the Unity Interface
                      ● Create UT Box, Dropbox and/or Google Drive account
 Thurs: 1/23      In Class:                                                        Project 1: Exploration
                      ● Lecture/Discussion: Game Design (Role, types,              (Design Kits)
                           approaches)                                             Project 1 Due on Sunday,
                      ● Design Kits for Project 1 - Create three challenges using  Feb 2nd at 11:59pm...give
                           your design kit.                                        yourself a minimum of 1
                      ● Possibility Space​ Intro to ​Explorational Game Design​.   hour to upload to Canvas.
                  HW:
                      ● Begin Project 1: ​Create three (non-Themed) challenges
                           using Design Kit
                      ● Required Reading:
                           Dream Machines​, Will Wright
                                                                                                             8


Week 2      In Class:
Tues: 1/28      ● Playcentric design (Decision making based on player
                     feedback)
                          ○ Playtesting and Iteration
                ● Lecture/Discussion - Design Documentation
            HW:
                ● Playtest Project 1 with three non-students. Adjust design
                     based on feedback, document what you've learned.
                ● Required Unity Tutorial:
                          ○ Essential Unity Concepts
Thurs: 1/30 In Class:
                ● Lecture/Discussion - Postmortems
                ● Lab: Playtesting and iteration
            HW:
                ● Adjust your design based on the feedback received in
                     your playtests.
                ● Write a design brief of your three challenges - Include
                     layouts and walkthroughs (To be submitted as part of
                     Project 1)
                ● Exercise 1​ - Review "​ Roll-A-Ball"​ and build a simple
                     rolling ball game in Unity.
                ● Project 1​ Due on Sunday, Feb 2nd at 11:59pm...give
                     yourself a minimum of 1 hour to upload to Canvas.
                ● Must Include...
                          ○ Video Playthrough
                          ○ A single PDF containing:
                                   ■ Design Brief for all three challenges
                                     with Photos
                                   ■ Playtest results
                                   ■ Postmortem
Week 3      In Class:                                                       Project 2: Exploration
Tues: 2/4       ● Lecture/Discussion - ​Mechanics​, ​Dynamics​.             (2D Game)
                ● Intro to Project 2
            HW:                                                             Project 2 Due on Sunday,
                ● Begin Project 2                                           Feb. 16th at 11:59pm...give
                ● Reading:                                                  yourself a minimum of 1
                          ○ A Theory of Fun for Game Design                 hour to upload to Canvas.
                          ○ Chapters 1 - 2
                          ○ Chapters 3-4
Thurs: 2/6  In Class:
                ● LAB
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 2
Week 4      In Class:
Tues: 2/11      ● Level Design and Player Progression
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 2
Thurs: 2/13 In-Class:
                ● Lab - Playtesting projects with fellow students.
            HW:
                ● Adjust design based on feedback, document what you've
                     learned.
                ● Project 2 Due on Sunday, Feb. 16th (11:59pm)...give
                     yourself a minimum of 1 hour to upload to Canvas.
                                                                                                        9


                          ○  Submit a build (PC and Mac build with
                             supporting files)
                          ○  Video playthrough
                          ○  A single PDF containing:
                                  ■ Design Brief
                                  ■ Playtest results
                                  ■ Postmortem
Week 5      In Class:                                                        Project 3: Exploration
Tues: 2/18      ● Lecture/discussion: Project 3 Intro                        (3D Game)
            HW:                                                              Project 3 Due on Sunday,
                ● Begin Project 3                                            March 1 (11:59pm)...give
                ● Required Unity Tutorial                                    yourself a minimum of 1
                          ○ Lighting - Lights & Shading Basics               hour to upload to Canvas.
Thurs: 2/20 In Class:
                ● Lab
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 3
Week 6      In Class:
Tues: 2/25      ● Lecture/Discussion - Game Artist (Roles, Type,
                     Establishing/Communicating Visual style)
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 3
Thurs: 2/27 In Class:
                ● Lab
            HW:
                ● PROJECT 3 DUE March 1 (11:59pm)
                          ○ Submit a build (PC and Mac build with
                             supporting files)
                          ○ Video playthrough
                          ○ A single PDF containing:
                                  ■ Design Brief
                                  ■ Playtest results
                                  ■ Postmortem
Week 7      In Class:                                                        Exercise 2 - Paper
Tues: 3/3       ● Lecture/Discussion: Paper Prototyping                      Prototype
                ● Introduction for Exercise 2 and Project 4                  Exercise 2 Due on
            HW                                                               Sunday, March 8
                ● Build and test out 1 level design structure for Project 4  (11:59pm)...give yourself a
                     with a paper prototype                                  minimum of 1 hour to
                ●    Required Unity Tutorial:                                upload to Canvas.
                          ○ Asset Store Basics
                                  ■ Using the Asset Store
                                  ■ Access the Asset Store from the
                                      Project
Thurs: 3/5  In Class:
                ● Lab - Paper Prototype
            HW:
                ● Exercise 2 Paper Prototype Due on Sunday, March 8
                     (11:59pm)...give yourself a minimum of 1 hour to upload
                     to Canvas.
                          ○ Submit a build (PC and Mac build with
                             supporting files)
                                                                                                         10


                          ○  Video Playthrough
                          ○  A single PDF containing:
                                  ■ Design Brief with Prototype layouts
                                  ■ Playtest results
                                  ■ Postmortem
Week 8      In Class:                                                      Project 4: Exploration
Tues: 3/10      ● Lecture/Discussion: Game Tech (Roles, Purpose, Tools)    (Puzzle Game)
            HW:
                ● Begin Project 4                                          Project 4 Due on Sunday,
                                                                           March 29 (11:59pm)...give
Thurs: 3/12 In Class:
                                                                           yourself a minimum of 1
                ● Lab
                                                                           hour to upload to Canvas.
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 4
Week 9          ●    Spring Break No Class
Tues: 3/17
Thurs:3/19      ●    Spring Break No Class
Week 10     In Class:
Tues: 3/24      ● Lecture/Discussion: Narrative Design in Games
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 4
Thurs: 3/26 In Class:
                ● Lab
            HW:
                ● Project 4 Due on Sunday, March 29 (11:59pm)...give
                     yourself a minimum of 1 hour to upload to Canvas.
                          ○ Submit a build (PC and Mac build with
                             supporting files)
                          ○ Video playthrough
                          ○ A single PDF containing:
                                           ● Design Brief
                                           ● Playtest results
                                           ● Postmortem
Week 11     In Class:                                                      Exercise 3: Theme
Tues: 3/31      ● Lecture/Discussion - Intro to Project 5. Theme Jam!!
                ● Mood Boards                                              Exercise 3: Theme /
            HW:
                                                                           Moodboard and theme
                ● Create 3. Mood Boards, one for each of your 3 themes
                     (NO FAN ART OR MEMES!).
                                                                           due End of day 4/1
                ● After completing Moodboards, select one theme to be      (11:59pm). ​ Give yourself
                     the basis of your final.                              a minimum of 1 hour to
            DUE END OF DAY 4/1 (11:59pm):                                  upload to Canvas.
                ● Exercise 3: Submit the Mood Boards of three themes.
                     Call out the name of each theme and the final one
                     you've selected for your final project.
                     Due End of Day 4/1 (11:59pm) Give Yourself a minimum
                     of 1 hour to submit to Canvas.
Thurs: 4/2  In Class:                                                      Project 5: Prototype
                ● Lecture: Prototyping
                ● Lab - Approval of Final Theme and Begin Prototyping      Project 5 DUE April 12
            HW:                                                            (11:59pm)...give yourself a
                ● Begin Project 5 - Build a single level to prototype your minimum of 1 hour to
                                                                                                       11


                     theme you will be using for your final project. Must   upload to Canvas
                     integrate theme, design, and art. Write a design brief
                     explaining your theme
Week 12     In Class:
Tues: 4/7       ● Game Production/The Game Producer (Roles, Purpose,
                     Tools, Planning and Communicating)
            HW:
                ● Continue Project 5 - Prototype of Final Project
Thurs: 4/9  In Class:
                ● LaB
            HW
                ● Project 5 DUE April 12 (11:59pm)...give yourself a
                     minimum of 1 hour to upload to Canvas
                ● Submit a build of your prototype (PC and Mac Build
                     with supporting files)
                     Video Playthrough
                     A single PDF containing:
                         ● Moodboard of selected theme
                         ● Design Brief of prototype
                         ● Playtest results
                         ● Postmortem
Week 13     In Class:                                                       Final Project
Tues: 4/14      ● Intro to Final Project (FINAL)
                     (See Assignment for details)                           Final Project Due May 7
            HW:                                                             (11:59pm)...give yourself a
                ● Begin Final Project                                       minimum of 2 hours to
                                                                            upload to Canvas
Thurs: 4/16 In Class:
                ● Lab and Project Check In
            HW:
                ● Continue Final Project
Week 14     In Class:
Tues: 4/21      ● Lecture/Discussion: QA In Game Development
            HW:
                ● Continue Final Project
Thurs: 4/23 In Class:
                ●    Lab and Project Check In
            HW:
                ●    Continue Final Project
Week 15     In Class:
Tues :4/28  HW:​ Lecture/Discussion: Game Publishing and Business
                ● Continue Final Project
Thurs: 4/30 In Class:
                ● Lab and Project Check In
            HW:
                ●    Continue Final Project (Final Project)
Week 16     In Class:
Tues: 5/5       ● Careers and Career Paths
                                                                                                        12


                 HW:
                     ●    Continue Final Project (Final Project)
 Thurs: 5/7      In Class:
                     ● Lecture/Discussion: Where do we go from here?
                 Final Project DUE May 7 (11:59pm)...give yourself a minimum of
                 2 hours to upload to Canvas
                     ● See assignment for final requirements and submission.
Units of Study
   1. Explorational Game Design
            ○ Use explorational game design techniques to discover gameplay and create interesting
                play opportunities.
   2. Elements of Game Design
            ○ Readings and discussion of important design topics
            ○ Theme development and content considerations.
   3. Level Design Fundamentals
            ○ Prerequisites for engaging in level design.
            ○ Creating meaningful play.
   4. Game Development
            ○ Structure and process of studio based game development
            ○ Discussions and exploration of disciplines within game productions
Process
                                  Required Tutorials and Reading
Unity Tutorials:
   1. Using the Unity Interface
   2. Essential Unity Concepts
   3. Lighting - Lights & Shading Basics
   4. Asset Store Basics
            ○ Using the Asset Store
            ○ Access the Asset Store from the Project
Reading:
   ●    I Have No Words and I Must Design
   ●    Dream Machines, Will Wright
   ●    Reading:
            ○ A Theory of Fun for Game Design
                    ■ Chapters 1 - 2
                    ■ Chapters 3 - 4
                                                        Exercises
        The following is an overview. See Assignment in Canvas for all requirements and details​...
        Students will engage in tutorials, readings and activities focused on building their knowledge of
        game development roles, tools, and process.
                                                                                                        13


           Exercise 1
              ●    Review ​"Roll-A-Ball"​ and build a simple rolling ball game in Unity.
           Exercise 2
              ●    Paper Prototype: Build, playtest, and document a single level paper prototype based on
                   the puzzle design mechanics of Project 4.
           Exercise 3
              ●    Select Three Themes from the in-class "Theme Jam", create a Mood Board for each
                   theme. Call out the name of each theme and the final one you've selected for your final
                   project.
                                                         Projects
           The following is an overview. See Assignment in Canvas for all requirements and details​...
           Students will work individually using explorational game design techniques to discover play
           opportunities within interactive systems, develop theme, and create level design.
           Projects 1 - 4: Explorational and Playcentric Game Design
                   Utilize Explorational Game Design1 techniques to create 3 different challenges based on
                   discovered gameplay opportunities in the provided starter materials. It’s CRITICAL that
                   NO additional content be added, however duplication/modification of the starter
                   assets/systems is allowed - provided functionality is NOT significantly changed and visual
                   changes are limited to primitive shapes and colors. These constraints are essential to the
                   process.
                   Game designs will then be playtested and iterated upon to focus on the player
                   experience.
                   Projects which contain superimposed, significantly modified, or additional content will
                   receive a grade of 0. DO NOT under any circumstances add representational or thematic
                   content. No Exceptions.
           Project 5: Prototype
                   Choose one of the previous three project mechanics and develop a theme and/or story
                   which aligns with discovered gameplay and integrate themed assets into the project.
                   Using the theme/moodboard from Exercise 3 as your seed, build a single level prototype
                   example, representative of the final game.
                   Once you've completed your prototype, write a design brief of your design.
                   IMPORTANT: Only use one of the previous project mechanics, DO NOT reuse designs
                   you have submitted for previous projects.
1
  https://goo.gl/DWB5jP​, Design Reboot, Jonathan Blow (2007)
                                                                                                            14


     Final Project: Final
            Design a sequence of 5 levels which plot a clear progression. Progression can be based
            on difficulty, story, theme, etc. Consider using challenges or obstacles to create this
            sequence. Create a successful build which starts with level 1 and allows the player to
            progress to level 5. The levels should be playable by anyone in the class with minimal
            practice. In other words, the levels should not be too difficult to complete.
            Integrate final themed assets and refine/balance gameplay. ​None of the original supplied
            Project assets should be used. ​Students are encouraged to create their own themed
            assets, but purchased asset kits may also be used.
            In addition to themed assets, students must integrate music and sound effects. Students
            can use music and audio of their own creation, or audio/music from open sources
            following the creative commons license.
            The final must function as a playable build which starts at level 1 and ends with level 5. A
            starting menu screen is optional.
            Requirements:
                  ●    Submit final executable on itch.io
                  ●    Final hi res images and breakdown on ArtStation showing workflow breakdown
                       and explaining each step in your process from concept to completion.
                  ●    Single PDF Containing
                           ○    Links to itch.io and ArtStation
                           ○    Mood Board of final theme
                           ○    Design Brief
                           ○    Level Design Documents including Breakdowns with final images
                           ○    Playtest Results
                           ○    Postmortem
                  ●    Submit zip file to Canvas containing:
                           ○    Final executable with supporting files
                           ○    Video of full game Playthrough
Elements of Game Design
   ● Possibility Space​ (Will Wright, 2006):
        ○   A conceptual region which defines the range of possible player activities within a game.
        ○    ​https://goo.gl/7n55Qn​, ​Dream Machines,​ Will Wright (2006)
   ● Kinesthetics​:
        ○ The sensation of movement of one’s physical body. This is related to proprioception
            which describes the sensation of position and orientation of limbs and muscle strain.
            When considered in the context of the rapid feedback loops in screen based games,
                                                                                                        15


           Kinesthetics is perhaps THE primary characteristic which defines videogames as a unique
           medium.
       ○   https://goo.gl/HLjKWY​, ​Kinaesthetics​, Errant Signal (2012)
  ● Explorational Game Design:​
       ○ Also known as Forward Game Design2 and related to emergent gameplay, this idea was
           introduced by Jonathan Blow in his GDC 2007 talk Design Reboot. Explorational Game
           Design (EGD) can be viewed as a “bottom up” approach to designing play systems in that
           the process requires designers to develop their “listening” skills in order to discover the
           latent play possibilities within interaction mechanics. This is contrasted with the more
           traditional “top down” approach (referred to as architected design by Blow) which
           subverts all development in service of a design document. Explorational Game Design is
           generally a more reliable means of creating meaningful play experiences as thinking
           through the play possibilities of a dynamic interactive system is nearly impossible for most
           humans.
       ○ https://goo.gl/DWB5jP​, ​Design Reboot,​ Jonathan Blow (2007)
       ○ https://goo.gl/oKuL5s​, ​Today I’m Going to Design an Ernesto Boss,​ Daniel Benmergui (2014)
  ● Endogenous Meaning:
       ○   Proceeding from within; derived internally. A game’s structure creates its own meanings.
           Explorational and Forward Design techniques seek to discover the endogenous meaning
           of interactive systems.
       ○    ​https://goo.gl/fjHgwY​,​ I Have No Words and I Must Design,​ Costikyan (1994),
  ● Mechanics:​
       ○   Discrete actions which change the state of the game world. Players and Non-player
           agents interact with mechanics during play. e.g. jump, move, collect, shoot, score.
  ● Dynamics​:
       ○   Sometimes referred to as emergent gameplay, dynamics are the result of mechanics
           combined through play. e.g. move and jump are combined to create platformer gameplay.
  ● Aesthetics:
       ○   The “content” of games which exists in the realm of emotion and sensation. In an applied
           sense, aesthetics can refer to any and all of the following: visual design, story, play
           systems, values, endogeny, ludonarrative meaning, and any other content not easily
           defined as mechanics, dynamics, or play systems.
  ● Game Feel/Juice​:
       ○ The intangible yet essential quality of a gameplay experience which defines the “feel” of
           interaction. Closely related to the harmony between kinesthetics and audiovisual
           feedback, Game Feel or Juice is essential for engagement, especially for action games.
       ○ https://goo.gl/BSLHMx​, ​Secrets of Game Feel and Juice,​ Mark Brown (2015)
2
                                                                                                       16


● Rewards:
      ○  Symbolic tokens which mark progress in games. ​Intrinsic ​rewards occur in the player’s
         brain in the form of chemical releases associated with pattern recognition and problem
         solving. ​Extrinsic ​rewards are given to the player by the game. They have no value
         outside the context of the game systems. The simplest type of extrinsic reward is the
         schedule reward, which is a token given to the player when a clearly defined task is
         completed.
● Ludonarrative and Ludonarrative Dissonance
      ○  Ludonarrative is the “story” generated through play. In open world games, this story is
         unique to the each player as their decisions during play determine a course of events. In
         story driven games or those with a distinct imposed narrative, play is often limited and
         serves only to unlock the next part of a predetermined sequence. Ludonarrative
         Dissonance is said to occur when a game’s narrative and its play systems conflict. i.e.
         when a game’s systems permit only actions which conflict with the in-game story. The
         term originated in a game criticism context by Clint Hocking. Some designers view
         Ludonarrative Dissonance as a tool.
      ○  https://goo.gl/4X4VFN​, ​The Debate That Never Took Place​, Errant Signal (2015)
      ○  https://goo.gl/uk65TJ​, ​Ludonarrative Dissonance in Bioshock,​ Hocking (2007)
● Flow​:
      ○ Defined by Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (Meehai, Chik-sent-meehai) in 1975. Flow is the mental
         state of operation in which a person performing an activity is fully immersed in a feeling of
         energized focus, full involvement, and enjoyment in the process of the activity. In game
         design, the “flow channel” is a conceptual model which defines a region in which players
         enjoy maximum engagement while completing tasks of increasing difficulty.
● LeBlanc’s Taxonomy:​
      ○  Aesthetics defined in the MDA framework as an attempt to more precisely describe “fun”
         and “gameplay”. The taxonomy includes: Sensation, Fantasy, Narrative, Challenge,
         Fellowship, Discovery, Expression, and Submission; and is intended as recombinant utility
         for analyzing game content.
      ○  https://goo.gl/32LeXX​, ​MDA: A Formal Approach to Game Design and Game Research​, Hunicke,
         LeBlanc, Zubek (2004)
● Bartle Types​:
      ○  A classification of player types in terms of play motivation: Killers, Achievers, Explorers,
         and Socializers. Later Bartle mapped the types on 2 axes relative to play goals: Acting -
         Interacting, and Players - World. The Bartle types are often misinterpreted as describing a
         player’s single motivation, while in reality players may engage in each of the four types (or
         many more) at different times during a play session.
      ○  https://goo.gl/X2gyBf​, ​Hearts, Clubs, Diamonds, Spades: Players Who suit MUDs​,​ Richard Bartle
         (1996)
● Affordance
      ○ (James Gibson 1977): A relation between and object and organism. Affordances are the
                                                                                                           17


                   “action possibilities” latent in the environment which are dependent on an agent’s
                   capabilities. e.g. a door knob or teacup handle. As a design tool, affordances can be used
                   to create play depth or by extension, suggest player actions, or manipulate players
                   expectations.
               ○   J. J. Gibson (1966). ​The Senses Considered as Perceptual Systems.​ Allen and Unwin, London.
Designing Play Experience
           Video games are interactive screen based experiences.
           Their systems are dynamically manipulated by players and provide a high speed continuous
           feedback loop - these are THE distinguishing features of the medium which set it apart from
           tabletop games, sports, and other screen based media.
           Games should be FUN.
           This oft invoked phrase represents a misunderstanding of why videogames are compelling.
           Evidence suggests that player engagement is directly correlated with chosen meaningful work3 -
           the results of which can foster a sense of accomplishment, reward, awe, surprise, joy,
           appreciation, delight, content, or satisfaction to name a few.
           When exploring a game idea, use the following list to develop the play experience:
               ●   Screen based interactive experiences such as videogames function like a ​conversation​.
                   The player “speaks” through the controls and inputs, and the game “replies” by updating
                   the game state.
               ●   Engagement (​ a.k.a Fun) results from pattern recognition (​learning​), decision making
                   (​strategy​), and problem solving (​feedback​).
               ●   Games ​teach ​by exposing ​patterns a     ​ nd providing feedback to the player.
               ●   Players learn by employing strategy and ​interacting w     ​ ith the game world.
               ●   Strategy (or ​informed decision making​) is only possible in the presence of clear patterns
                   and feedback.
               ●   Obstacles ​are learning opportunities which advance the player's knowledge and
                   understanding of the game world.
               ●   Challenges ​are reinforcement opportunities which confirm/expand the player’s
                   knowledge of game systems.
               ●   Intrinsic ​and ​extrinsic rewards ​mark player progress.
               ●   Players are generally motivated by ​meaningful play (or work),​ which manifests in
                   different forms at different times. Some of these are: skill mastery, social connection,
                   exploration, story, achievement, reward, collection, fantasy, challenge, discovery,
                   expression, fellowship, competition, distraction, culture, and many others scattered across
                   the wide spectrum of human drive and desire.
               ●   The relationship between ​theme​, ​narrative​, and ​play ​systems should be clear and
                   symbiotic - even if in an unexpected way.
3
  ​https://goo.gl/TSP7iJ​, ​Reality is Broken​, Jane MacGonigal (2010)
                                                                                                                18
