                Taxation of Real Estate Investments SPRING, 2020
                                        RE360.1 (#03845)
                                      ACC378.5 (#02440)
                                     ACC380K.27 (#02570)
                                      LAW379M (#28615),
Schedule:               Mon and Wed, 12:30pm-1:45pm
Classroom:              CBA 4.304
Office:                 CBA 6.304G.
Office Hours:           11:00am-11:30am, Mon and Wed and by appointment.
Instructor:             Stuart R. Singer
Email:                  stuart.singer@mccombs.utexas.edu.
Purpose of Course:
The purpose of the class is to develop your ability to understand how U.S. tax law analyzes
transactions involving investment in real estate assets and securities. The class is divided into
five parts: (1) An introduction to the federal income tax; (2) a review of taxation of real estate
acquisitions, operations and dispositions; (3) a study of the legal entities through which most
real estate investments are made; (4) examination of the principal real estate investment
securities (REITs and REMICs); and (5) a review of other significant real estate tax issues
(including investments by foreigners, Qualified Opportunity Zones, tenancies-in-common and
like-kind exchanges).
Class Schedule
Wednesday, March 4 will be HAT DAY. Everyone must wear a hat to class.
There will be no class on Monday, February 10.
Part of the class on Monday, February 24 will be devoted to a session on preparing the
Practice Memorandum assigned that morning. This practice memo will be due on Thursday,
February 27.
Course Materials
The course materials will include of readings in Rosenfeld, Principles of Real Estate Accounting
and Taxation. There will be other materials, all available in the course packet available at the
McCombs COPY CENTER on the Third Floor in GSB.
Classroom Deportment
Cell phones must be turned off while you are in class. You may NOT use laptops in class.
Beverages are OK, but no food in class.
Evaluation and Grades
I will determine your final grade on the basis of your class participation and the two
memorandum assignments, each to be weighted equally. There will be no exams.
                                                   1


Reading Assignments
The tax issues involved in real estate transactions are sometimes difficult and complex, even in
a summary course such as this one. Moreover, the knowledge in classes 1, 2 and 3 will form
the base for understanding the material in classes 4, 5, and 6, and so on. You cannot fall
behind in these assignments
Written Assignments
There will be two written assignments in the form which you, as professionals, would prepare for
clients or employers. The memorandum assignments will be given to you on Monday,
March 30 and Monday, May 4, respectively, and you will have 3 days to turn them in.
Class Participation
Since every professional must be able to communicate any thoughts and analysis, I expect
every student to participate regularly in our class discussion. There will be no exceptions;
you cannot succeed in this course unless you are prepared every day to recite in class. It
is far more important for each student to make efforts than to get the “right” answer. As
professionals, all of the knowledge in the world will accomplish nothing unless it is coupled with
the ability to express it clearly and to discuss it with your peers. I will grade each student each
day on participation.
Missed Assignments and Attendance
You will be excused from turning in work timely if you are deceased or if you become a parent
during the semester. I am willing to entertain other excuses, but don’t get your hopes up. A
similar policy applies to taking an “incomplete” for the course.
Scholastic Dishonesty--Departmental Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty. The Department
of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of both
students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the
department’s Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty. By teaching this course, I have
agreed to observe all the faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this
class, you have agreed to observe all the student responsibilities described in that document. If
the application of that Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it
is your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Professional Conduct. The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the
McCombs community. The collective class reputation and the value of the Texas experience
hinges on this.
Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request
appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more
information, you may call the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641 TTY.
                                                    2


THE FOLLOWING SCHEDULE MAY BE AMENDED DURING THE SEMESTER IN ORDER
TO ACCOMMODATE GUEST SPEAKERS ON A FEW OF THE TOPICS.
   #     DATE                 TOPIC                               TEXT READING
                 PART ONE: INTRODUCTION
                 TO FEDERAL INCOME TAX
 1   1-22        Introduction to Course.
 2   1-27        Federal Taxation- Basics       Introduction to Federal Tax (Bittker & Lokken excerpt)
                 PART TWO: TAXATION
                 OF REAL ESTATE
 3   1-29 & 2-3  Acquisition of Real Estate     Rosenfeld, Chapters 3 and 5
 4   2-10 & 2-12 Operation of Real Estate       Rosenfeld, Chapters 6 and 7
 5   2-17 & 2-19 Disposition of Real Estate     Rosenfeld, Chapter 4
                 PART THREE: ANALYSIS           NOTE: Assignment for Practice Memorandum,
                 OF INVESTMENT                  Monday, February 24.
                 VEHICLES
 6   2-24 & 2-26 Types of Investment Vehicles   Rosenfeld, Chapter 1
 7   3-2 & 3-4   Taxation of C Corporations and Excerpt from the Mulcahy case
                 S Corporations
     3-4         HAT DAY
 8   3-9 &       Taxation of Partnerships and   Excerpt from McKee et al., Federal Taxation of
     3-11        LLCs                           Partnership and Partners
                 PART FOUR: TAXATION            NOTE: Assignment for First Memorandum,
                 OF REAL ESTATE                 Monday, March 30
                 SECURITIES
 9   3-23, 3-25  Real Estate Investment Trusts  Kim et al., “Decade of the REIT”
     & 3-30
 10  4-1 &       Real Estate Mortgage           Wunder, “REMICs --- the Newest Investment Medium”
     4-6         Investment Conduits
                 PART FIVE: TAXATION
                 OF OTHER REAL ESTATE
                 TRANSACTIONS
 11  4-8 &       Like-Kind Exchanges            Foster, “A Checklist for Real Estate Like-Kind
     4-13                                        Exchanges”
 12  4-15 & 4-20 Tenancies in Common            Lipton, “Like-Kind Exchanges of Undivided
                                                Fractional Interests in Real Estate”
 13  4-22        Qualified Opportunity Zones    Qualified Opportunity Funds -- Overview
 14  4-27 &      Taxation of Real Estate
     4-29        Investments by Foreign
                 Persons
 15  5-4         REVIEW                         NOTE: Assignment for Second Memorandum,
                                                Monday, May 4.
                                            3
