    WORLD ARCHITECTURE: INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION TO PRESENT
                                         ARC 318L-W
                                          FALL 2018
Instructor: Dr. Richard Cleary
Office hours: W 2:00-3:00 Th 1:30-2:30, and by appointment
Office: 4.122 Sutton Hall
email: cleary@austin.utexas.edu
Teaching Assistants:
Barbara Cortizo de Aguiar                       barbara.aguiar@utexas.edu
Betsy Frederick-Rothwell                        betsyfr@utexas.edu
Rosa Fry                                        rosalisafry@gmail.com
Karen Kincaid Brady                             karenk1127@utexas.edu
Sydney Steadman                                 sydneyritter@utexas.edu
Lectures T Th 9:30-10:50, HRH 2.104 (Jessen Auditorium)
Discussion Sections
00625 Tuesday           11:00-12:00     UTC 4.120
00630 Thursday          11:00-12:00     SUT 2.114
00635 Tuesday           12:00-1:00      CBA 4.346
00640 Tuesday           12:30-1:30      SUT 2.110
00645 Tuesday           1:00-2:00       CBA 4.346
00650 Monday            2:00-3:00       CAL 323
00655 Wednesday         2:00-3:00       WMB 4.118
00660 Thursday          2:00-3:00       SUT 2.112
00665 Wednesday         10:00-11:00     PAR 210
00670 Monday            10:00-11:00     PAR 210
Description
This is the second course in the School of Architecture’s two-part introduction to the
history of architecture. It offers a global perspective of buildings, their settings, and the
dissemination of ideas about architecture from the eighteenth century to the present.
Particular attention is given to the relationships among architectural expression, meaning,
and building technology and to issues arising when architectural traditions of one culture
are imposed upon or otherwise adapted by another.
The course may be taken for partial fulfillment of the following University core
curriculum requirements:
•   Global Cultures Flag
•   Writing Flag
•   Visual and Performing Arts Core Component Area


                                                                                             2
Educational Objectives
•   Establish chronological and thematic frameworks for the study of architectural history
•   Understand the broader cultural factors that frame the design of the built environment
•   Understand how notions of modernity and modernism apply to architecture
•   Develop skills of description and formal analysis
•   Be able to critically respond to primary and secondary texts on nineteenth- and
    twentieth-century architecture
•   Be able to conduct research using secondary sources
CIDA Objectives (Interior Design)
•   Understand the social, political, and physical influences affecting historical changes
    in the design of the built environment in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
•   Identify movements and traditions in nineteenth- and twentieth-century architecture
Core Curriculum Notes
Global Cultures
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Writing
This course carries the Writing flag. Writing flag courses are designed to give students
experience with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write
regularly during the semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback
from your instructor to help you improve your writing. You will also have the
opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and to read and discuss your peers' work.
A substantial portion of your grade will come from your written work.
Visual and Performing Arts
This course may be used to fulfill the visual and performing arts component of the
University core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established
by the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical
thinking skills, teamwork, and social responsibility.
Texts
•   Barry Bergdoll, European Architecture, 1750-1890 (Oxford University Press, 2000)
•   William J. R. Curtis, Modern Architecture since 1900 (Prentice-Hall, 1996)
•   Course reader available from the textbook department of the University Coop
•   (Recommended) John Fleming, Hugh Honour, Nikolaus Pevsner, The Penguin
    Dictionary of Architecture (Penguin Books, 4th edition, 1991)


                                                                                           3
Services for Students
Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(ddce.utexas.edu/disability/) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations. We will do our best to work with you.
The Counseling & Mental Health Center (CMHC) offers resources for general health
and well-being, time management, stress management, test anxiety and other personal
concerns. The Center is located on the 5th floor of the Student Services Building. The
telephone number is (512) 471-3515. http://cmhc.utexas.edu
If you have concerns about the behavior of someone, the Behavior Concerns Advice
Line offers assistance 24/7: (512) 232-5050.
The University Writing Center located in the UT Learning Commons area at Perry-
Castañeda Library provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing for
UT undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment. The Center’s staff can help you
with any writing assignment at any stage of development. uwc.utexas.edu
Office of Campus Safety and Security: www.utexas.edu/safety: Emergency: 911
                                     GROUND RULES
This is a large class in a large room, and we must work together to create a good
environment for learning. Newspaper reading, posting photos of your weekend on
Facebook, chatting with friends, eating breakfast tacos, and snoring are disruptive to
those around you, so catch up on news, meals, and sleep before class. Please note that this
is one of the finest auditoriums on campus. Help keep it that way by not bringing food or
drink into the hall.
Policy on attendance and due dates:
Regular attendance is expected. Students with more than two unexcused absences from
the weekly discussion sections will be penalized by a reduction of the final letter grade.
All assignments and examinations must be submitted on the due dates. Late papers will
be penalized by a grade reduction. Incompletes (X grades) will be awarded only in
instances of medical or severe family emergencies. Documentation may be required.
Accommodation for religious holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify your teaching assistant or me of your pending
absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, you will be given the opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.


                                                                                            4
The Honor Code:
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity and responsibility. Each member of the University is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
A note on plagiarism
Please heed your professional responsibilities regarding plagiarism. The work you
present must be your own unless you explicitly indicate otherwise. Be attentive to your
use of sources. If you copy or closely paraphrase language from a source (print or
internet), you must provide a citation. If you are unsure about what constitutes plagiarism
or are unfamiliar with the mechanics of citations (it also is important to know when not to
footnote) please ask us for assistance.
Evaluation
Grades will be based on mid-term and final examinations, reader response statements, a
building description essay, and a research project, which includes a presentation at an
evening poster session and a final paper. Evaluations will be represented by a cumulative
point system with letter grades determined as a percentage of a given score. Thus, a score
of 40 on the 50-point building description assignment is 80%, a B-; a semester total of
435 out of the 500 possible points is 87%, a B+.
My standards regarding grades are as follows: A represents exemplary work in which the
student has successfully realized his or her stated objectives in terms of content and style;
B has a broader compass in which the intentions of the assignment are met adequately but
with some weakness of content or style or reticence in approach; C recognizes effort but
acknowledges serious problems in content or style; D and F reflect a lack of effort. I
award incompletes only in cases of illness or other personal emergencies.
Reader Response Essays                           20 points each (except for #1); 100 total
points
Due in section (note: late reader responses will not be accepted except in cases of
documented illness or family emergency)
#1 Week of 3 September (ungraded, prepare the prompts for discussion)
#2 Week of 10 September
#3 Week of 17 September
#4 Week of 1 October
#5 Week of 15 October
#6 Week of 29 October
Building Description                              50 points
Due in section week of 24 September (revised paper due on Tuesday, 16 October)
Midterm Examination
Tuesday, 9 October                               100 points


                                                                                             5
Research Project                                 150 total points
         Proposal                                  10 points
         Due in section, week of 22 October
         Outline                                   10 points
         Due in section, week of 5 November
         Poster Session                            30 points
         Thursday afternoon, 15 November
         Final Paper                             100 points
         Monday, 10 December, 5:00 p.m.
                Electronic submission or hard copy to teaching assistant
Final Examination                                100 points
Thursday, 13 December, 9:00 am - 12 pm, Jessen Auditorium (our usual classroom)
                                    SURVIVAL SKILLS
This course covers a broad range of material in a very short time. Many places and events
will be unfamiliar, you will encounter architecture’s specialized vocabulary, and the
material we expect you to master may require considerable time to sort out. All this will
happen alongside the myriad demands of your other courses. The best way to assure
success is to keep up and be an active participant. Regular class attendance in the lectures
and the discussion sections is the essential first step. The second is to develop an effective
system of note taking. Your notes should record the over-all structure and key points of
each lecture and be cross-referenced to the reading assignments. Review your notes
frequently to correct misspellings, add information, and mark questions. You may find it
useful to form a study group that meets periodically throughout the semester.
Don’t hesitate to ask questions in class and to take advantage of our office hours. The
teaching assistants and I are very willing to meet with you to discuss the course or just to
talk. If our posted hours aren’t convenient, we can make an appointment for another time.
Course materials on Canvas
The syllabus, pdfs of the lectures, and other class materials will be available in folders on
the course Canvas site.
Research tools
The teaching assistants and I recognize that many of you are new to doing research on
architectural history. Please feel free to talk with us as you start planning your research
project.
The website of the Architecture and Planning Library offers many useful tips for
conducting research on architectural topics: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/apl/index.html.
When setting out to learn more about a particular topic, many students forget about two
types of valuable sources: (1) specialized encyclopedias and dictionaries and (2) journal
articles. Encyclopedias and dictionaries will provide answers for many basic questions
and help you to define topics. Three excellent sources are the Macmillan Encyclopedia of


                                                                                           6
Architects (a biographical dictionary) available in the reference area of the Architecture
and Planning Library, the Encyclopedia of 20th-Century Architecture available in the
library and on-line, and the encyclopedic Dictionary of Art (also available on-line), which
covers individual designers, historic and stylistic periods, theoretical concepts, and
terminology.
Don’t limit your bibliographic searches to the books in UTCAT. Journal articles can be
identified using search engines supported by University Libraries. See the link: Databases
and Indexes to Articles. http://www.lib.utexas.edu/indexes/ For architecture, an essential
search tool is the Avery Index to Architectural Periodicals. Many full-text articles on
architecture may be found by searching the JSTOR database.
The Web as a research tool. Useful websites will be cited from time to time in the
lectures and discussion sections and posted on Canvas. You will discover others on your
own. When you encounter information from unfamiliar sources, treat it critically.
Alongside the useful, accurate information a Google search can generate is a tremendous
amount of junk, and you must determine which is which. Consider the identity of the
author and corroborate the information with other sources known to be reliable.
Wikipedia is useful as a point of departure, but many of its entries on architectural
subjects are derived from outdated or unsubstantiated secondary sources and should not
be regarded as authoritative. If you use material from the Web for your papers or research
project, cite the full URL in your bibliography.
Assigned Readings
Think of the texts by Barry Bergdoll and William Curtis as reference tools. Skim them
for an overview and slow down when you encounter discussions of the people and
buildings introduced in class.
The course reader available at the Co-op contains articles and book excerpts offering a
variety of perspectives on topics and methodology. Approach your reading so that you
can speak to the principal themes of each article and how the author has developed his or
her argument. Expect to encounter questions related to the articles in the reader on the
examinations.
Supplemental Texts
If you took ARC 318K and own a copy of Spiro Kostof’s A History of Architecture:
Settings and Rituals, I recommend that you hang on to it for use as a general reference.
The Penguin Dictionary of Architecture is a handy reference for terms and capsule
accounts of architects and historical periods.
The following survey texts will be useful as you refine your lecture notes and begin
research for your papers. All have been placed on reserve in the Architecture and
Planning Library.
Luis E. Carranza and Fernando Luiz Lara, Modern Architecture in Latin America: Art,
    Technology, and Utopia (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2014). NA 702.5 C37
    2014


                                                                                            7
Kenneth Frampton, Modern Architecture: A Critical History, 3rd edition (London:
    Thames & Hudson, 1992). NA 500 F75 1992
Mark Girouard, Cities & People: A Social and Architectural History (New Haven: Yale
    University Press, 1985). HT 111 G47 1985
Spiro Kostof, The Architect: Chapters in the History of the Profession (New York:
    Oxford University Press, 1977). NA 1995 A73
Thomas Leslie, Chicago Skyscrapers, 1871-1934 (Urbana, IL: University of Illinois
    Press, 2013). NA 6232 L47 2013
Ulrich Pfammatter, Building the Future: Building Technology and Cultural History from
    the Industrial Revolution until Today (Munich: Prestel, 2008). NA 2543 T43 P4913
    2008
Andrew Saint, Architect and Engineer: A Study in Sibling Rivalry (New Haven: Yale
    University Press, 2007). NA 2543 E54 S25 2007
Gwendolyn Wright, USA: Modern Architectures in History (London: Reaktion, 2008).
    NA 712.5 M63 W75 2008
                                WRITING ASSIGNMENTS
Please note the terms description and analysis in the assignments. Description refers to
the systematic accounting of an object or situation. It aspires to objectivity and the
assertion of fact. Analysis refers to an investigation of the described object or situation
(the fact) with the intent of understanding how it came to be, how it is put together, or
how it works. Analysis of an object, for example, might reveal its compositional structure
(proportion, patterning). Analysis of a situation, on the other hand, might place it in a
historical context and assess its impact. Analysis requires independent thinking and
creativity, because it draws on the application of information and method that lie outside
the object, such as the application of geometry to analyze the composition of a façade or
the use of models of individual or social behavior to account for human deeds. It requires
you to have an opinion that you can support by demonstration. The paper assignments
and the research project are intended to help you develop your ability to conduct
historical analysis.
Late papers will not be accepted except in cases of documented illness or family
emergency.
Reader Response Essays
The reader response essays are intended to sharpen your ability to read critically and to
provide a basis for discussion in the weekly section meetings. Each paper should be two
pages long (about 500-600 words, double-spaced). It should include a sentence or two
summarizing the principal theme of the article and a longer discussion of an aspect that
you find interesting. You may express support or disagreement with the author’s position,
comment on the subject matter, or otherwise relate it to something you’ve encountered
elsewhere. The object of the exercise is to set out your thoughts clearly and concisely and
to offer a direction for further discussion. The criteria for evaluation are as follows:
evidence of your comprehension of the article, expression of a personal point of view,
clarity of expression.


                                                                                           8
Building Description Essay (Due in your discussion section the week of 24 September)
The purpose of this assignment is to refine your ability to describe a building clearly and
concisely. Please select a building from the following list and describe its façade. Your
paper should be about 700 words long. If possible, include a photograph (it can be one
taken with your phone).
This is an exercise of direct observation. While you may consult secondary sources, you
should not rely on them as the basis of your description. If you use secondary sources
such as books, articles, or websites, please cite them in a bibliography.
The challenge in writing architectural descriptions is to present the building in a way that
allows the reader to visualize it. One way to think about this is as if you are describing
the building to a friend over the telephone. An effective approach is to proceed from the
general to the specific. In so doing, organize your text around aspects you consider
significant, such as massing, materials, fenestration (windows and doors), and ornament.
The papers will be peer reviewed in discussion sections the week of 24 September,
reviewed by the teaching assistants, and returned the following week for revision. The
final submission is due in lecture on Tuesday, 16 October. Criteria for evaluation:
organization and approach, use of appropriate architectural terminology, clarity of
expression.
Building List (describe the principal façade only)
French Legation, 1840-41 (802 San Marcos St.)
Neill-Cochran House, Abner Cook, 1855 (2310 San Gabriel Street)
Nowotny Building (part of UT’s Little Campus), Abner Cook, 1857 (Red River & MLK)
Old General Land Office Building, Conrad C. Stremme, 1857 (East 11th & Brazos)
Johns-Hamilton Building (Barclay Building), 1870 (716 Congress)
St. Mary’s Cathedral, 1874-1884, Nicholas Clayton (203 East 10th Street)
Townsend-Thompson Building, 1875 (718 Congress Avenue)
Walter Tips Building, J. N. Preston, 1876 (710-712 Congress Avenue)
Hannig Building, J. N. Preston, 1876 (206 East 6th Street)
John Bremond, Jr. House, George Fiegel, 1886-87 (700 Guadalupe St)
Southwestern Telegraph & Telephone Building, 1886/stone façade 1898 (410 Congress)
Elisabet Ney Museum, begun 1892 (304 East 44th Street)
McKean-Eilers Buildings, Burt McDonald & J. Reily Gordon, 1897 (323 Congress)
Research Project
This project allows you to investigate a topic of your choice in some depth. It has two
principal components: presentation of research in the poster session and the final paper.
Please note the due dates. The timing is tight, and it is very important to plan ahead.
Topic selection. Anything within the chronological scope of this course is fair game. You
may analyze a single building or compare certain points among several buildings. You
may focus on themes in the work of a single architect or relate specific features of a
building to the interests of its patron or the needs of those who used it. You may examine
vernacular buildings, materials, construction systems, response to climate, or
relationships with landscape. As you think about selecting a topic, keep in mind the basic


                                                                                           9
questions architectural historians ask: (1) what is it? (description and comparison); (2)
how and why was it made? (narrative and contextual histories); (3) how does it work?
(composition, structure, use, meaning). It is important to focus your topic so you can get
beyond general description and have the time and space to develop your analysis. Feel
free to brainstorm topic ideas with us.
Besides the canonical figures who populate the pages of the survey texts, there are many
others with outstanding achievements who merit study. One of the strengths of William
Curtis’s survey is his coverage of modernist architecture in Latin America, Spain, and
parts of Asia, but there is much more to be done. Africa, for example, has received
comparatively little attention. Women have only recently enjoyed a place in the spotlight.
For the United States, see Sarah Allaback, The First American Women Architects
(Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 2008), available in the reference area of the
Architecture & Planning Library: NA 736 A48 2008. There are few histories of African-
American architects. See Dreck Spurlock Wilson, ed., African-American Architects: A
Biographical Dictionary, 1865-1945 (New York: Routledge, 2004): reference area NA
736 A47; Ellen Weiss, An Annotated Bibliography on African-American Architects and
Builders (Philadelphia: Society of Architectural Historians, 2003): reference area NA 738
N5 W43 2003.
Project proposal, due in discussion section the week of 22 October
Prepare a statement of about 1-2 pages (double-spaced) that 1) identifies your topic
(including names, dates, and places, as appropriate), 2) states what you find interesting
about it, 3) indicates your intended focus, and 4) describes the status of your research.
Append a preliminary bibliography indicating what you’ve looked at and what is on your
“to do” list. The bibliography must include print sources (books or journal articles, which
may include online copies of print sources) in addition to any survey texts or websites
you might use. Remember that if you use a website such as Wikipedia, you must
corroborate the information by consulting scholarly sources.
Project outline, due in discussion section the week of 5 November
Prepare an outline showing the scope and organization of your final paper. It should
begin with a sentence or two that concisely describes the scope of your project. For the
sections for which you have completed substantial research, use an expanded format
including topic sentences for key parts. Include a bibliography annotating the sources you
have consulted to indicate their importance to your project.
Poster session, Thursday afternoon, 15 November
Professional meetings of architectural historians frequently include poster sessions, which
resemble a science fair without the dry-ice volcanoes. Scholars summarize their work on
a poster displaying graphics and text that allow audience members to quickly grasp the
key issues. The author then responds to questions. We will adapt this system to provide
an opportunity for others to learn from your research and for you to receive constructive
feedback from your colleagues.
The poster. Use poster board or plotter paper measuring around 22” x 28.” It should be
easily readable from a distance of several feet. It should have a title at the top (format
may be horizontal or vertical) and your name. The layout of text and graphic information


                                                                                            10
should allow viewers to easily grasp the scope of your project, your approach, and key
findings. All photographs or diagrams copied from published sources must include a
credit line. Note to the graphically challenged: this isn’t a test of artistic skill. The
objective is to present ideas effectively.
Abstract and bibliography. Your poster must be accompanied by an abstract of about 300
words (1-2 pages, double spaced), plus your bibliography. What is an abstract? It is a
highly-condensed summary presenting the particular focus and findings of your research.
It must show how you have made the topic your own.
Oral presentation. We will divide the class into groups capable of fitting comfortably in
the Sutton Hall 4th-floor corridor. Each large group will be divided into small groups of
four students who will share their work with each other. Each student will have ten
minutes to present his or her poster and respond to questions.
Evaluation. The criteria for evaluation will be based on the following: (1) clear definition
and development of the topic; (2) command of the subject – has the author personalized
it? (3) presentation – appearance of the poster, ability of the author to explain the project.
Note: the challenge in this project is in demonstrating your intellectual engagement with
your subject. A series of general views of a building will not accomplish this unless the
basis for their selection is made clear by your layout and accompanying text.
Final paper, due 5:00 p.m., Monday, 10 December
After receiving feedback from your colleagues and the teaching assistants at the poster
session, please expand the findings outlined in your poster and abstract into a paper with
a text of about 2500 words (8-10 pages double-spaced) plus notes, bibliography, and
illustrations. This should require little, if any, additional research. Focus your attention on
developing your points as clearly as possible. Evaluation will consider the thoroughness
of your research, your ability to define and develop a topic within the constraints of the
exercise (time, space limitations), and the clarity of your writing.
Bibliography and footnote (or endnote) formats
Bibliographic citations allow your readers to trace the path you took in your research.
Scholarly publications typically prescribe specific formats. For this assignment, you may
use a format with which you are familiar or follow the following examples:
Footnote or endnote
Book:
First name Last name, Title (Location: Publisher, Year of publication), page number(s).
Richard Cleary, Merchant Prince and Master Builder: Edgar J. Kaufmann and Frank
Lloyd Wright (Pittsburgh and Seattle: Carnegie Museum of Art and University of
Washington Press, 1999), 23-55.
Article:
First name Last name, “Title of article,” Title of Journal volume number/issue number
(Month, Year), page number(s) containing the information or quote you are citing
Renee Y. Chow, “In a Field of Party Walls: Drawing Shanghai’s Lilong,” Journal of the
Society of Architectural Historians, 73/1 (March 2014), 18.


                                                                                        11
URL (same format for footnote or bibliography):
Handbook of Texas Online, s.v., “Myers, Elijah H.,”
http://www.tsha.utexas.edu/handbook/online/articles/MM/fmy2.html (accessed August
28, 2010).
Bibliography (has slightly different format than a footnote—author names are
alphabetized)
Book:
Last name, First name. Title (Location: Publisher, Year of publication).
Cleary, Richard. Merchant Prince and Master Builder: Edgar J. Kaufmann and Frank
Lloyd Wright (Pittsburgh and Seattle: Carnegie Museum of Art and University of
Washington Press, 1999).
Article:
Last name, First name, “Title of article,” Title of Journal volume number/issue number
(Month, Year), page numbers of entire article.
Chow, Renee Y. “In a Field of Party Walls: Drawing Shanghai’s Lilong,” Journal of the
Society of Architectural Historians, 73/1 (March 2014), 16-27.
For additional information consult a style guide such as Kate L. Turabian, A Manual for
Writers of Term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations (University of Chicago Press,
available online: https://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/turabian/citation-guide.html).
                      MIDTERM AND FINAL EXAMINATIONS
The midterm (Tuesday, 9 October) and final examinations (Thursday, 13 December) will
have similar formats: identification of ten buildings (location, name, date, architect)
discussed in the lectures and noted on the lecture notes posted on Canvas; three essays
selected from a set of study questions.


                                                                                        12
                              SCHEDULE OF CLASSES
Week 1
Thursday, 30 August: Introduction
Reader: Hilde Heynen, “Concepts of Modernity,” in Architecture and Modernity: A
Critique (Cambridge, MA: MIT University Press, 1999), 8-14. Note: this essay offers an
introduction to ways of thinking about modernity. I suggest you return to it from time to
time during the semester.
Discussion Sections do not meet this week
Week 2
Monday, 3 September: Labor Day Holiday – No classes
Tuesday, 4 September: Cities and Landscapes in the Age of the Enlightenment
Thursday, 6 September: Rule, Sensibility, and Character in Architecture (Guest
lecture by Professor Mirka Beneš)
Discussion Section Topic: Classicism and the Picturesque
Reader response #1 due: follow the instructions on Canvas
Bergdoll, Chaps. 1, 2, 3
Week 3
Tuesday, 11 September: Historicism and the Gothic Revival
Bergdoll, Chaps. 5-6
Thursday, 13 September: Historicism and Nationalism in 19th-Century American
Architecture
Curtis, Chap. 2
Discussion Section Topic: John Ruskin and Eugène Viollet-le-Duc
Reader response #2 due
Reader: John Ruskin, The Seven Lamps of Architecture (1849) (New York: Noonday
Press, 1961): Chap. 2, “The Lamp of Truth,” 34-59; Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc,
Discourses on Architecture, Benjamin Bucknall, trans. (1875) (New York: Grove Press,
1959): Lecture X, 446-455, 473-487.
Week 4
Tuesday, 18 September: Colonialism and Identity in British India
Thursday, 20 September: Meiji Japan and Japonisme
Discussion Section Topic: East Meets West
Reader response #3 due
Reader: Thomas R. Metcalf, “Architecture and the Representation of Empire: India,
1860-1910,” Representations, no. 6 (Spring 1984), 37-65; Cherie Wendelken, “The
Tectonics of Japanese Style: Architect and Carpenter in the Late Meiji Period,” Art
Journal 55/3 (Autumn, 1996), 28-37; Toshio Watanabe, “Josiah Conder’s Rokumeikan:
Architecture and National Representation in Meiji Japan,” Art Journal 55/3 (Autumn,
1996), 21-27.


                                                                                      13
Week 5
Tuesday, 25 September: Building with Iron, Steel, and Reinforced Concrete
Bergdoll, pp. 179-184, Chap. 7; Curtis, Chap. 4
Thursday, 27 September: Railroads and Skyscrapers
For more on the design and engineering of early skyscrapers, see Thomas Leslie,
Chicago Skyscrapers, 1871-1934, available on reserve in the Architecture & Planning
Library.
Discussion Section Topic: Building Description Peer Review
Building description essay due
Week 6
Tuesday, 2 October: Cities in the Age of Industrialization
Bergdoll, Chap. 8
Reader: Renee Y. Chow, “In a Field of Party Walls: Drawing Shanghai’s Lilong,”
Journal of the Society of Architectural Historians, 73/1 (March 2014), 16-27; Luis E.
Carranza and Fernando Luiz Lara, “Francisco Pereira Passos Begins a Project to
‘Civilize’ Rio de Janeiro by Applying Baron Haussmann’s Ideas as an Answer to the
Tropical (Lack of) Urbanism,” in Modern Architecture in Latin America: Art,
Technology, and Utopia (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2014), 7-9.
Thursday, 4 October: The House Beautiful at the Turn of the 20th Century
Curtis, Chaps. 5, 7
Discussion Section Topic: Frank Lloyd Wright
Reader response #4 due
Reader: Frank Lloyd Wright, “In the Cause of Architecture,” (1908); reprinted in Bruce
Brooks Pfeiffer, ed., Frank Lloyd Wright: Collected Writings, vol. 1 (New York: Rizzoli
and the Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, 1992), 84-100; Reyner Banham, “The Well-
Tempered Home,” in The Architecture of the Well-Tempered Environment (Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press, 1969), 93-121.
Week 7
Tuesday, 9 October: Midterm Examination
Thursday, 11 October: Leaf and Crystal, Visions for a New Architecture
Bergdoll, Chap. 9; Curtis, Chap. 3
Discussion Section Topic: Adolf Loos
Reader: Adolf Loos, “Ornament and Crime” (1910, published 1912), in Ulrich Conrads,
ed., Programs and Manifestoes on 20th-Century Architecture (Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1975), 19-24.


                                                                                     14
Week 8
Tuesday, 16 October: The German Werkbund; Futurism
Curtis, Chaps. 6, 9, 12
Revised Building Description due by time of lecture
Thursday, 18 October: De Stijl; the Soviet Avant-Garde
Discussion Section Topic: Manifestos of Modernism
Reader Response #5 due
Reader: Hermann Muthesius, Henry van de Velde, “Werkbund Theses and Antitheses”
(1914), in Ulrich Conrads, ed., Programs and Manifestoes on 20th-Century Architecture
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1975), 28-31; Antonio Sant’Elia and Filippo Tommaso
Marinetti, “Futurist Architecture” (1914), in Conrads, 34-38; Theo van Doesburg,
“Towards a Plastic Architecture” (1924), in Conrads, 78-80; Mieczysław Szczuka and
Teresa Zarnower, “What is Constructivism?” (1924), in Tim and Charlotte Benton,
Dennis Sharp, eds., Architecture and Design: 1890-1939 (New York: Whitney Library of
Design, 1975), 102-103.
Week 9
Tuesday 23 October: The Modernist Villa
Curtis, Chaps. 16, 18, 19
Thursday, 25 October: Modernism and Social Housing
Curtis, Chaps. 14, 24
Discussion Section Topic: Le Corbusier vs the Neue Sachlichkeit
Research project proposal due
Reader: Le Corbusier, Towards a New Architecture (1923/1925), reprinted 1931 (New
York: Dover, 1986), 85-148; Hannes Meyer, “Building” (Bauhaus: Zeitschrift für
Gestaltung, 1928), reprinted in Ulrich Conrads, ed., Programs and Manifestoes, 117-19.
Week 10
Tuesday, 30 October: Architectural Education
Curtis, Chap. 11
Reader: Walter Gropius, “Programme of the Staatliches Bauhaus in Weimar” (1919), in
Conrads, Programs and Manifestoes, 49-53
Thursday, 1 November: The Modernist Canon and Other Expressions
Curtis, Chaps. 15, 17
Discussion Section Topic: Who Gets to Be an Architect?
Reader response #6 due
Reader: Gwendolyn Wright, “On the Fringe of the Profession: Women in American
Architecture,” in Spiro Kostof, ed., The Architect (New York: Oxford University Press,
1977), 280-308; Whitney M. Young, Jr., “Unedited Transcript of the Speech Made to the
American Institute of Architects in 1968,” in Linda Kisk, ed., 20 on 20/20 Vision:
Perspectives on Diversity and Design (Boston: Boston Society of Architects and the AIA
Diversity Committee, 2003), 9-22; Madhavi Desai, “Shifting Boundaries and Creating
Identities: Women Architects in India: 1960 Onward,” in D. Fairchild Ruggles, ed.,


                                                                                      15
Woman’s Eye, Woman’s Hand: Making Art and Architecture in Modern India: A
Collection of Essays (New Delhi: Zubann, 2014), 207-227.
Week 11
Tuesday, 6 November: Modernism and Expressions of Religious Faith
Thursday, 8 November: Architecture and the Automobile
Curtis, Chaps. 22, 26
Discussion Section Topic: Research projects
Research project outline due
Week 12
Tuesday, 13 November: Architects’ Romance with Technology
Thursday, 15 November: Postmodernism v Modernism
Curtis, Chaps. 30, 32, 33
Reader: Robert Venturi, Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture (New York:
Museum of Modern Art, 1966), 22-45; Jane Jacobs, The Death and Life of Great
American Cities (New York: Vintage Books, 1961), 3-25, 55-62.
Thursday late afternoon/evening: Poster Session
Discussion Section Topic: Research Projects
Week 13
Tuesday, 20 November: Modernism and National Identity in Brazil and Mexico
Curtis, Chap. 27; Keith Eggener, “Contrasting Images of Identify in the Post-War
Mexican Architecture of Luis Barragan and Juan O’Gorman,” Journal of Latin American
Cultural Studies 9/1 (2000), 27-45.
Wednesday, 21 November – Saturday, 24 November: Thanksgiving Holiday!
No discussion sections this week
Week 14
Tuesday, 27 November: Modernity and National Identity in Japan and China
Thursday, 29 November: Modernity and National Identity in Nigeria, the Indian
Subcontinent, and the Middle East
Curtis, Chap. 31
Discussion Section Topic: Modernism in the Middle East, Africa, and China
Reader: Nezar Alsayyad, “From Modernism to Globalization: The Middle East in
Context,” in Sandy Isenstadt and Kishwar Rizvi, eds., Modernism and the Middle East:
Architecture and Politics in the Twentieth Century (Seattle: University of Washington
Press, 2008), 255-266; Cary Y. Liu, “Encountering the Dilemma of Change in the
Architectural and Urban History of Shanghai,” Journal of the Society of Architectural
Historians, 73/1 (March 2014), 118-136; Hannah Le Roux, “Modern Architecture in
Post-Colonial Ghana and Nigeria,” Architectural History 47 (2004), 361-392.


                                                                            16
Week 15
Tuesday, 4 December: Architectural Themes of the 21st Century
Curtis, Chaps. 34, 35, Conclusion
Thursday, 6 December: No class (Final reviews in School of Architecture)
Discussion Section Topic: Wrapping Up
Week 16
Monday, 10 December: Last Class Day (UT)
Final research paper due by 5:00 p.m. as directed by teaching assistants
Monday discussion section meets as directed by teaching assistant
No other class meeting
Final Examination: Thursday, 13 December, 9:00 am-12:00 pm, Jessen Auditorium
