                                                                                                         1
                                                        AFR 374D/ HIS 350R/ WGS 340
                                                     Women, Gender, and Black Power
                                                                      UT-Austin, Spring 2019
Instructor: Dr. Ashley D. Farmer
She/ Her/ Hers
Course Description
The Black Power movement has not only shaped how we think of American society and race relations,
but also how we think about gender roles and gender equality. This course examines the movement
through the experiences of African American women activists as well as gender and sexuality constructs
that prevailed during the second half of the twentieth century. The class will familiarize students with
the history of the Black Power movement and examine scholarship about how femininity, masculinity,
and sexuality shaped and were shaped by the struggle. By the end of the course, students will be
familiar with the leading female figures of the movement as well as be able to engage in critical debates
about the intersection of gender, sexuality, and African American activism.
Required Texts
1. Dayo Gore, Jeanne Theoharis, Komozi Woodard eds., Want to Start a Revolution?: Radical Women
in the Black Freedom Struggle
2. V.P Franklin and Bettye Collier-Thomas, Sisters in the Struggle: African American Women in the Civil
Rights-Black Power Movement
3. Ashley D. Farmer, Remaking Black Power: How Black Women Transformed an Era
4. All other texts are available via CANVAS unless otherwise indicated
Course Breakdown
Class Attendance:            10%                                Revision Memo:                 10%
Class Participation:         15%                                Final Project:                20%
Response Papers (3x15%) 45%
                                           Course Requirements
Class Attendance:
Regular attendance in class is very important. Furthermore, you are expected to come to class having
read the material and prepared to engage with the assigned texts. Multiple absences will count against
you. Please notify me in advance (if possible) if you know that you will need to be absent from class.
After one unexcused absence, I will begin deducting 1/3 of a letter grade off your final participation
grade for every missed class provided. This policy can be updated on a case-by-case basis for students
with accommodations.


                                                                                                         2
Class Participation:
Your participation grade will be calculated based on your contributions to in-class discussion, critical
engagement in our group activities, and thoughtful participation during our in-class practicums. Often
times, we will perform written tasks or activities that will be collected and recorded as part of your
participation grade.
Response Papers: Due Feb 14th, March 14th, and April 11th
You will complete three 5-page response papers over the course of the semester. Each paper will ask
you state a position on a question about the major debates in the history of Women, Gender, and Black
Power. These papers are designed to help you identify the major questions in the field as well as
develop your argumentative writing skills. All Response Papers are to be submitted via CANVAS on the
due date listed on the syllabus. Papers submitted late without prior approval will be marked down ½
grade per day.
Revision Memo: Due on or before May 6th
A key part of historical writing is continually revising one’s ideas and writing on a subject. For this
assignment, you will write a revision memo for one of the response papers of your choosing. This 1-
page, single-spaced document should consist of one paragraph on how you would revise your
argument, one paragraph on how you would revise your use of evidence, and one paragraph on how
you would revise your writing style for the essay in question. The Revision Memo must be submitted via
CANVAS and can turned in before or by May 6th. Memos submitted late without prior approval will be
marked down ½ grade per day.
Final Project: Activist Profile: Due May 6th
For the final project you will do an extended profile of a female black power activist. This could be an
activist we studied in the course, one who we did not discuss, a local activist ,or one on UT’s campus.
You will research the activist in depth including their motivations, how they defined women and gender
roles, and their experiences as a black woman activist. You will present your findings on the last week
of class in a 5-minute presentation. You will also create a 1-page primer on the activist for submission
and distribution to the class along with your presentation.


                                                                                                              3
                                         Rules, Regulations, and Respect
Late Assignment Policy:
Please contact me advance of an assignment’s due date if you think that you will have difficulty meeting
a particular deadline. All assignments submitted late without permission will automatically be marked
down one half grade per day.
Academic Integrity:
The University's Institutional Rules (Section 11-802(d)) define plagiarism as including, "but not limited
to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any other means material that is
attributable in whole or in part to another source . . . and presenting that material as one's own
academic work offered for credit." In other words, “handing in someone else's work and taking credit
for it as if it were your own.” (Source: History Department statement on Academic Integrity). Students
who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the
possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the
individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on academic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity
website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
Accessibility:
This course is intended for all students at UT Austin. This includes those with mental, physical, or
cognitive disabilities, illness, injuries, impairments, or any other condition that tends to negatively affect
one’s equal access to education. If, at any point in the semester, you find yourself not able to fully
access the space, content, and experience of this course, you are welcome (but not required!) to contact
me by email, phone, or during office hours to discuss your specific needs. I also encourage you to
contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Preferred Names and Pronouns:
Courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and
nationalities. Class rosters are provided to the instructor by the university. I will gladly honor your
request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me of this preference
early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Religious Holy Days
Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class. Students will be excused from attending classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including
travel for that purpose. University policy required students to notify each of their instructors as far in
advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements can be made.
E-mail Correspondence:
E-mail is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for
reading your e-mail for university and course-related information and announcements. You are
responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-mail address. Email communication
with should be considered formal, and follow the conventions of professional emails. I will usually be
able to answer emails within 24 hours except for weekends and holidays.


                                                                                                    4
                                           Course Schedule
                                        Week 1: Introductions
                        rd
Wednesday, January 23
     • Overview of the Course
                                    Week 2: What is Black Power?
Monday, January 28th:
     • Peniel E. Joseph, “Rethinking the Black Power Era” The Journal of Southern History (August
         2009): 707-716. (CANVAS)
     • Rhonda Williams, “Black Women and Black Power” OAH Magazine (July 2008): 22-26.
         (CANVAS)
Wednesday, January 30th
     • Anatomy of a Response Paper and Revision Memo
            o We will discuss the organization and elements of course writing assignments and
                explore examples in-class
                   Week 3: Postwar Radicals and the Foundations of Black Power
Monday, February 4th
     • Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Chapter 1
     • Erik S. McDuffie, “No Small Amount of Change Could Do”: Esther Cooper Jackson and the
         Making of a Black Left Feminist,” in Want to Start a Revolution?
Wednesday, February 6th
     • Dayo Gore, “From Communist Politics to Black Power: The Visionary Politics of Victoria
         “Vicki” Garvin” in Want to Start a Revolution?
     • Fanon Che Wilkins, “Beyond Bandung: The Critical Nationalism of Lorraine Hansberry, 1950-
         1965” Radical Historical Review (Spring 2006): 191-210. (CANVAS)
                          Week 4: Neighborhood Rebels & the Early Movement
                     th
Monday, February 11
     • Ashley D. Farmer, “All the Progress to Be Made Will Be Made by Maladjusted Negroes”: Mae
         Mallory, Black Women’s Activism, and the Making of the Black Radical Tradition,” Journal of
         Social History (CANVAS)
Wednesday, February 13th
     • Sharon Harley, “‘Chronicle of a Death Foretold’: Gloria Richardson, the Cambridge
         Movement, and the Radical Black Activist Tradition,” in Sisters in the Struggle.
                        Response Paper 1 Due: Thursday, February 14th by 12pm


                                                                                                  5
                                    Week 5: Grassroots Black Power
Monday, February 18th: MFDP
     • Vicki Crawford, "African American Women in the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party,"
         in Sisters in the Struggle
     • Chana Kai Lee, "Anger, Memory, and Personal Power: Fannie Lou Hamer and Civil Rights
         Leadership" in Sisters in the Struggle
Wednesday, February 20th : Lowndes County Freedom Movement
     • Hassan Kwame Jeffries, “Organizing for More than A Vote: the Political Radicalization of
         Local People in Lowndes County Alabama, 1965-1966” (CANVAS)
                          Week 6: “We Are Gonna Start Saying Black Power!”
                      th
Monday, February 25
     • Belinda Robnett, “Women in the Student Non-Violent Coordinating Committee: Ideology,
         Organizational Structure, and Leadership” in Gender and the Civil Rights Movement,
         (CANVAS)
     • Tanisha C. Ford, “SNCC Women, Denim, and the Politics of Dress,” Journal of Southern
         History (August 2013): 625-658. (CANVAS)
Wednesday, February 27th
     • Cynthia Griggs Fleming, “Black Women and Black Power: The Case of Ruby Doris Smith and
         the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee,” in Sisters in the Struggle
     • Gwen Patton, “Born Freedom Fighter” in Hands on the Freedom Plow: Personal Accounts by
         Women in SNCC. (CANVAS)
                                    Week 7: The Black Panther Party
                 th
Monday March 4
     • Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Chapter 2
Wednesday, March 6th
     • Tracye Matthews, “‘No One Ever Asks What a Man’s Role in the Revolution Is’: Gender
         Politics and Leadership in the Black Panther Party, 1966-71,” in Sisters in the Struggle


                                                                                                     6
                        Week 8: Cultural Nationalism and the Black Aesthetic
Monday, March 11th
      • Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Chapter 3
Wednesday, March 13th
      • E. Frances White, “Africa on my Mind: Gender, Discourse, and African American
         Nationalism,” Journal of Women’s History 2:1 (Spring 1990): 73-97. (CANVAS)
                       Response Paper 2 Due: Thursday, March 14th by 12pm
                                       Week 9: Spring Break
                                 Week 10: The Black Arts Movement
                    th
Monday, March 25
      • Larry Neal, “The Black Arts Movement” The Drama Review (Summer 1968): 28-39.
         (CANVAS)
      • Cherise A. Pollard, “Sexual Subversions, Political Inversions: Women’s Poetry and the Politics
         of the Black Arts Movement,” in New Thoughts on the Black Arts Movement, 173-186.
         (CANVAS)
Thursday March 27th
      • James Smethurst, “Retraining Heartworks: Women in Atlanta’s Black Arts Movement,” in
         Want to Start a Revolution?
                          Week 11: Grassroots Fighters & Political Prisoners
Monday, April 1st :
      • Robyn Y. Williams, “Black Women, Urban Politics, and Engendering Black Power, in The
         Black Power Movement -Rethinking the Civil Rights-Black Power Era, 79-104 (CANVAS)
      • Premilla Nadasen, “We Do Whatever Becomes Necessary: Johnny Tillman, Welfare Rights,
         and Black Power,” in Want to Start A Revolution?
Wednesday, April 3rd:
      • Angela Davis, “Afro Images: Politics, Fashion, Nostalgia” in Soul: Black Power: Politics and
         Pleasure, 23-31 (CANVAS)
      • “An Interview with Assata Shakur” in Let Freedom Ring: A Collection of Documents from the
         Movements to Free US Political Prisoners, 605-620. (CANVAS)


                                                                                                      7
                                 Week 12: Women and Pan-Africanism
                th
Monday, April 8
     • Fanon Che Wilkins, ““A Line of Steel”: The Organization of the 6th Pan-African Congress and
         the Struggle for International Black Power” in The Hidden 1970s: Histories of Radicalism, 97-
         114. (CANVAS)
     • La TaSha Levy, “Remembering Sixth-PAC: Interviews with Sylvia Hill and Judy Claude,
         Organizers of the Sixth Pan-African Congress,” The Black Scholar (Winter 2008): 39-47.
         (CANVAS)
Wednesday, April 10th
     • Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Chapter 4
                         Response Paper 3 Due: Thursday April 11th by 12pm
                                     Week 13: Sex and Black Power
                   th
Monday. April 15
     • Toni Cade Bambara, “On the Issue of Roles” and “The Pill? Genocide or Liberation?” in The
         Black Woman: An Anthology (CANVAS)
     • Simone M. Carson, “Birth Control in the Black Community: Genocide or Power Politics?
         Journal of Social History (Spring 2008):545-569. (CANVAS)
     •
Wednesday, April 17th :
     • Stephanie Dunn, “Black Power and New Baad Cinema” in Baad Bitches" and Sassy
         Supermamas: Black Power Action Films(CANVAS)
     • Stephanie Dunn, “Race, Gender, and Sexual Power in Cleopatra Jones, in Baad Bitches" and
         Sassy Supermamas: Black Power Action Films (CANVAS)
                                    Week 14: Black Power Feminism
                   nd
Monday, April 22
     • Sherie Randolph, “‘Women’s Liberation or Black Liberation You’re Fighting the Same
         Enemies’: Florynce Kennedy, Black Power, and Feminism, in Want to Start a Revolution?
     • Kimberly Springer, “Black Feminists Respond to Black Power Masculinism,” in The Black
         Power Movement -Rethinking the Civil Rights-Black Power Era, 105-118 (CANVAS)
Wednesday, April 24th
     • Frances Beal, “Double Jeopardy: to Be Black and Female” (CANVAS)
     • Farmer, Remaking Black Power, Chapter 5


                                                                                             8
                               Week 15: Freedom Fighters Yesterday and Today
Monday April 29th
     • Duchess Harris, “From Kennedy Commission to Combahee Collective: Black Feminist
        Organizing, 1960-1980,” in Sisters in the Struggle
Wednesday, May 1st
     • #FergusonFridays: Not all the Black Freedom Fighters are Men: An Interview with Black
        Women on the Front Line in Ferguson The Feminist Wire, October 3, 2014. (online)
                               Week 16: Activist Profile Presentations
Monday, May 6th
     • Activist Profile Presentations
Wednesday, May 8th
     • Activist Profile Presentations
