                           Urban Experiences in East Asia
Fall 2018, ANS 361/URB 354
Instructor: Professor Youjeong Oh, youjeong@utexas.edu
Course Website: Canvas ANS 361
Course Description
Urbanization in East Asia has taken place in rapid, massive and turbulent ways. The
purpose of this class lies in employing urbanization as an analytical category through which
we can examine development, modernization, the politics of accumulation and distribution,
state-society relations, urban struggles and activism in East Asia. The class lectures are
organized, therefore, around topics rather than by country and city. For more critical
examinations, we will also learn and discuss key concepts in Geography and Urban Studies,
such as modernity, uneven development, place-making, gentrification, cultural
agglomeration, global cities, and urban social movements. Reading various books and
articles on urban issues, this course aims to advance the understanding of East Asia’s
contemporary dynamics and East Asia in global context. We will supplement our readings
by drawing various other materials including maps and illustrations, films, and video clips
of TV programs.
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to
increase your familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should
therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from assignments covering
the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-U.S. cultural group, past or present.
Requirements
    1. Required reading and class participation (10%). Students are required to come to
        class having already done the reading for the day. This is the minimum required of
        you to be in the class. All students are expected to contribute to class discussion in a
        positive, relevant and respectful way.
    2. Class attendance (10%). Class attendance is mandatory and will be checked
        regularly including the add/drop period. Students are allowed one absence. For
        each unexcused absence after that, your final grade will be lowered by 2 points, up
        to maximum 10 points. The only exception to this policy is your health condition. In
        order to be excused from absence due to nay health problem, you must bring in a
        note from your doctor. If you come to class 10 minutes late or leave the classroom
        earlier, it will be considered as tardiness; three occasions will be regarded as a full
        absence.
    3. Discussion Role (10%). Students will make class presentations to summarize major
        points of the assigned class reading(s). Summarization should touch authors’ major
        arguments in the readings within maximum 10 minutes.
                                                                                                1


     4. Small Paper (10%). Students are required to write a small paper. Paper topics: TBA.
          Hardcopy of a 2 (single-space) page paper is due on October 18th in class. (Late
          or emailed papers will be accepted, but it will lower your grade by 3 points.)
     5. Group Project (30%). Students (in a group) are required to complete an analytical
          project on any topics about urban conditions and practices; research subjects could
          not be limited to East Asian urban phenomenon; your project should contain critical
          analyses of the selected topics.
          1) Each group need to submit two (single-space) page prospectus to describe
              what topic(s) you will explore, what types of research method you will employ,
              what sorts of data you need to collect, and the preliminary and expected
              findings, by Week 5 (Sep. 27th).
          2) Each group should meet with the instructor at least once before the final
              presentation to discuss the research topics and analytical frameworks.
          3) Students will make class presentation in Week 11 and Week 12 about the final
              findings of their projects. Presentations should include research question(s),
              analytical frameworks, key findings, argument(s), and implication(s). (20%.)
          4) Each group needs to submit the final project materials by December 6th. (10%.)
     6. Take-home final exam (30%). Essay questions based on class lecture and readings. A
          hardcopy of typed final paper should be submitted no later than December 6th, in
          class. (Late or emailed papers will be accepted, but it will lower your grade by 10
          points.)
** In any cases you cannot make the deadlines of assignments and papers, you should give
me reasonable notice at least one week prior to the deadlines.
Academic Dishonesty
Cheating and plagiarism are serious offences and will not be tolerated. Plagiarism is representing
someone else’s work as your own. This includes handing in another student’s paper, and it
includes using the words and/or ideas from a publication, the web or other source without
citation. Always cite your sources (in whatever format). Please refer to this site:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_plagiarism.php.
Etiquette
All lectures are proprietary material. Audio or video of lectures in any forms is not permitted.
Please arrive on time. No cell phone use or text messaging during class time. If you use your
laptop in class, I had better see note taking only. (Any use of these devices, including texting,
web surfing, games, studying for another class, or catching up on reading, etc. will lead to
dismissal from class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat offenders will result in a
filing of a report of academic problems.
University Notices and Policies
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your
email for university and course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university
informed about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay current
                                                                                                                    2


with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and
instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
students with disabilities. If you require special accommodations, you will need to obtain a letter that documents your
disability from Services for Studies with Disabilities. Present the letter to me at the beginning of the semester (within
first two weeks), so we can discuss the accommodations you need. No later than five business days before an exam,
you should remind me of any testing accommodations you will need. For more information, contact Services for
Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone) or www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
Religious Holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order
to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time
after the absence.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is
activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may
not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do
not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Weekly Topics and Readings
(subject to change at the discretion of the instructor).
** All readings are available on Canvas.
Week 1 Introduction
      August 30. Distribution of syllabus. Introduction to class themes and requirements.
Week 2 Spectacular Beijing
      September 4. Film: New Beijing: Reinventing a City (2010). 52min.
       September 6. Beijing Olympics and the City
Readings:
Broudehoux, Anne-Marie. (2007). “Spectacular Beijing: The Conspicuous Construction of an
Olympic Metropolis.” Journal of Urban Affairs 29 (4): 383-399.
Week 3 Space and Commodity
      September 11. Space and Commodity
Readings:
Pattillo, Marry. (2013). “Housing: Commodity versus right.” Annual Review of Sociology 39:
509-531.
                                                                                                                          3


    September 13. Rentier Capitalism
Readings:
Hudson, Michael. (1998). “Financial Capitalism v. Industrial Capitalism.” Contribution to
The Other Canon Conference on Production Capitalism vs. Financial Capitalism
Oslo, September 3-4, 1998. http://michael-hudson.com/1998/09/financial-capitalism-v-
industrial-capitalism/.
Week 4 Post Socialism and Chinese Urbanization
    September 18. The Politics of Metropolitan Expansion in China
Readings:
Hsing, You-tien. (2006). “Land and Territorial politics in Chinese cities.” The China
  Quarterly 187:1-18.
    September 20. Grassroots Resistance against Demolition and Displacement
Readings:
Hsing, You-tien. (2010). “Urban housing mobilizations.” In You-tien Hsing and Ching Kwan
  Lee eds. Reclaiming Chinese Society: The New Social Activism. Routledge.
Week 5 State Space
    September 25. Political Forest
Readings:
Peluso, Nancy Lee and Peter Vandergeest. (2001). “Genealogies of the political forest and
customary rights in Indonesia, Malaysia, and Thailand.” The Journal of Asian Studies 60
(3):761-812.
    September 27. State Space
Readings:
Yeh, Emily. (2013). Taming Tibet: Landscape Transformation and the Gift of Chinese
Development. Cornell University Press. (Read Chapter 1).
* Research Prospectus Due
Week 6 Uneven Development and Migration
    October 2. Floating population and space of difference
Readings:
Zhang, Li. (2001). Strangers in the City: Reconfigurations of Space, Power, and Social
Networks within China's Floating Population. Stanford University Press. (Read Chapter 1).
    October 4. Spatio-Temporal Migration
Readings:
Rofel, Lisa. (2008). “Temporal-Spatial Migration: Workers in Transnational Supply-Chain
Factories.” In Carlos Rojas and Ralph Litzinger eds. Ghost Protocol: Development and
Displacement in Global China. Duke University Press. pp. 167-190.
                                                                                          4


Week 7 Spectacles
    October 9. Film: Mardi Gras: Made in China (2005)
    October 11. Marketing Mardi Gras
Readings:
Gotham, Kevin. (2002). “Marketing Mardi Gras: Commodification, Spectacle and the
Political Economy of Tourism in New Orleans.” Urban Studies 39 (10): 1735-1756.
Week 8 Rethinking Peripheries
    October 16. Struggles in Okinawa I
Readings:
Inoue, Masamichi. (2017). Okinawa and the U.S. Military: Identity Making in the Age of
Globalization. Columbia University Press. (Read Chapter 2.)
    October 18. Struggles in Okinawa II
Readings:
Inoue, Masamichi. (2017). Okinawa and the U.S. Military: Identity Making in the Age of
Globalization. Columbia University Press. (Read Chapter 6.)
** Small Paper Due
Week 9      Mobility and Place
    October 23. Film: B.A.T.A.M. (2005)
    October 25. The Anxieties of Mobility
Readings:
Lindquist, Johan A. (2008). The Anxieties of Mobility: Migration and Tourism in the
Indonesian Borderlands. University of Hawaii Press. (Chapter 1&4).
Week 10 Urbanization in India
   October 30. Global City Making
Readings:
Ghertner, D. Asher. (2015). Rule by Aesthetics: World-class City Making in Delhi. Oxford
University Press. (Read Chapter 1).
   November 1. Betting on the Future
Readings:
Searle, Llerena G. (2016). Landscape of Accumulation: Real Estate and the Neoliberal
Imagination in Contemporary India. University of Chicago Press. (Read Chapter 3).
                                                                                         5


Week 11 Student Presentation
    November 6. Group Presentation
    November 8. Group Presentation
Week 12 Student Presentation
    November 13. Group Presentation
    November 15. Group Presentation
Week 13 Modernity and Development I
    November 20. Modernity and Development
Readings:
Berman, Marshall. (1982). All That IS Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity.
  (Read Introduction and Chapter 1.)
    November 22. Thanksgiving Holiday
Week 14 Modernity and Development II
    November 27. In Pursuit of Progress.
Readings:
Bulloch, Hannah. (2017). In Pursuit of Progress: Narratives of Development on a Philippine
Island. University of Hawaii Press. (Read Chapter 4.)
    November 29. In Pursuit of Progress.
Readings:
Bulloch, Hannah. (2017). In Pursuit of Progress: Narratives of Development on a Philippine
Island. University of Hawaii Press. (Read Chapter 6.)
Week 15 Urban Experiences in East Asia
    December 4. Jeju Free International City
    December 6. Wrap-up discussions
    * Final Exam Due
                                                                                           6
