                                 SYLLABUS - ANT 301 (31470)
            HONORS INTRODUCTION TO BIOLOGICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
                                        Fall Semester 2018
PROFESSOR:             Dr. Chris Kirk
                       Office: SAC 5.154
                       Email: eckirk@austin.utexas.edu
                       Office hours: W 1:00 – 3:00 PM
LECTURES:              Tuesday and Thursday, 9:30 – 11:00 AM       SAC 5.172
TEXTBOOKS AND READING ASSIGNMENTS:
        Required: How Humans Evolved - 7th Edition – by Robert Boyd and Joan Silk
               WW Norton & Co., 2015
        ISBN: 9780393936773 ; Available as paperback, looseleaf, or e-book
       Additional readings will be posted on Canvas at: http://canvas.utexas.edu
PREREQUISITES: Admission to the Liberal Arts Honors Program, or consent of the LAH
                       course director
                                   COURSE DESCRIPTION:
Biological anthropology (also called physical or evolutionary anthropology) is the study of the
behavior, ecology, and evolution of primates, including humans. As a scientific discipline,
research in biological anthropology is (1) empirical and (2) grounded in the scientific method.
ANT 301 is intended to provide an introduction to the field of biological anthropology and an
overview of its sub-disciplines. ANT 301 is also designed to provide the necessary foundational
knowledge required for all upper division courses in biological anthropology. The first several
weeks of class focus on living primate diversity. The remaining lectures focus on three main
topics: 1) primate behavior and ecology, 2) micro- and macroevolution, and 3) primate and
human evolution. In-class lab exercises will generally expand on concepts presented in lectures,
and will provide students with an opportunity for hands-on exploration of skeletal and fossil
materials.
This course may be used to fulfill the natural science and technology (Part II) component of the
university core curriculum. Courses meeting this requirement are designed to give students an
                                                                                                 1


appreciation of the current state of knowledge in two or more areas of natural science and
technology, and to help students understand the methods, approaches, and theories that scientists
use to answer questions about the natural world. To meet these core objectives, students taking
ANT 301 are expected to gain a detailed understanding of biological evolution and adaptation
(considered foundational knowledge in all life sciences). Students are also introduced to a range
of scientific concepts and methods that are central to biological anthropology and related
scientific disciplines (e.g., biology, geology, and paleontology).
                                      ON-LINE MATERIALS:
Some readings will be made available through Canvas at: http://canvas.utexas.edu
Please note that class lectures will not be made available on-line, and will not be provided
to students who have missed lectures.
                                              GRADING:
There will be three exams covering all lectures and reading assignments. All exams will be non-
cumulative. THERE IS NO FINAL EXAM.
DO NOT MISS AN EXAM. Make-up exams will be given only when medical or family
emergencies can be documented. If you miss an exam due to an emergency, you must contact
Prof. Kirk as soon as possible and provide documentation within 5 days of the exam. FYI: If you
are sick on an exam day, don’t ask the Student Health nurse who schedules your appointment for
a note – get one from the physician or PA who sees you.
If you have any questions about your grade on an exam, Prof. Kirk will be happy to re-grade
your whole exam if it was completed in indelible ink. Please write out a short statement
explaining your specific concerns (e.g., incorrect addition of the number of wrong answers on a
page, why you think that a question was graded incorrectly and what you think the correct
answer should have been, etc.). Then give your (1) written explanation & request for a re-grade
and (2) your original exam to Prof. Kirk. You have 1 week after the exams have been returned to
you to notify Prof. Kirk of any errors or disagreements. After that, grades are final.
Your grade for the semester will be based on the following four components:
                         Exam 1 ----------------------------- 30%
                         Exam 2 ----------------------------- 30%
                         Exam 3 ----------------------------- 30%
                         Extant Primate Species Report --- 5%
                         Fossil Primate Species Report ---- 5%
Final Grade Ranges:
A = 100-90; B = 89-80; C = 79-70; D = 69-60; F = 59 and below
                                                                                                  2


PLEASE NOTE THE FOLLOWING GRADING POLICIES:
- Final letter grades are assigned according to the integer ranges shown above. Pluses and
minuses will not be assigned for final grades.
- After one unexcused absence, one percentage point will be subtracted from your final grade
(i.e., cumulative final average) for each additional unexcused absence.
- Species reports that are not turned in as hard copies at the beginning of class on the day they are
due will receive a grade of zero.
- All grades for the semester are final. Students will not be provided with opportunities for
“bonus work” to increase their final grade.
- Documentation of excused absences from an exam will not be considered more than 1 week
after the date of the exam.
                                        CHEATING POLICY:
During exams, students will not be permitted to wear hats or use electronic devices of any kind
(including, but not limited to, cell phones, mp3 players, headphones, and smart watches). Please
silence cell phones before an exam begins. If your cell phone rings during an exam, do not
remove it from your pocket, backpack, or purse. All exams must be completed using a pen with
indelible ink, or you will forfeit the opportunity to request a re-grade of your exam.
BE ADVISED that on exam days, students will only be allowed to take a pen to their seat. All
backpacks, book bags, purses, drinks, food, jackets, etc. must be left at the front of the
classroom.
Students are welcome to participate in online forums for discussion and study (e.g., a Facebook
page for this course). However, Dr. Kirk must be permitted to join any such forum in order to
monitor content. Please note that sharing information about an exam with a student who has not
yet taken an exam will be considered cheating, regardless of the means by which the information
is shared (e.g., verbally, on a web page, via email, via text message, etc.). Students who observe
cheating via electronic media are encouraged to contact Dr. Kirk.
Without exception, any student found cheating on an exam will receive a grade of zero for the
exam and will be referred to Student Judicial Services for further disciplinary action. Note that
any attempt to alter a graded, returned exam in order to improve the score will be considered
cheating and will result in a grade of zero for the exam.
Plagiarism on species reports is also considered cheating – any plagiarism (i.e., half of a single
sentence) will result in a grade of zero for the report and referral to Student Judicial Services.
Note that cutting and pasting text without a citation and quotation marks is plagiarism. If you
have any questions about what constitutes plagiarism, you are encouraged to speak to Dr. Kirk.
                                                                                                    3


SPECIAL ACCOMMODATIONS:
If you require special accommodations for exams (e.g., a reduced-distraction environment or
extra time), you must contact Dr. Kirk at least 7 days before an exam in order to discuss the
necessary arrangements. There will be no exceptions to this rule. Proof of qualification for
accommodations from the UT Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) office must be
provided. Each time a student wishes to use an approved accommodation for an exam, it is the
student’s responsibility to notify and make arrangements with Dr. Kirk.
A student is free not to use an approved accommodation. However, if a student opts out of an
accommodation for one exam and then decides to use it for another exam, it is the responsibility
of the student to make advance arrangements with Dr. Kirk.
                                    OTHER CLASS POLICIES:
1. CELL PHONES MUST BE KEPT SILENT AND IN YOUR POCKET, BAG, PURSE
OR BACKPACK FOR THE DURATION OF CLASS. Please don’t text in class. Please
don’t read from your cell phone in class. I’ll remind everyone about this policy one time each
day. If I see a cell phone after this reminder, you will be asked to leave the classroom.
2. Feel free to take notes on a computer. However, no one is allowed to make audio or video
recordings of lectures under any circumstances. Similarly, no one is allowed to photograph the
Power Point slides during lecture.
Please note also that students who use their computers for anything other than taking notes
may be asked to turn off their computer and/or to leave the classroom.
3. If you want to send me a message, please use my email address and not the message
function in Canvas. I generally do not see and therefore will not reply to messages sent in
Canvas.
4. GUNS: While I cannot legally ban concealed guns from my classroom, I can exercise my first
amendment right to let you know that I would strongly prefer that you NOT bring them into my
classroom. I CAN legally ban concealed guns from my faculty office. Thus, this (and my reading
of this statement aloud in class) is my official notification that you may not bring any guns into
my faculty office.
                                                                                                   4


COURSE OUTLINE AND READINGS*
DATE          TOPIC                            READINGS**
30 Aug (Th)   Primate Characteristics          B&S Ch. 5
4 Sep (Tu)    Strepsirrhines and Tarsiers      B&S Ch. 5
6 Sep (Th)    Monkeys                          B&S Ch. 5
11 Sep (Tu)   Hominoids                        B&S Ch. 5
13 Sep (Th)   Intro to Primate Ecology         B&S Ch. 6-7
18 Sep (Tu)   Group-Living and Mating Systems  B&S Ch. 6-7
20 Sep (Th)   Socioecology and Sociobiology    B&S Ch. 6-7
25 Sep (Tu)   Social Behavior I                B&S Ch. 6-7
27 Sep (Th)   Social Behavior II ***           B&S Ch. 8
2 Oct (Tu)    EXAM 1
4 Oct (Th)    History of Evolutionary Thought  B&S Ch. 1-3
9 Oct (Tu)    Darwin and the Modern Synthesis  B&S Ch. 1-3
11 Oct (Th)   Macroevolution 1                 B&S Ch. 4
16 Oct (Tu)   Macroevolution 2                 B&S Ch. 4
18 Oct (Th)   Primate Evolution 1              B&S Ch. 9
23 Oct (Tu)   Primate Evolution 2              B&S Ch. 9
25 Oct (Th)   Primate Evolution 3              B&S Ch. 9
30 Oct (Tu)   Primate Evolution 4              B&S Ch. 9
1 Nov (Th)    EXAM 2
6 Nov (Tu)    Australopithecines 1             B&S Ch. 10-11
8 Nov (Th)    Australopithecines 2             B&S Ch. 10-11
13 Nov (Tu)   Australopithecines 3             B&S Ch. 10-11
15 Nov (Th)   Early Homo 1                     B&S Ch. 12-13
20 Nov (Tu)   Early Homo 2                     B&S Ch. 12-13
22 Nov (Th)   NO CLASS - Thanksgiving
27 Nov (Tu)   Early Homo 3 ****                B&S Ch. 12-13
29 Nov (Th)   Neanderthals                     B&S Ch. 12-13
4 Dec (Tu)    Modern Human Origins             B&S Ch. 12-13
6 Dec (Th)    EXAM 3
* Schedule subject to change.
**Additional readings TBA
***Extant Primate Species Report due in-class
****Fossil Primate Species Report due in class
                                                             5
