           SYLLABUS AND COURSE OUTLINE`
                   *********************
           BUSINESS OF SPORTS TELEVISION
                     ADV 378/PR 378
                        SPRING 2020
              Tuesdays and Thursdays 2-3:15pm
                Location: CMB 2.104
                  Instructor: Joel Lulla, JD
                   Telephone 512-471-9616
           E-Mail:         Joel.Lulla@austin.utexas.edu
Office Hours and location: By appointment in CMB 2.104
            Graduate Assistant: Reece White
                                                        1


                        Moody College of Communication
                            University of Texas at Austin
  Title:              Business of Sports Television
                      Course number: ADV 378/PR 378
  Description:        This course will first examine the structure and economics of the
                      television industry in general and then use this knowledge as a foundation
                      to explore the particular structure and economics of sports television.
                      The course will also examine case studies of certain important sports
                      programming deals, with a focus on the corporate players behind these
                      agreements and the reasons the deals were made. The basics of program
                      production and the economics of the various distribution methods of
                      sports television programming will be examined, including over-the-air,
                      cable/satellite/telecommunications, mobile and streaming platforms. The
                      course will be primarily lecture and discussion of important issues in
                      sports television with guest speakers who play an important role in
                      today’s industry.
  Objectives:         The student who successfully completes this course will ideally be able
                      to:
      1.    Appreciate the history of sports television and the impact of this history on the
            current shape of the industry.
      2.    Understand the structure and economics of the various sports television distribution
            platforms.
      3.   Understand the basics of how sports television programs are produced.
      4.    Analyze the structure and economics of important current and past deals for sports
            programming.
      5.    Recognize the key corporate players in sports television and understand their
            motives and objectives in pursuing certain deals.
                                    COURSE OUTLINE
Approach:
  This course will be comprised of thirty (30) sessions (two sessions per week), including a
  mid-term examination and an examination on the last day of class (May 7), with each
  individual session being approximately seventy five (75) minutes in length. There will
                                                                                               2


   mixture of lecture by the principal instructor and guests, group discussion, student
   presentations and in-class quizzes and examinations.
Class Preparation:
   1. It is expected that each student will be prepared to participate in informed and
        constructive discussions.
   2. Reading assignments and homework must be done prior to attending class so that all
        students will benefit from an informed discussion of issues.
   3. All written assignments are to be typed. Spelling, grammar, and punctuation must
        conform to professional standards. If your written assignments incorporate concepts
        that originated with others, you must acknowledge your utilization of these concepts
        pursuant to MLA citation standards.
   4. All cell phones will be turned off prior to class and use of laptops is NOT permitted,
        except to take weekly quizzes on Canvas as discussed below. Students are
        encouraged to take notes using pen and paper.
Attendance:
   Students are expected to attend every class, which is critical to their success in the course
   and the success of the course itself. As noted below, a substantial proportion of each
   student’s grade will be attributable to in-class activities. Students should be prepared to
   start the class session on time. If for some reason, a student is unable to attend class, that
   student is expected to inform the instructor or GA via email prior to class. Being absent
   or late for class may result in a reduction of a student’s grade for the course. If a student
   misses a class for any reason, it is also the responsibility of the student to be informed of
   the materials covered during the class. Each student is encouraged to find a “class buddy”
   who can share information and assignments.
 Academic Integrity and Standards:
   Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and integrity in
   all course activities and assignments. It is expected that there shall be no deception regarding
   the representation made by the student of his/her preparation, participation or performance.
   Plagiarism is presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own and is a form of
   fraud. Plagiarism includes (but is not limited to) the presentation of a sequence of words
   from another writer, utilized without proper attribution. It is critical that students properly
   acknowledge the work of others and that the acknowledgement be accurate and complete.
   The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and plagiarism
   are subject to the standard policies and procedures for all UT-Austin students as established
   by UT-Austin
   .
                                                                                                  3


University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect
toward peers and community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities at
471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). Also, see
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Use of Canvas in Class
In this class I will periodically use Canvas—a Web-based course management system
with password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu —to give weekly
quizzes to students, distribute course materials, to communicate and collaborate
online, to post grades and to distribute assignments. You can find support in using
Blackboard at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6
p.m., so plan accordingly. Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond
to requests for their feedback)
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your
e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend
daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies
and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting in a disturbing manner, you may use the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of
the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
                                                                                            4


Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at all
educational institutions, including UT Austin, that receive federal funds. UT Austin is
committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all
its forms. Wen sexual misconduct occurs our community, the University can take any or
all of the following actions:
1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating;
2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experience harm or
    have become involved in a Title IX investigation.; and
3. Investigate and discipline violators of the University’s relevant policies.Emergency
    Evacuation Policy
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees”
and/or "Mandatory Reporters”, which means that they are required to report alleged
violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and
Mandatory Reporter and must report any Title IX-related incidents that are disclosed to
me. Before taping with me or with any other faculty or staff member about a Title IX-
related incident, be sure to ask whether he, she or they is a Responsible Employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to
the University, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting
options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
I also take any kind of discrimination or harassment very seriously, and I urge you to
report any sexual misbehavior, discrimination, harassment and/or retaliation on the basis of
race, color, religion, national origin, sex, pregnancy, age, disability, citizenship, veteran
status, genetic information, sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression to the
Office for Inclusion and Equity. Alternatively, you can tell me and I’ll report it.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember
         that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the
         building.
     If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of
         class.
     In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
                                                                                              5


Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department,
the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
        “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education
may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses,
including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
You can find advice, models, templates, and other resources for designing your course
syllabus on the DIIA website at http://www.utexas.edu/academic/diia/
Grading and Evaluation:
Individual assessment will be based on attainment of up to 100 points with the number of points
assigned to each means of grading and method of evaluation as listed below:
          In-Class quizzes, attendance                             40% (40 points)
          Class Participation and Presentation
          Midterm Exam                                             30% (30 points)
          Last Day Exam                                           30% (30 points)
In Class Quizzes shall be given by use of Canvas. It is expected that a quiz will be given weekly
on that week’s issue of Sports Business Journal. Those in attendance on the date the quizzes are
given will receive a minimum of 1 point for participating in the quiz and receiving a minimum of
one correct answer on that quiz. Please note that you may not be able to participate in the
quiz unless you have your smartphone or laptop with you in class (which may be used for
quizzes only). Also please note that unless you are in attendance, you will not be able to earn
points from that day’s quiz toward your final grade. Therefore, attendance is very
important.
In-Class Presentation: Students will be paired in groups of two or three and each group will
make a short presentation to the class about an aspect of sports television of interest to that group.
Midterm Exam. A Midterm exam shall be given on March 12. It will consist of a number of
multiple choice and/or true/false, profit/loss calculations and similar type questions and will cover
material assigned and lectures given through the date of the exam.
Last Day Exam. An exam shall be given on the last day of class, which is May 7. It will
consist of a number of multiple choice and/or true/false, profit/loss calculations and similar type
questions and will cover material assigned and lectures given throughout the entire semester.
                                                                                                     6


Grading
Course grades will be made according to the following grading scale:
  Under the plus/minus grading system of the university, grades will be calculated as
follows: 100-94=A; 93.9-90=A-; 89.9-87=B+; 86.9-83=B; 82.9-80=B-; 79.9-77, C+; 76.9-
73=C; 72.9-70=C-; 69.9-67=D+; 66.9-63=D; 62.9-60=D-; 59.9-0=F.
.
                                Required Reading Materials
  Miller, James Andrew and Shales, Tom, ESPN: Those Guys Have All the Fun (Inside the
                               World of ESPN), Little Brown, 2011
                    Arledge, Roone, Roone: A Memoir, HarperCollins, 2003
Students will also be expected to stay current with breaking news about the sports television
industry, both on their own initiative and by checking Canvas for reading assignments that I will
add based on current developments. Students will be required to subscribe to the on-line edition
of Sports Business Journal, which is available on-line weekly commencing Monday mornings
and must be read in its entirety each week prior to that Thursday’ class.
                                          Course Plan
      Session 1 (Jan 21): Orientation to Class and Review Syllabus
           •  Review texts and additional resource material including SBJ.
           •  Discuss what students can expect of the class and what I will expect from the
              students
      Sessions 2 and 3 (Jan 23 and 28): Introduction to Broadcast Television
           •  Discussion of structure of broadcast television, including network-affiliate system,
              day-parts, syndication, and those time periods on local stations which are
                                                                                                 7


         programmed by the networks and those which are programmed by the local
         stations themselves.
     •   Discuss basic business model of broadcast television and reasons that broadcast or
         “free” television is not free anymore for the great majority consumers due to
         retransmission fees.
     •   Examine the formula for determining whether a sports event on broadcast
         television will be profitable.
Session 4 (Jan 30): Introduction to Cable Television
         •    Discuss structure of cable television and similarities and differences with the
              structure of satellite television and television services offered by
              telecommunications companies such as AT&T and Verizon.
         • Discuss basic business model of cable television and concept of
              subscriber/carriage fees.
         • Examine concept of a la carte programming and danger it presents to cable
              business model
         • Contrast business models of broadcast television and cable television.
         Case Study: The Conan O’Brien Move from NBC to TBS
         •    Although The Conan O’Brien Show is not sports television, a discussion of its
              move from NBC to TBS instead of FOX is illustrative of the differing
              economics of broadcast and cable networks
         •    Discuss local station recapture and syndication issues, prime time pre-
              emption, and affiliate compensation problems that led to O’Brien’s move to
              TBS
Session 5 (Feb 4): Super Bowl Commercials
                •   Discussion and Analysis of Commercials from Sunday’s Super Bowl
                    Telecast on CBS
                    Assignment for this Session: Review all Super Bowl Ads on YouTube
                    or similar platform
Session 6 (Feb 6): ESPN
     •   Introduction to ESPN, its networks and platforms
     •   Discuss basic business model of ESPN
     •   Discuss basic business model of Longhorn Network and SEC Network
                                                                                              8


      •   Readings for this session: ESPN: Those Guys Have All the Fun, Chapter 1,
          pages 1-58.
 Session 7 (Feb 11): ESPN (continued from Session 6)
      •   Continue discussion from Session 4 on ESPN, its business model, networks and
          platforms
      •   Discuss current assets and properties, including events owned by ESPN such as X
          Games and college bowl games
      •   Case study: ESPN’s 15 year/ $2.25B deal in 2008 for SEC rights and how that
          deal was financed by the increased value of ESPNU. Contrast the ESPN
          agreement with the SEC with CBS’s 15 year/$825M agreement for SEC rights.
      •   Readings for this session: ESPN: Those Guys Have All the Fun, Chapter 2,
          pages 59-101
   Session 8 (Feb 13): Guest Speaker: TBA
    Session 9 (Feb 18): Sports Event Rights Contracts
        •   Review model contract between a television network and a sports event owner
            for the network’s license of the right to telecast a sports event
        •   Discuss important terms of rights contracts
        •   Examine and contrast different types of compensation in rights contracts, e.g.,
            rights fee contracts, barter contracts and time buys.
        •   Readings for this session: Model contract between ESPN and Event
            Organizer on Canvas.
Session 10 (Feb 20): Abridged History of Sports Television
            •    Review beginnings of sports television
            •    Discuss career and influence of Roone Arledge on sports television industry
                 today
            •    Readings for this session: Roone, A Memoir, Chapters 3-4, pages 23-61
                 and Chapters 7-8, pages 99-139
  Session 11 (Feb 25): Introduction to Industry Players
                                                                                            9


      •   Discuss the major sports and non-sports assets and basic corporate strategy of
          key media players, including Disney, FOX, ViacomCBS, Comcast,
          AT&T/TimeWarner/DirecTV.
      •   Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 12 (Feb 27): Intercollegiate Sports Rights
    •   Discuss television contracts for “Power 5” and mid-major conferences, CFP and
        non-CFP bowl games.
    •   Examine sales of third tier telecast rights of individual universities to sports
        management companies such as IMG and Learfield.
    •   Examine weakening of the American Athletics Conference (formerly the Big
        East Conference)
    •   Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 13 (Mar 3): Case Study: The Big 12 Conference--The Rise and Fall and
Rise and Fall and Rise of the Big 12
    •   Examine origins of Big 12 in 1994.
    •   Discuss period from May of 2010 through the present, including defections of
        Nebraska, Colorado, Texas A&M and Missouri along with additions of TCU
        and West Virginia.
    •   Discuss the Big 12’s cable television contracts with Fox and ESPN and the
        influence of television, including The Longhorn Network, on recent events
        affecting the Big 12.
    •   Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 14 (Mar 5): Session 17 (Mar 24): The BCS and College Football Playoff
            •   Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 15 (Mar 10): Audience Measurement (Ratings) and Commercial Sales
and Sponsorships
       •   Examination of AC Nielsen Co. and its methodology and metrics for
           measuring audience size and characteristics
       •   Discuss importance of ratings in determining advertising rates.
       •   Examine ratings histories for past sports events
       •   Discussion of Upfront market sales and scatter or spot market sales
                                                                                         10


       •   Examine sales of commercial units alone or in integrated packages across
           different platforms and metrics for pricing of units or packages
       •   Examine Title and Presenting Sponsorship packages
       •   Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 16 (Mar 12): Mid-Term Examination
Session 17 (Mar 24): Case Studies: NCAA Basketball Tournament and Pac 12
      Conference
    •   Contrast prior NCAA Tournament contract with CBS and current contract
        shared by CBS and Warner Media (Formerly Turner Sports)
    •   Examine contract of Pac 12 Conference with ESPN and FOX and compare with
        Big 12 Conference contracts with ESPN and FOX
    •   Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 18 (Mar 26) Regional Sports Networks
            •   Examine major RSN’s around the country and their corporate owners
            •   Discuss business model of RSN’s
            •   Examine formation and bankruptcy of CSN Houston
            •   Readings for this session: To be posted
 Session 19 (Mar 31): League-Owned Cable Networks
              •   Discuss business model and prospects for networks owned by
                  professional sports leagues and college conferences, including NFL
                  Network, MLB Network, Big Ten Network, Pac 12 Network and SEC
                  Network.
              •   Readings for this session: To be posted
 Session 20 (Apr 2): The ABC’s of Sports Television Production
            •   Discuss basics of how sports events are produced for television,
                including equipment, personnel, facilities, budgets and the role of on-air
                and off-air talent.
                                                                                        11


         Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 21 (Apr 7): Guest Speaker: TBA
Session 22 (Apr 9): Technology and Digital Media
     •   Examine affects of mobile and internet platforms (e.g., Hulu and
         YouTube) on television business in general and the sports television
         business in particular.
     •   Discuss concept of “TV Everywhere” and what it means for both the
         television and internet exploitation of sports events.
     •   Readings for this session:
Session 23 (Apr 14): The Olympic Games
     •   Discuss history of Olympics on television and rapid rights fee escalation
     •   Examine economics of 17 day multi-platform NBC Olympic telecasts
     •   Examine relationship of IOC and USOC and how it affects domestic
         television deals for the Olympics
     •   Discuss IOC and USOC sponsorship categories and requirements for
         Olympic telecasters to engage with these sponsors
     •   Examine reasons that sports such as skiing, figure skating, gymnastics,
         swimming and track and field are enormously popular with television
         audiences during the Olympics but are largely absent from the major
         networks during other times.
     •   Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 24 (Apr 16): Guest Speaker: TBA
Session 25 (Apr 21): Case Studies: NFL, Golf, Tennis and Soccer
     •   Examine network deals of the NFL, which is by far the most popular
         and lucrative sports television property in the US
     •   Discuss FOX’s initial acquisition of NFL rights and role it played in
         making FOX the fourth major broadcast network as well as the affect
         that the 1990’s loss of the NFL by CBS had on its non-sports
         programming, including “60 Minutes”
     •   Examine origins and economics of NFL Sunday Ticket and NFL Red
         Zone
                                                                                 12


    •  Examine different types of deal structures for PGA Tour events and
       major championship events
    •  Examine economic challenges of LPGA Tour telecasts
    •  Examine economic and production challenges of tennis tournaments
    •  Examine recent World Cup soccer negotiation and separate sale of US
       English and Spanish language rights
    •  Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 26 (Apr 23): Important Industry Developments and Future
Events:
    •  Examine Comcast’s acquisition of NBC, Viacom’s merger with CBS
       and AT&T’s acquisition of Time Warner.
    •  Examine ESPN’s agreement to pay $1.9B annually for NFL rights and
       new NFL deals with CBS, FOX and NBC and affects of these
       enormous rights fees on the rights fees paid for other sports
    •  Discuss migration of major sports events from broadcast to cable
       television such as NCAA basketball tournament, College Football
       Playoff, British Open golf , Wimbledon and US Open tennis.
    •  Readings for these sessions: To be posted
Session 27 (Apr 28): The Longhorn Network
    •  Readings for this session: Longhorn Network Contract on Canvas
Session 28 (Apr 30): Racial and Ethnic Sensitivities, Ethics
    •  Discuss ethics and how to comport oneself in business
    •  Discuss insensitive racial and ethic comments of sportscasters, including
       those made concerning Jeremy Lin and Robert Griffin III
    •  Readings for this session: To be posted
Session 29 (May 5): Course Wrap-up and Review for Examination
Session 30 (May 7): Examination
                                                                              13
