                         Accounting 326 - Financial Reporting and Analysis – Fall 2019
Professor: Lale Guler
E-mail: Lale.Guler@mccombs.utexas.edu
Office Location: CBA 4M.258
Office Hours: W 2:00pm-3:00pm or by appointment
Web: https://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/Directory/Profiles/Guler-Lale
Course Unique No, Meeting Time, Meeting Place: 02470, MW 9:30am-11:00pm, UTC 4.104 and
02475, MW 11:00pm-12:30pm, UTC 4.104 and 02490 MW 3:30pm-5:00pm, UTC 4.110
___________________________________________________________________________________
Overview
The course examines issues in financial reporting from both preparer and user perspectives. The basic objectives
of the course are:
(1) to learn about current U.S. GAAP.
(2) to consider the economics of transactions and events, and understand whether and how financial reporting
captures those economics. This way of thinking lays the foundation for understanding how equity and credit
analysts use financial reports and allows you to learn about business.
(3) to learn how to reason about financial reporting problems in a forward direction, similar to what preparers
normally do (i.e., work forward from the data to journal entry to financial statement) and to learn how to reason
about financial reporting problems in a backward direction, similar to what financial report users do (i.e., work
backward from financial statements and notes to the financial statements to journal entry).
Required Text
Intermediate Accounting, by Kieso, Weygandt, and Warfield, 17th edition with WileyPLUS access.
Prerequisites
Accounting 311 or 311H, and 312 or 312H, with a grade of at least C- in each; and Finance 357 or 357H.
Communication Channels
The class webpage is Canvas. Please check Canvas weekly for announcements, presentation materials, articles,
assignments, solutions to practice problems and other relevant information.
Course Format
Class sessions will be a combination of lecture and discussion. Students should bring to each class session a printed
copy of that day’s PowerPoint slides (available on Canvas prior to each class). The material covered in-class will
follow the PowerPoint slides, which are designed to clarify and complement the text material. I suggest that you
work all of the recommended questions for each chapter which will be posted on Canvas. While there will be no
points allocated to solving recommended questions, there is a direct relation between working problems and
performing successfully on examinations.


Professionalism & Participation
I expect that you will at all times exhibit high standards of professionalism in this course. Professionalism is an
important part of your training. Therefore:
1. I expect you to attend class. In the professional working world, attendance is mandatory unless illness or an
emergency prohibits it. Scheduling interviews and other appointments during class sessions is unacceptable. Please
note that performance is positively correlated with attendance. You do not need to notify me unless your absence
will be for an extended time. Office hours are not a substitute for coming to class; accordingly, I will not go over
the entire set of missed material covered in class during office hours if you have missed class. I expect you to attend
the section in which you are enrolled.
2. I expect students to arrive to class on time. It is disruptive to the class when a student enters the classroom
after class has begun, as it interrupts the flow of the lecture/discussion and distracts the other students.
3. I expect that all electronic devices will be turned off once class begins. Laptops, cell phones, smart phones,
pagers, and other communication devices are to be turned completely off (including turning off “cell phone vibrate
mode” during class time.) I also expect that reading of non-class materials will stop once class starts.
4. I expect students to not take personal breaks during class. Students leaving and returning during class is
disruptive, so please keep these disturbances to an absolute minimum.
5. I expect you to bring your nameplates to the class.
6. I expect that you will not have conversations or write notes back and forth with other students during class.
7. I expect that you will be respectful of me, the TAs, and of the other students in class and in office hours. I
expect you to communicate in a professional manner when composing e-mails to me and the TAs.
8. I expect you to be diligent in studying for the course and participate in class discussions in a professional
and constructive way. You should come to class prepared, which means that you should have read the material.
9. I expect you to be responsible for getting the course notes and in-class handouts on any day that you must
miss class. It is not my responsibility to secure any missed material for you.
In return, you can expect me and the TAs to:
1. Be in class and office hours on time.
2. Be respectful of your need to learn the material in this class. Thus, we will provide timely and full
responses to questions made in person or on Canvas and keep you up to date on changes in the syllabus or
homework solutions, again on a timely basis. You can expect us to return homework and exams in a timely
fashion to enhance your learning experience.
3. Be courteous to you in our interactions with you in and outside of class.
4. Provide you with an education that will prepare you well for the long-term.
                                                                                                                      2


Exams
There will be three closed book exams in this course. Exams are 100% independent work. You are not permitted to
use any electronic communications devices during the exam. This explicitly includes cell phones, pagers,
computers, laptops, iPads, and other advanced electronic devices. I will consider it cheating if a cell phone or other
electronic communication device is used and/or visible during the exam. You are not permitted to copy or otherwise
reproduce the exams at any time. This includes taking pictures of the exam with your cell phone or other device
while taking the exam or when reviewing graded exams. All students are required to present proof of identification
at the time of the exam. Exam papers will be recycled at the end of the semester.
Grading Policy
Your overall course grade will be comprised of the following:
Exam 1                                    20%
Exam 2                                    30%
Exam 3                                    30%
Unannounced in-class quizzes              10%
Homework assignments                      10%
Total points                             100%
Final grades will be assigned on the basis of the following rubric:
   Total Points      Letter
   94-100            A
   90-93             A-
   87-89             B+
   84-86             B
   80-83             B-
   77-79             C+
   74-76             C
   70-73             C-
   67-69             D+
   64-66             D
   60-63             D-
   Less than 60      F
While the grading scale above will be used as a guideline, translation of the total points into a letter grade will
ultimately be based on the professor’s judgment. The letter grade will reflect each student’s performance relative
to the class and standards expected of UT students. I will impose a substantial grade penalty (one course grade per
incident) for those who distract other students through cell phone or laptop use during class.
Exams may include multiple-choice, short answer and computational questions. You may have 1-page (8.5” x
11”, front/back, your own handwriting) of notes for use during the exam, which must be turned in with your
exam. Because exams require 100% independent work, electronically prepared exam notes (which can be easily
                                                                                                                     3


reproduced) will be considered as a cheating case. Any request for a re-grade must be made in writing no less than
two days and no more than seven days after the exam grades are available. The request must state, in detail, the
reason you believe the grade is in error. Requests that do not conform to this policy will not be honored.
Extra Credit & Late Work
There are no extra credit opportunities in this class. Late work is not accepted without an approved excuse as verified
by the instructor.
Make-up Exams
Students must take all exams. Any missed exam must be approved through Student Emergency Services and
makeups will be given only in truly extraordinary circumstances (at my discretion). Makeup exams are given only
for excused absences, which must be determined, if possible, prior to the exam. Excused absences may be given
for verifiable medical or family emergencies. Written documentation must be provided to qualify for an “excused
absence”. The medical documentation must specifically state that you could not complete the exam on the day of
the exam due to your illness and must be signed by a licensed physician. Students who miss an exam without making
arrangements with me prior to the exam will receive a zero. All documentation evidencing your absence from an
exam is due within five business days of the missed exam and you must make up the missed exam within five
business days. If the documentation of an emergency is not received within the five days and the exam is not
completed within the five-day window, you will receive a grade of zero. The determination of an “acceptable”
excuse is solely up to the instructor’s discretion. A job or internship interview or any other appointment does
not constitute a valid excuse for not taking the exam on the scheduled date. Students who have three or more
exams on the same date should notify the professor by the second week of classes with the documentation of their
exam date conflicts. Students who have two exams on the same date are not eligible for a make-up exam. It is solely
the student’s responsibility to communicate with the professor regarding these issues and it is solely the student’s
responsibility to ensure that the instructor is receiving the communication and any documentation. The student
should use UT e-mail as the main form of communication. Also, the student must verify that the instructor has
received the appropriate documentation within the five-day window. I do not guarantee that the level of difficulty
of the make-up exam will be comparable to the exam given at the scheduled time. I will determine the date and time
of the make-up exam, and you must make arrangements to take it at that time.
Submission of Homework Assignments through WileyPLUS
To gain access to your class, please register at the following class section URL:
wileyplus/class/713395
When you click on this link, you will be taken directly to our WileyPLUS class section, where you will log in if
you already have a WileyPLUS account, or if not you will be prompted to create one. Once that is done, you will
be taken to the e-commerce page to choose the type of access you prefer.
You must include your official UT e-mail address, and your name using only the English characters as part of
your registration to WileyPLUS.
Online homework assignments will be available at WileyPLUS every week on Wednesday. The homework will
be due on the following Tuesday (except for the WileyPLUS homework assignments #7 and #11 – please see the
class schedule on the last page). Given the fixed schedule of homework assignments, no e-mail announcement
will be sent regarding the homework assignments. It is your responsibility to check WileyPLUS website regularly.
Online homework assignments will be automatically graded by WileyPLUS Software. It is your responsibility to
successfully submit your homework assignment online. It is unlikely that WileyPLUS questions / grading
                                                                                                                      4


schemes are wrong. If you have questions regarding the grading of homework assignments through WileyPLUS,
please state the question in an e-mail to me within one week from the time that the homework assignment is due.
Questions regarding the grading of homework assignments through WileyPLUS that are submitted beyond one
week from the time the homework assignments is due will not be answered.
Having your homework assignments done by someone else is cheating, and any suspicious case will be forwarded
to the Dean of Students.
No make-up homework assignments will be offered for the missed homework assignments. If you miss the
deadline for an online homework submission, then your grade for that homework assignment is zero.
Important Student Tips for Using WileyPLUS
https://hub.wiley.com/community/support/wileyplus-v4
Technical support line: 1-877-586-0192
Unannounced In-class Quizzes
You will often be tested on the material covered in class through in-class quizzes. In order to encourage class
attendance and timely arrival in class, the dates of in-class quizzes will not be announced in advance. Different class
sections may be given quizzes on different dates. The number of in-class quizzes will not be announced in advance.
If you are absent when a quiz is given in class, then your grade for that quiz is zero. No make-up quizzes are offered
for the missed quizzes. No excuse reports will be accepted for the missed quizzes. Your professor understands that
students may occasionally have to miss a class. Therefore, at the end of the semester when calculating your point-
total, quizzes with the two lowest scores will be dropped. The syllabus quiz will be considered as an in-class quiz.
Teaching Assistants
TAs have earned their positions; they are eager to help you. They will be attending my classes and you should be
able to catch them before or after class. Content related questions on the homework assignments and other class
material must be directed to them first. TAs will not respond to grading related questions. Feel free to drop by
their office during the TA office hours that are listed at Canvas. They will have extended office hours during the
exam weeks. Check the announcements at Canvas.
Instructor’s Policy on Academic Integrity
Business professionals have important legal and ethical duties to investors, creditors and to non-investor
stakeholders who rely on their comments, analyses, forecasts and representations. Students in this course are
expected to act with personal integrity at all times. Academic dishonesty is incompatible with preparation for a
career as a responsible business professional. As such, academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course.
Any offenders will be subject to appropriate sanctions and discipline, a process which begins with a referral to Dean
of Students. For purposes of this course, the instructor will always seek a score of zero for any exam or assignment
in which the student has engaged in academic dishonesty. Information about the University’s policy on academic
integrity can be found on page 6.
Other Important Notes
This is a very demanding course. To succeed in this course you have to:
         1) Read the chapters in the book. This is critical; there are a lot of concepts covered in this course that
             you can only really grasp if you read the chapters of the book we cover. Just doing the homework is
             not enough.
         2) Work the recommended assignments listed at Canvas.
                                                                                                                      5


3) Keep up with the course. This is a comprehensive course, and the material builds upon itself. In
   addition, much of the material is highly detailed. As a result, it is highly difficult to cram this material
   at the end. You should expect to study a minimum of 6 hours (outside
   of class) per week to pass the course.
You are expected to exert a high level of effort for learning the material.
                             Get ready to be challenged.
                                                                                                             6


                                                   University Policies
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably
expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have
agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity
website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and procedures on
scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
      If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
      In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                                                                                     7


                         ACC 326 Fall 2019 Tentative Schedule Updated on 7/16/2019*
  Week        Class     Chapter in         Topic                                                      Assignment &
               Day      Textbook                                                                      Homework
     1         8/28     Chapter 1          Introduction to the course, Syllabus,                      Read the syllabus;
                                           Financial Reporting Overview                               register for
                                                                                                      WileyPLUS
     2          9/4     Chapter 2          Basic Assumptions & Principles of Financial                Syllabus quiz;
                                           Reporting                                                  review accounting
                                                                                                      cycle (Chp 3)
     3          9/9     Chapter 3          The Accounting Information System (Review)                 WPH1** due 9/10
               9/11
     4         9/16     Chapter 4          Income Statement                                           WPH2 due 9/17
               9/18
     5         9/23     Chapter 5          Statement of Cash Flows                                    Review balance
               9/25                                                                                   sheet (Chp 5);
                                                                                                      WPH3 due 9/24
     6         9/30     Chapter 5          Statement of Cash Flows                                    WPH4 due 10/1
               10/2
     7         10/7     Review             Exam will be held in the evening of 10/9 at a location
               10/9     First Exam         TBA. No class session or professor’s office hour will
                                           be held on exam day.
     8        10/14     Chapter 19         Income taxes
              10/16
     9        10/21     Chapter 14         Long-Term Debt                                             WPH5 due 10/22
              10/23
    10        10/28     Chapter 15         Stockholders’ Equity                                       WPH6 due 10/29
              10/30
    11         11/4     Review             Exam will be held in the evening of 11/6 at a location     WPH7 due 11/4
               11/6     Second             TBA. No class session or professor’s office hour will      (M)
                        Exam               be held on exam day.
    12        11/11     Chapter 16         Dilutive Securities and Earnings Per Share (EPS)
              11/13
    13        11/18     Chapter 16         Stock Compensation Plans                                   WPH8 due 11/19
              11/20
    14        11/25     Chapter 21         Leases                                                     WPH9 due 11/26
    15         12/2     Chapter 17         Intercompany Investments and Derivatives                   WPH10 due 12/3
               12/4                                                                                   WPH11 due 12/6
                                                                                                      (F)
    16         12/9     Third Exam         Exam will be held in the evening of 12/9 at a location
                                           TBA. No class session or professor’s office hour will
                                           be held on exam day.
* Descriptions and timelines (including assignment due dates and exam dates) contained
in this syllabus are subject to change at the discretion of the Professor. Any change will be announced
at the course homepage at Canvas.
**WPH: WileyPLUS homework assignment.
                                                                                                                         8
