Su19 - FRENCH I-WB (81000)
  Edit
Settings
   Click here or go to the Modules page to access course chapters.
FR 406
Summer 2019
Ryan Swankie, PhD
swank1@utexas.edu
HRH 4.136
602 295 7330
Welcome to FR 406, the first of three online French courses offered at UT
Austin. My name is Ryan Swankie and I am your course instructor. I am
available for online and phone office hours Monday-Wednesday, 10am -
noon by appointment. I ask that you please give at least 12 hours advance
notice when scheduling a meeting so that I can be sure to reserve a time just
for you. Our meetings may be virtual (online) or by phone at the office phone
number given above in accordance with your needs. You may also reach me
via Canvas email and I will respond to all non-emergency emails during office
hours, if not before.
Assignment (Module)          Due date / Time (always 9:59 am)
Bienvenue!
Semaine 1


Exploration du cours    le jeudi 6 juin (Thursday, 06/06)
Introduction au cours + le vendredi 7 juin (Friday, 06/07)
Chapitre préliminaire
Bonjour!
Semaine 2
Chapitre 1 Leçon 1      le lundi 10 juin (Monday, 06/10)
Chapitre 1 Leçon 2      le mardi 11 juin (Tuesday, 06/11)
Chapitre 1 Leçon 3      le mercredi 12 juin (Wednesday, 06/12)
Chapitre 1 Leçon 4      le jeudi 13 juin (Thursday, 06/13)
Chapitre 1 Leçon 5      le vendredi 14 juin (Friday, 06/14)
Semaine 3
Chapitre 1 Leçon 6      le lundi 17 juin (Monday, 06/17)
Chapitre 1 Leçon 7      le mardi 18 juin (Tuesday, 06/18)
                        le mercredi 19 juin (Wednesday, 06/19)
Chapitre 1 Leçon 8
                        le jeudi 20 juin (Thursday, 06/20)
Chapitre 1 Leçon 9 +
Révision
                        le vendredi 21 juin (Friday, 06/21)
Chapitre 1 Évaluations
Me  voici!
Semaine 4
Chapitre 2 Leçon 1      le lundi 24 juin
Chapitre 2 Leçon 2      le mardi 25 juin
Chapitre 2 Leçon 3      le mercredi 26 juin
Chapitre 2 Leçon 4      le jeudi 27 juin
Chapitre 2 Leçon 5      le vendredi 28 juin
Semaine 5


Chapitre 2 Leçon 6            le lundi 1er juillet
Chapitre 2 Leçon 7            le mardi 2 juillet
Chapitre 2 Leçon 8            le mercredi 3 juillet
la fête de l'indépendance     le jeudi 4 juillet
américaine
Chapitre 2 Leçon 9 +
                              le vendredi 5 juillet
Révision
Les vacances en France
Semaine 6
Chapitre 2 Évaluations        le lundi 8 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 1            le mardi 9 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 2             le mercredi 10 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 3            le jeudi 11 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 4            le vendredi 12 juillet
Semaine 7
Chapitre 3 Leçon 5            le lundi 15 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 6            le mardi 16 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 7            le mercredi 17 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 8            le jeudi 18 juillet
Chapitre 3 Leçon 9 + Révision le vendredi 19 juillet
Les gens
Semaine 8
Chapitre 3 Évaluations        le lundi 22 juillet
Chapitre 4 Leçon 1            le mardi 23 juillet
                              le mercredi 24 juillet
Chapitre 4 Leçon 2
                              le jeudi 25 juillet
Chapitre 4 Leçon 3
                              le vendredi 26 juillet
Chapitre 4 Leçon 4
Semaine 9


Chapitre 4 Leçon 5                    le lundi 29 juillet
Chapitre 4 Leçon 6                    le mardi 30 juillet
Chapitre 4 Leçon 7                    le mercredi 31 juillet
Chapitre 4 Leçon 8                    le jeudi 1er août
Chapitre 4 Leçon 9 + Révision         le vendredi 2 août
Bon appétit
Semaine 10
Chapitre 4 Évaluations                le lundi 5 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 1                    le mardi 6 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 2                    le mercredi 7 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 3                    le jeudi 8 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 4                    le vendredi 9 août
Semaine 11
Chapitre 5 Leçon 5                    le lundi 12 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 6                    le mardi 13 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 7                    le mercredi 14 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 8                    le jeudi 15 août
Chapitre 5 Leçon 9 + Révision         le vendredi 16 août
Chapitre 5 Évaluations                le samedi 17 août
 Bienvenue! Welcome! to French 406, the first semester beginning online French course offered by
 the University of Texas at Austin. In this online course, we will be using the online adaptation of the
 traditional first-year French curriculum of Français interactif, a beginning French program
 developed here at the University of Texas. FR 406, Introductory French I, FR 407, Introductory
 French II, and FR 412K, Intermediate French, have been designed for online delivery by Nancy
 Guilloteau and Karen Kelton with support and assistance from expert staff at the College of Liberal
 Arts Instructional Technology Services (LAITS), numerous graduate students and faculty members of
 the Department of French and Italian, and staff at the Center for Open Educational Resources and
 Language Learning.
 Français interactif helps you explore French language and culture by following the lives of UT
 students who participated in the UT Summer Program in Lyon, France. The UT students introduce
 you to their French host families, their French university, and their lives in France.


 In addition to following the exploits of these UT students, you also watch videos of native French
 speakers as well as scenes of day-to-day interactions in France (e.g., vendors in the market, waiters at
 a café, children getting ready to go to school, etc.). These video-based lessons lend authenticity
 to Français interactif. Authentic materials from a variety of other sources have also been
 incorporated into this online course.
 The goal of FR 406 is to help you develop your listening, speaking, reading and writing skills in
 French. You also learn useful vocabulary, grammatical structures, pronunciation, and cultural
 information, all embedded in videos and online activities.
 In addition to working independently on the online activities, there are also synchronous
 (Conferences) and asynchronous (Discussions) interactions with classmates that you will record
 online and post as assignments (videos, conversations, surveys, etc.).
 This course follows the dates of the regular University of Texas semester, June 6 to August 17, 2019.
 You should anticipate an average of 8-12 hours of work per week, depending on the types and number
 of activities assigned in each lesson and your own work style.
 Prerequisite: None. No prior knowledge of French expected.
•    TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS
     o Reliable internet connection
     o A computer with webcam, microphone and headphones. Please
          remember to do a sound check before submitting each of your
          recorded activities.
     o Canvas is designed to be compatible with Chrome, so if you are
          using a web browser other than Chrome, you might not have full
          functionality in Canvas.
•    RECOMMENDED RESOURCES
     o wordreference.com (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
          site. (free online dictionary)
     o The Canvas by Instructure app, available for download on Android
          and iOS devices
Piazza
This term we will be using Piazza for student communication on
course issues and questions. The system is designed to help you get help
fast and efficiently from your classmates. If you have any problems or
feedback for the developers, email team@piazza.com.
Find our class page at: Link (Links to an external site.)Links to an external
site.
CANVAS ASSIGNMENTS
 Regular and persistent preparation, as well as active participation with partners online, are essential to
 your success in learning French. For this reason, be aware of the due dates indicated on the course
 syllabus.Once a due date and time passes (always 9:59 am), the online activities close down and you
 are no longer able to modify them or change your grade. It is course policy to not re-open assignments
 once they have been closed. Due to the fast pace of the course, no late submissions are allowed.
 The activities in Canvas will be opened up for you one week at a time. The following week's lessons


 will go live every Friday at 10 am. This allows you to work ahead of the syllabus by just a bit, if you
 choose to do so. However, the Interaction sections often require you to work with a partner, so you
 will have to carefully coordinate with your assigned classmate to set up online meeting times while
 those activities are still open and available to you.
 While you are allowed to work ahead to a certain extent, you must work through the materials
 progressively as they appear. In other words, you cannot move on to Leçon 5 until you have
 completed Leçon 4, etc. The course has been set up so that Canvas will block you from doing this and
 also prevent you from skipping over activities.
 It will likely take some time to become familiar with Canvas. On the majority of assignments that are
 graded automatically, you will be given 2 attempts to submit your answers. With each submission,
 you will be able to see your answers, but it is not until the second submission that you are able to see
 the correct answers. Sometimes Canvas will show you exactly which items you have gotten wrong.
 Other times, depending on how the assignment has been set up, Canvas simply indicates how many
 items are wrong, but does not indicate which ones are wrong.
 When you submit paragraphs, audio and video recordings, and certain other types of expressive work,
 your course grader will review and evaluate those individually, so grader feedback will not be
 instantaneous. You should allow 48 hours from the due dates to receive grader feedback on
 regular assignments and up to 72 hours from the due dates to receive grader feedback on longer
 assignments and assessments.
 If you ever have a problem with a Canvas assignment, such as an answer that you know is correct, and
 Canvas is showing that it is not, please email me, the instructor, immediately so it can be fixed. For all
 technical issues, contact Canvas Support directly at 1-855-308-2494. Canvas technicians typically
 respond within 1-2 minutes and are available 24/7. They are extremely helpful and knowledgeable.
 If your personal computer is having issues (mic not working, videos not playing, etc.), it is your
 responsibility to borrow a computer to complete your assignments or to have your tech issues
 addressed by a professional immediately. This will not be a valid excuse to not complete an
 assignment, so it is a good idea to not wait until the last minute, particularly when submitting
 media files.
GRADING
•    The grade for every exercise you submit on Canvas counts in your final
     course grade. In addition, there is a set of culminating Évaluations at the
     end of each chapter that are designed to help assess your ability to carry
     out chapter objectives. Each Évaluation has 4 sections: writing, listening,
     reading, and speaking, combined into three separate assessments:
     Compréhension (listening and reading), Expression écrite (written
     expression), and Expression orale (spoken expression). Some of
     the Évalutations are timed, just as they would be in face-to-face classes.
 Structured Activities
 (The two lowest grades in this category are dropped at end of the semester.)
 •    Vocabulary and grammar practice activities including matching, fill-in-the-blank, Internet Activities, and more.
 Open-Ended Activities


 •   Written paragraphs, audio and video recordings, and exercises with more than one right answer
 Texercises
 •   Assignments from the Tex's French Grammar website (to be completed online and submitted via Canvas)
 Pronunciation
 •   Pronunciation practice in Lessons 1-8 of each chapter
 •   Pronunciation quizzes in Lesson 9 of each chapter
 Interactions
 •   Oral conversations carried out with another student, either synchronously or asynchronously
  Quizzes
 •   Exercises that appear at the end of Lessons 1-8 of each chapter
 •   These are timed exercises.
 Évaluations
 •   Assessments that appear at the end of each chapter
 •   Grades are based on your demonstration of proficiency with respect to Chapter objectives (reading, writing, listening and
 •   These are timed assessments.
 TOTAL
The Lower-Division Grading Scale for French is the following:
 97-93 A                   89-87 B+                 79-77 C+                  69-67 D+
 92-90 A-                  86-83 B                  76-73 C                   66-63 D
                           82-80 B-                 72-70 C-                  62-60 D-
                                                                              Less than 60 F
You must receive a final grade of C or higher (73% or higher) in FR 406
in order to continue to FR 407, the second online course in the sequence
(to be offered in Fall 2018 and Spring 2019). A grade of a C- is not
sufficient to continue on to FR 407.
AN IMPORTANT NOTE ABOUT CANVAS GRADEBOOK


Be sure to UNCHECK the blue box below "Calculate based only on graded
assignments" the grade breakdown you see on the right side of your Canvas
Grade Page to avoid receiving inaccurate grade average information. To be
more specific, you want to uncheck the default option on your Canvas
Grade page that allows Canvas to calculate your grade average based only
on graded assignments. If you do not uncheck that box on your Canvas
Grade page, the total percentage calculation will not factor in zeros for
unsubmitted assignments, which could result in an unpleasant surprise at
the end of the semester.
COURSE SEQUENCING
Completion of either the face-to-face sequence (FR 601C and FR 611C) OR
the online sequence (FR 406, FR 407, FR 412K) constitutes completion of the
College of Liberal Arts 12-hour language requirement in French:
FR 406 + FR 407 + FR 412K = 12 hours
FR 601C + FR 611C = 12 hours
It is possible, although a bit cumbersome, to move from the online curriculum
to the face-to-face curriculum if you are a current UT student:
•    FR 406 + FR 407 (with final grades of C or higher) allows you to register
     for FR 611C (the second semester of the face-to-face curriculum).
It is also possible to move from the face-to-face sequence to the online
sequence:
•    FR 601 (with a final grade of C or higher) allows you to register for FR 407
     (the second semester of the online curriculum).
You must complete FR 407, or the equivalent, in order to be able to enroll in
FR 412K, the third and last course in the online sequence.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
 Online French Program. For answers to questions about policies and procedures in online French
 courses and about which courses to take next in the online sequence, please feel free to contact Dr.
 Patricia Kyle, Director of Online Instruction, in the Department of French and Italian via email
 at particia.kyle@austin.utexas.edu or by phone at 512 471 2200.
 Lower-Division French. For additional information on face-to-face French courses FR 601C and FR
 611C, please contact Dr. Nancy Guilloteau, Lower-Division Coordinator, HRH 2.106A, 471-
 5511,at nguilloteauut@gmail.com.
 Scholastic dishonesty. Scholastic dishonesty on any graded assignment will result in a zero.
 Scholastic dishonesty includes any kind of cheating. In language classes, this includes the use of
 online translators. Be aware that scholastic dishonesty can have far-reaching consequences, and can
 result in suspension or expulsion from the University. For more information, contact the Student
 Judicial Services at 471- 2841, or go http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis.php (Links to an
 external site.)Links to an external site.


In order to receive full credit for assignments in FR 406, you are expected to use only the vocabulary
and structures that have been learned in this course to date. Producing perfect, native-like
paragraphs and other work with the aid of unauthorized technological or personal assistance may
result in a grade of zero. Use of Google translate or other aids is considered scholastic dishonesty
and will result in a zero and possible further action.
Disabilities. The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of
the Dean of Students at 471-6259 or 471-4641, or go to http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd (Links to
an external site.)Links to an external site.
Students with disabilities should present documentation at the beginning of the semester from the
SSD in order for special provisions and accommodations to be considered. Please keep in mind
that accommodations are not retroactive, so it is important to present proper documentation as soon
as it is available.
Code of conduct. The dean may initiate disciplinary proceedings under subchapter 11-300 against a
student who conducts himself or herself in a manner that impedes, interferes with, or disrupts any
University teaching, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, learning, or other authorized
activity. For more information and a complete list of Student Standards of Conduct, please consult
http://registrar.utexas.edu/catalogs/gi08-09/app/gi08.appc03.html#subchapter-11-300-initiation-of-
disciplinary-proceedings.
All students are expected to assist in maintaining an online learning environment that is
conducive to success. Inappropriate behavior (making offensive remarks, harassment or bullying of
the instructor or other students, etc.) will be addressed by the instructor. Repeated inappropriate
or disruptive behavior will be reported to the Dean of Students and may quickly escalate into a
judicial matter.
The FR 406 team is made of the me, the instructor, and your graders and we all welcome you
to FR 406. We are here to make your experience learning French online one of the best possible.
Please be sure to keep in touch with me, your instructor, on a regular basis so that I can respond to
issues, questions, and concerns as quickly and effectively as possible. Email is usually the most
efficient means of communication.
As we say in French, bon courage et bonne chance!
