ARC 520E INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO II: ENVIRONMENTAL                                                        spring 2019
MWF 1pm-5pm
Instructor: Elizabeth Farrell
Office hours: by appointment
Email: ekfarrell3@gmail.com
                                                                                                “Road Mirage” Katie Maratta
DRAWING RELATIONSHIPS: CONVERSATIONS BETWEEN ARCHITECTURE AND CONTEXT
“Instead of creating mere objects of visual seduction, architecture relates, mediates and projects meanings. The
ultimate meaning of any building is beyond architecture; it directs our consciousness back to the world and towards
our own sense of self and being.” - Juhani Pallasmaa, T​ he Eyes of the Skin
What does it mean for architecture to respond to place? ​Place​ is a human construct, a product of
our understanding of the physical reality of a site, and the mental associations we bring to it. As
mediators between humans and the environment, buildings can offer ways for us to relate to and
begin to comprehend the complex forces that create a sense of place. Humans are armed
primarily with our five senses as a toolkit for interfacing with and understanding what is around
us. While the development of architecture often leans heavily on visual concerns, we experience
the environment with our whole body (not just the eyes) using touch, sound, smell, even taste.
Collecting a breadth of sensory data, artists working across mediums often make work that is
site-responsive - the work is somehow inspired by a particular place, either where they live now,
where they grew up, or another location of significance. Thus, occupying and understanding the
place becomes an important part of the generation of the artist’s work. How can architecture
engage the human senses in a way that connects artists and others - whether residents or
visitors - with their environment, conveying a deeper understanding of place?
Architecture that seeks to be place-responsive must address the detail level of the human body
while considering the building’s immediate site (perhaps, but not always, delineated by property
lines) and operating at the scale of the larger landscape. In this studio we will look at two sites
of contrasting scale - one in west Texas and one in downtown Austin - interrogating in both
how buildings can operate at multiple scales in their response to context. Our projects will
provide places for artists to occupy and work in both landscapes, first with an
artist-in-residence outpost in Marfa, and second with an arts complex in downtown Austin.
Throughout the semester, we will take on inquiry of architecture and site through the act of
drawing. We will use drawing as a tool for investigation, research, and documentation. We will
also use drawing to probe the space between the physical reality of place, and the less-tangible
ideas about place that exist in the human mind. How can drawings help relate not just visual
data, but also convey a multisensory understanding of the world?


THEME: ENVIRONMENTAL
This studio emphasizes architecture as a response to context: architecture and landscape
architecture in the city and in nature, urban issues, housing, making place. This studio should
take advantage that students are concurrently enrolled in or have already completed the course
Site Design.
STUDIO STRUCTURE
Assignment #1: Research and Analysis - drawing to find out (2 weeks)
15% of final grade (team)
The first two weeks will focus on both traditional and hands-on research to develop a toolkit for
the semester. Through a combination of team research and individual work, we will study
images, narrative and drawings, creating a taxonomy of ways that buildings interface with
landscape. We will reference this body of knowledge throughout the semester.
Assignment #2: Marfa Outpost (3.5 weeks)
20% of final grade (pairs)
* This project will involve a weekend field trip to Marfa, TX.
We will begin by considering an artist-in-residence outpost sited in West Texas. How does one
negotiate building on a large site with dramatic and beautiful landscape views? With such a
contrast in scale between humans and the landscape, how can people start to occupy this type of
space? With a relatively small building on a vast site, we will dive into how buildings operate at
the scale of the landscape simultaneously with the scale of the human body.
Assignment #3: Austin Arts Complex (8 weeks)
65% of final grade (individual)
For the third project, we will imagine that a new center for the arts is going to be built in
downtown Austin. Along with providing studio and gallery space, the building will offer a set
number of affordable housing units for local artists. Compared to the West Texas site, what is
the same or different about placing a building in an urban context? How do urban regulations,
including site boundaries, begin to push on the project’s development? With a closeness and
density of buildings, pavement and noise, how can one negotiate a building that responds to the
urban landscape, and offers a positive contribution to its site?
PREREQUISITES
ARC 320D, ARC/ARI 221K, and ARC 415K with a grade of at least C in each.
CURRICULUM FLAG
This course carries the Independent Inquiry flag. Independent Inquiry courses are designed to
engage students in the process of inquiry over the course of a semester, providing a student with
the opportunity for independent investigation of a question, problem, or project related to the
student’s major. At least one-third of the grade will be based on independent investigation and
presentation of one’s own work.


INTERMEDIATE DESIGN STUDIO
Students pursuing the Bachelor of Architecture must complete four Intermediate Design
Studios during their second and third years. Building on the Foundation Design Studios taken
during the first year, the goal of the Intermediate Studios is to prepare students for Advanced
Design Studios in their fourth and fifth years.
Each Intermediate Studio will be structured around one of four broad themes of inquiry
(Operational, Environmental, Integration, and Speculation) and will offer a critical framework
and vocabularies for design and development into key issues emphasized in the theme.
Intermediate Studios will also serve as a platform to prepare students for the range of offerings
of the Advanced Studios (e.g. Comprehensive, Urban Design, Landscape Architecture, etc.).
Intermediate Studios will follow a similar structure, but each instructor will individually
determine the scope and design problem for each studio.
LEARNING OUTCOMES
Students will be exposed to a series of learning goals several times and from different angles
over the four Intermediate Studio sequence. The goal is that similar issues are repeated from
studio to studio but from different angles, allowing students to find, within the diversity of the
topics, a “common thread” as they go through the sequence of the four studios. The level of
expectation will grow as students go from being introduced to an issue, to becoming competent
at it. Some issues would be only mentioned in passing in one studio but will be studied in more
depth in another.
     ●  Design Composition Skills​: Developed through three-dimensional architectural form and
        space, both exterior and interior; building envelope
     ●  Design Integration Skills​: Demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of
        materiality, structures, construction, and environmental system
     ●  Site Analysis and Design​: Developed through the creative engagement with relevant
        contextual; environmental and programmatic factors underlying the project
     ●  Critical Thinking​: Quality of conceptual and critical thought; learning from precedents;
        research skills
     ●  Graphic Skills​: Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of
        media strategy and level of skill displayed
     ●  Basic grasp of accessibility and egress
     ●  Collaborative and Leadership Skills​: Demonstrated through the active engagement in all
        activities of the studio
STUDIO CULTURE
The School of Architecture believes in the value of the design studio model. Studio learning
encourages dialogue, collaboration, risk-taking, innovation, and learning-by-doing. The studio
offers an environment where students can come together to ask questions and make proposals,
which are developed and discussed among classmates, faculty, visiting professionals, and the


public-at-large. Studio learning offers intensive one-on-one instruction from faculty members,
and provides the opportunity for each student to develop his/her critical thinking skills and
spatial and material sensibilities. The design studio offers a synthetic form of education, where
project-based learning becomes the foundation for developing an understanding of and
commitment to the school's core values — broadmindedness, interconnectivity,
professionalism, exploration and activism — all in service of architecture's fundamental
mission: to improve the quality of the built and natural environments.
https://soa.utexas.edu/programs/architecture/architecture-studio-culture
DESIGN CONVERSATIONS: JESSEN LECTURES
The School of Architecture offers a wide range of opportunities for students to extend the
design conversations taken place in studios (Lecture Series, Goldsmith Talks, Exhibitions, etc).
Students are encouraged to participate and be engaged. Specifically, all B.Arch and BSAS
students in studio are expected to attend all the Jessen Lectures (three per semester by lead
practitioners from around the world). The lectures and the group discussions in studio that
follow are important for the holistic education of intellectually engaged students and
participation will have an impact on students’ grades (see below).
Please refer to the schedule and emails for specific lecture dates.
EVALUATION CRITERIA
While each project contains certain quantifiable elements for evaluation, a significant portion of
each grade is derived from broader and more subjective criteria.
Student work will be evaluated according to its rigor and evolution over the semester. Grades
are subject to deductions for late arrivals, absences, and late or incomplete work at the
discretion of the instructor.
Grading for an assignment is broken into four components, each of which is given roughly equal
weight:
Pursuit:​ the consistent and rigorous development and testing of ideas.
          ●   The ability to formulate a query or thesis and pursue a self-determined concomitant
              method of inquiry
          ●   The ability to identify and implement various processual mechanisms (software,
              sketch drawing and models, etc.) in the development of the design
          ●   Initiative as demonstrated in work ethic – Does the student do what is asked; go
              beyond what is asked; direct their own efforts; eager to produce the next iteration of
              the design?
Grasp:​ the ideas and understanding of the project at hand and integration of knowledge
    introduced in companion courses.
          ● A strong and clearly stated design objective


        ●     Spatial acuity as demonstrated in plan – including reasonable disposition of
              programmatic elements – and sectional development
        ●     Synthetic and critical thinking; the ability to holistically organize a project as
              demonstrated through creative engagement with issues of materiality, structures and
              construction, structural and environmental system integration, building materials
              and assembly, sustainable practices, etc. in support of the design objective
        ●     Structural competence and material sensitivity as demonstrated in wall thickness,
              floor plates, and assembly
Resolution:​ of the design objective; the demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse
    in the final design presentation.
        ● Quality of presentation; clarity of communication; appropriateness of media strategy
              and level of skill displayed through the work presented at all stages of the design
              process; technical documentation
Engagement:​ the active participation in studio activities, leadership, collaboration, group
    discussions and reviews.
A student must earn a letter grade of C or better in order for the course to count towards a
degree in the School of Architecture and to progress in to the next studio. A letter grade of C-
will not satisfy degree requirements.
GRADE DESCRIPTIONS
A/A-            Excellent
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, visual language,
conceptual rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques
above and beyond what is discussed in class. Project is complete on all levels.
B+/B/B-         Above Average
Project is thorough, well presented, diligently pursued, and successfully completed. Student
pursues ideas and suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects.
Project is complete on all levels and demonstrates potential for excellence.
C+/C            Average
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class and not pursued with
dedication and rigor. Project is incomplete in one or more areas.
C-/D+/D/D- Poor
Project is incomplete. Basic grasp of skill is lacking, visual clarity or logic of presentation are
not level-appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required competence and knowledge
base.
F               Fail
Project is unresolved. Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note
that this grade will be assigned when students have excessive unexcused absences.


X             Excused Incomplete
Can be given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Simply not completing
work on time is not an adequate cause for assigning this evaluation. It may only be used after
consultation with the Associate Deans' offices and with an agreement as to a new completion
date. Work must be completed before the second week of the next semester in which the student
is enrolling, according to the School of Architecture policy.
ATTENDANCE
Punctual and regular attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. With three (3)
unexcused absences, the student’s final grade for the course will be lowered by a full letter
grade. The final grade will be lowered by a full letter grade for each unexcused absence
thereafter. Aside from religious observances, absences are only excused with written
documentation of a medical issue or family emergency. The student is responsible for
completing work missed due to excused absences and initiating communication with the
instructor to determine due dates.
If a student is late (5 minutes after the start of class) three (3) times, it will be counted as one (1)
unexcused absence. Students should notify the instructor prior to class if lateness or absence is
known in advance. Students must notify instructors directly regarding lateness or absences;
Asking a classmate to inform the instructor is not acceptable.
RELIGIOUS OBSERVANCES
A student shall be excused from attending classes of other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day, including travel for the purpose. A
student whose absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence
and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the student
is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy requires students to
notify each of their instructors as far in advance of the absence as possible so that arrangements
can be made.
By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of the pending absence at least fourteen
days prior to the date of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, an
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Students who violate University policy on academic integrity are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on academic integrity will be strictly enforced. Refer to the Student Conduct and
Academic Integrity website for official University policies and procedures on academic


integrity: ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php​. University Code of
Conduct: h ​ ttp://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/the-university/#universitycodeofconduct
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUPPORT SERVICES
Taking care of your general well-being is an important step in being a successful student. If
stress, test anxiety, racing thoughts, feeling unmotivated, or anything else is getting in your way,
there are options available for help:
    ● In-house CARE counselor (see below)
    ● For immediate support
             o Visit/call the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC):
                  M-F 8am-5pm | SSB, 5​th​ floor | 512-471-3515 | ​cmhc.utexas.edu
             o CMHC Crisis Line:
                  24/7 | 512-471-2255 | ​cmhc.utexas.edu/24hourcounseling.html
    ● Free services at CMHC:
             o Brief assessments and referral services: c​ mhc.utexas.edu/gettingstarted.html
             o Mental health & wellness articles: ​cmhc.utexas.edu/commonconcerns.html
             o MindBody Lab: c​ mhc.utexas.edu/mindbodylab.html
             o Classes, workshops, and groups: c​ mhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
CARE PROGRAM
Counselors in Academic Residence (CARE) Program places licensed mental health professionals
within the colleges or schools they serve in order to provide better access to mental health
support for students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically.
Abby Simpson (LCSW) is the assigned CARE counselor for the School of Architecture. Faculty
and staff may refer students to the CARE counselor or students may directly reach out to her.
Please leave a message if she is unavailable by phone.
Abby Simpson, LCSW | BTL 114B | 512-471-3115 (M-F 8am-5pm)
https://cmhc.utexas.edu/CARE_simpson.html
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations must obtain a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of
the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing).
This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the semester
and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time.
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
SECURITY, SAFETY, AND SUSTAINABILITY
The studio is an exceptional learning environment. Since it is a place for all, it necessitates the
careful attention to the needs of everyone. All spraying of fixative, spray paint, or any other


substance should be done in the shop. Security is a necessary component for a studio that is
accessible to you and your colleagues 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Do not leave your studio
without your studio key and do not leave your studio unlocked. Hold yourself and your
studiomates accountable for the security of your shared space.
The studio is an opportunity to apply sustainability principles, being mindful to recycle and
reuse to reduce material consumption at UTSOA. Recyclable materials should be placed in blue
bins or any other containers with white bags. The Material Exchange, a​ give-and-take system
for students to donate materials and take what they need for studio and fabrication coursework,
is available throughout the semester to all UT students in the UTSOA Technology Lab. All
unwanted, reusable materials should be brought to the Material Exchange station in the
Technology Lab at the end of the semester.
BCAL
Concerns regarding the safety or behavior of fellow students, Teaching Assistants (TA), or
Professors can be reported to the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Calls
can be made anonymously. If something doesn’t feel right, it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts
and share your concerns.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION
In the case of emergency evacuation:
    ● Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
        evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
        requires exiting and assembling outside.
    ● Students should familiarize themselves with all exit doors of each classroom and
        building they may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one used
        when entering the building.
    ● Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
        during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of
        faculty or class instructors.
    ● Reentry into a building is prohibited unless given instructions by the following: Austin
        Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire
        Prevention Services offices.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency​.
