                     Anthropology 302, Digital Section (31540, Fall 2018
                                Cultural Anthropology
                                Online at the following website:
                      https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1227088
                                    Professor Circe Sturm
                          Office: SAC 5.122, circe@austin.utexas.edu
   Online Office Hours: Wednesdays, 3:00 pm-5:00 pm. These are held online only at
       Google Hangouts using my regular email address: circe@austin.utexas.edu.
                                Graduate Teaching Assistants
                                       Megan McQuaid
         Office: Texas Coffee Traders, Geosciences Bldg., mmcquaid@utexas.edu,
                         Office Hours: Thursdays, 10:00 am-12:00 pm
                                         Kate Maddox
    Office: Graduate Student Lounge, SAC 5.114 (Desk 8), katherinenora@gmail.com,
                         Office Hours: Wednesdays, 1:00 pm-3:00 pm
                                      Diyana Sastrawati
             Office: Graduate Student Lounge, SAC 5.114, diyana@utexas.edu,
                           Office Hours: Monday 2:00 pm- 4:00 pm
                                         Josh Wainner
    Office: Graduate Student Lounge, SAC 5.114 (Desk 11), joshwainner@utexas.edu,
                           Office Hours: Tuesdays 4:00 pm-6:00 pm
                                        José Villagran
         Office: Graduate Student Lounge, SAC 5.114, josevillgran956@gmail.com,
                 Office Hours: Tuesdays and Thursday 11:00 am- 12:00 pm
                                     Course Description
By studying a range of selected topics and case studies, this online course introduces
you to the cultural diversity of human beings and will provide you with tools for
thinking critically about the classic concepts, theories and methods of cultural
anthropology. Our primary objective will be to understand both the universal manner in
which all human beings constitute themselves through culture, and the great diversity of
specific cultural expressions that have resulted from these processes. In the past
anthropologists have pursued these ends by studying distant and “exotic” peoples, the
more different from “us” the better. In this class we will critically examine this
“we/they” dichotomy and how it has shaped the discipline. We will also explore what
happens when we turn the anthropological lens back on our own societies and
experiences.
                                        Course Format
This is the digital version of the introductory course in Cultural Anthropology,
Anthropology 302. Unlike most other courses offered at the University of Texas, more
                                                                                       1


often than not you will be viewing this class online (from the comfort of your own home,
library, or coffee joint) rather than in-person. The official class website where you will
log in to participate is as follows: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1227088.
Delivered via the Internet, you are expected to “attend” class by logging into the course
site to watch video lectures and participate in class activities, however you may do this
on your own pace, as long as you keep up with the materials required for the regularly
scheduled exams. It is very important that you treat logging into the course website the
way you would treat attending a traditional course held in a classroom. This means that
you must cover all the assigned readings and lectures as required by the examination
dates. You cannot wait to take the exams at your own pace. All students will take
examinations at the same time, helping to ensure that everyone completes the course in
a timely fashion. As you watch lectures, you will also have the opportunity to
participate in instant polls and other online exercises. These items will automatically
appear as you view the lectures.
                                      Assigned Readings
    1.   Kenneth J. Guest (2017), Essentials of Cultural Anthropology: A Toolkit for a Global
         Age, 2nd edition. *Available for purchase at the University Co-op or directly for
         the publisher, W.W. Norton & Co., New York.
    2.   Kenneth J. Guest (2017), Cultural Anthropology: Fieldwork Journal, 2nd edition.
         *Available for purchase at the University Co-op or directly for the publisher,
         W.W. Norton & Co., New York
    3.   Bourgois, Philippe (2002) In Search of Respect: Selling Crack in El Barrio, 2 edition.
                                                                                      nd
         Cambridge University Press: Cambridge. This is a traditional paper copy of the
         book available from the University Co-op, though digital versions are also
         available from various sources, including the publisher and online sites such as
         Kindle, Amazon, etc.
    4.   Selected Chapters and Articles, available for viewing and download on Canvas.
                                         Requirements
Because the course relies upon a blend of online lectures and exercises, reading in
advance is encouraged. Students should view the recorded lectures with questions and
ideas in mind. Students are also required to keep up with the key points presented each
week. If you are having difficulty with any of the ideas presented in class, then it is your
responsibility to chat with other students or to attend office hours, virtually with the
professor or in person with the graduate teaching assistants to clarify course materials.
During regularly scheduled office hours (see above), individual members of the
teaching team are able to meet with you in person or can field questions on line, if they
are not otherwise engaged with a student. The physical location for in-person office
hours is listed above. To attend virtual office hours with the primary instructor, please
use Google Hangouts and call her at her regular email address during office hours.
Please use these different opportunities to your advantage.
Assignments will be due as listed in the syllabus and there will be no make-up exams,
incompletes, or time extensions, except in the case of emergencies or required university
activities. To document such occurrences, please provide a physical copy of a medical or
other written excuse, ideally signed by someone other than a family member, to any
member of the teaching team.
                                                                                               2


The scale for final grades is such that 94 to 100% = A, 90 to 93% = A-; 87 to 89 = B+, 84 to
86 = B, 80 to 83% = B-; 77 to 79% = C+, 74 to 76% = C, 70 to 73% = C-; 67 to 69% = D+, 64
to 66% = D, 60 to 63% = D-; 59% and below = F.
You will be evaluated and assigned a grade on the following basis:
        3 Exams                                        300 pts.
        Participation (see requirements below)         100 pts.
        Fieldwork Journals                             100 pts.
        Family Altar Exercise                          100 pts.
                                                       600 pts.
Your grade is determined by your total points scored, scaled against everyone else in the
class. No extra credit assignments are available.
Exams will be taken online and are comprised of multiple-choice questions. They must
be taken at the specific dates and times listed below in the syllabus. The exams are
generally about 50% from lecture and 50% from the texts and films. Cheating will not be
tolerated! Please be aware that we have extensive systems in place for monitoring
cheating in the online classroom. Anyone caught cheating will be charged under the
academic misconduct code. Please see the University Honor Code for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/standardsofconduct.php
Class Participation is primarily based on interfacing with online resources, including
consistently viewing lectures in their entirety, successfully completing instapolls in each
of the lecture modules, and completing the online surveys. We are able to monitor how
often you log into the class site, how active you are when using it, and how much time
you spend. Therefore, your participation grade will be largely based on the following
three features:
1. Instapolls (successful participation in instant polling during lecture viewing) 60
points; two instapolls are associated with most lectures, not including films. You will see
that the lecture topics are broken up into smaller segments, including the instapolls. The
answers to the instapolls are to be found in viewing the relevant lecture materials. You
will receive credit for answering the instapolls correctly.
2. Flash Card Assignments 30 points; five flash card terms will need to be identified
fully before each of the three exams. Detailed instructions will be provided with the
terms and the due dates are listed in the syllabus. These key terms will help you prepare
for the exams and keep you on track with lecture viewing. You will be able to pull the
definitions from both lectures and assigned readings.
3. Online surveys 10 points; before you can access course material you must complete
the pre-course module, which contains information and resources to prepare you for
online success and will introduce you to the class format. This module also includes
several short surveys. You will be awarded an automatic 5 points for completing these
surveys; these 5 points will count toward your participation grade.
Fieldwork Journals are to be handed in at the end of the semester by the due date listed
on the class schedule. You must select 8 of the possible 17 exercises and complete them
by answering the questions or following the guidelines of the activities presented in the
textbook. You do not need to do all 17 exercises, only 8. You will receive credit based on
quality of answers, care and attention to detail, and completion.
                                                                                            3


Piazza is an online discussion platform that the course utilizes, though your
participation in Piazza is optional and not a required component of your grade.
However, many students find that Piazza provides them with a useful forum for
discussion of key concepts and getting clarity on any questions they might have about
course materials and requirements. Access to Piazza can be found via a link on the
Canvas website. The TA and Professor will keep track of student questions as they are
posted and will monitor these discussions, providing feedback when needed.
Guidelines for the Family Altar exercise are posted on Canvas in the course documents
and become relevant when we do the unit on kinship and hold a virtual conference.
Technical Requirements: An internet-enabled device. All students are required to
have access to an internet-enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and
smartphones are not supported. Your computer should meet the following
requirements:
- Laptop or desktop computer
- 2GB memory/RAM
- Modern operating system (macOS or Windows)
- Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox
Please confirm that your computer is able to stream the video lectures by visiting
https://www.laits.utexas.edu/tower/tech.html, before the start of class on June 1st,
2017.
Technical Support: technical support for students will be available through Canvas.
Any student in this course who has a disability that may prevent him or her from fully
demonstrating their other abilities should contact me personally as soon as possible so
we can discuss the necessary accommodations to ensure your full participation in the
class and to facilitate your educational opportunities. If not already registered, students
with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-
471-6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/
This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity
courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least
one U.S. cultural group that has experienced persistent marginalization.
I reserve the right to amend or change the course syllabus as necessary, primarily due to
any unforeseen circumstances that may arise during the course of the semester.
However, any changes in the syllabus should not adversely affect your grade or
workload.
Also, the concealed carry of handguns is not permitted in my office, located in SAC
5.122, at any time. I will be providing oral notice of this during the first week of class. If
you have any questions or concerns, please contact me directly. Relax and enjoy the
course!
                                                                                               4


                                    Course Schedule
Key: G = Guest Main Textbook, Respect = In Search of Respect, CNV = Article Posted on
Canvas. All readings are to be completed on the day assigned.
Date          Topic                                             Readings
Lecture 1      Introductions and Aims of the Course
               Assignments: Post Image of Snack
                              One thing they cannot tolerate
Lecture 2      Cultural Anthropology—What? Why? How?            G Ch. 1
               Exercise: Snack Day
Lecture 3      The Features of Culture and Cultural Relativism  G Ch. 2
               Discuss: One thing they cannot tolerate
Lecture 4      Language: American Tongues (Film)                G Ch. 4
                                                                CNV Whorf
Lecture 5      Language and Communication Cont.                 CNV Miner
               Discuss Nacirema
Lecture 6      Participant Observation and Ethnographic         G Ch. 3
               Fieldwork: Methods and Theory
Lecture 7      Race, Ethnicity and Systems of Social Inequality G Ch. 5
Lecture 8      Ethnicity and Race Continued: Whiteness and      G Ch. 6
               The Invisible Knapsack                           CNV McIntosh
Lecture 9      Economic and Political Systems                   G Ch. 11
October 1      First Flash Card Assignment Due
October 3      FIRST EXAM, Online from 4:00 pm to 5:15 pm
Lecture 10     Theoretical Frames: Materialism vs. Idealism     Respect Intro & Ch. 1
Lecture 11     Marxism 101                                      Respect Ch. 2 & 3
Lecture 12     The Interpretive Turn                            CNV Geertz
                                                                Respect Ch. 4
Lecture 13     Theory Applied: Okie Noodling (Film)             G Ch. 10
                                                                Respect Ch. 5
Lecture 14     Gender, Sexuality and Status                     G Ch. 7
               SXSW video: Imagining switching genders
Lecture 15     Families, Kinship and Descent                    G Ch. 8
               Begin working on Family Altar exercise
                                                                                     5


Lecture 16  Marriage: Small Happiness (Film)                G Ch. 9
Lecture 17  Religion                                        G Ch. 13
Lecture 18  Ritual and Women: Texas Tavola (Film)           CNV Seriff
                                                            Respect Ch. 6
November 3 Second Flash Card Assignment Due
November 5 SECOND EXAM, Online from 4:00 pm to 5:15 pm
Lecture 19  The World System and Colonialism(s)             G Ch. 12
            Ted Talk: Cultures at the Edge of the World     CNV Hughes
November 19 Family Altar Assignment Due, Post online
Lecture 20  Virtual Conference on Family Altars             Respect Ch. 7& 8
Lecture 21  Applied and Activist Anthropology: Ethics       G Ch. 14
Lecture 22  Practice Theory                                 Respect Ch. 9, Finish
                                                            All, incl. epilogue
Lecture 23  What is Modernity? A Critique                   G Ch. 15
                                                            CNV: M. Foucault
Lecture 24  Live Final Exam Review
            Final Exam Review Sheet Posted around Dec 3 rd
December 3  Fieldwork Journals Due by 5:00 pm, Hand in at Box located in
            Anthropology Office SAC 4.102
December 8  Third Flash Card Assignment Due
December 10 THIRD EXAMINATION, Online from 4:00 pm to 5:15 pm
                                                                                  6
