      SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                                                1
              Accounting 380K.1 – Spring 2020
              Financial Accounting Standards and Analysis I for MPA’s **
              Unique 02455 8:00-9:30 a.m. in GSB 3.138
**Integrated program, traditional, and ECO-MPA. Prerequisite for Integrated MPA is ACC 356; for traditional MPA and ECO-MPA, it is ACC 381.
Course                 The course examines issues in financial reporting from both preparer and user perspectives. The
Objectives             basic objectives of the course are:
(1) to learn about current U.S. financial reporting, including (some) international financial reporting standards (IFRS),
(2) to consider the economics of transactions and events,and understand whether and how financial reporting
      captures those economics. This sort of thinking is the foundation for understanding how equity and credit
      analysts use financial reports (and how they might make adjustments to them). This sort of thinking also allows
      you to learn about business (i.e., broadens your thinking beyond just debits and credits).
(3) to learn how to reason about financial reporting problems in a forward direction, similar to what preparers
      normally do (i.e., work forward from the data to journal entry to financial statement) and to learn how to reason
      about financial reporting problems in a backward direction, similar to what financial report users do (i.e., work
      backward from financial statement and footnote data to journal entry).
Professor:                          Stephen Smith
Email:                              stephen.smith@mccombs.utexas.edu
Consultation
Location / Phone:                   GSB 4.112CF / 471-8185
Consult Hours:                      Tuesday Noon – 2 pm, Thursday Noon – 1 pm & by appointment
FOR HOMEWORK, EXAM AND CASE CONSULTATIONS
Assistants:                         Randall Lane & Rachel Clarke
Email:
Location:                           To be provided
Consult Hours:
.
                                               BRING YOUR NAME PLATE TO CLASS


  SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                                  2
COURSE MATERIALS
 TEXT:           INTERMEDIATE ACCOUNTING, by Kieso, Weygandt, and Warfield, 2019, 17th edition. Available
 for purchase at Co-Op. The Wiley.com website has an e-book rental or e-book purchase option (around $55; also
 has a hard-copy rental option too). I tried the Wiley.com e-book and it worked quite well.
 CLASS NOTES:                       These are essential, cannot-do-without class notes. Bring the relevant
 parts to class each day. I have prepared a packet containing my class notes. These notes contain (1) my class
 notes, (2) the "Additional Problems in Class Notes" indicated on the syllabus, and (3) old exams.
 Based on feedback from students who have taken this course previously, your primary source of studying topics
 in this course probably will be these class notes. Students have indicated to me that they rely heavily on the
 class notes and homework problems to study for exams. Spending time reading every word in the textbook was
 not deemed as productive for several reasons:
      (1) we cover topics very quickly in this class and there is not much time to spend reading the
      textbook,
      (2) the textbook contains many accounting details that are not that important (i.e., they will never
      show up on exams),
      (3) the textbook forces students to think only about current accounting; many aspects of this course
      involve thinking about alternative perspectives, some of which are not currently allowed (but were or
      will be entertained by standard setters), and
      (4) some topics are not discussed in the book.
 Thus, you are encouraged to use the textbook as a reference tool; read excerpts from the textbook as necessary.
 For most, reading the textbook on an as needed basis after we talk about a topic in class will work best. For
 others, reading it before class optimizes their performance in this class. DO WHAT WORKS BEST FOR YOU.
 SOLUTIONS TO HOMEWORK PROBLEMS: The packet contains the
 solutions to all of the practice homework problems homework problems. It does not include those to be turned in
 for course credit (solutions for these will be available on Canvas right after the due date/time).
 ACCOUNTING STANDARDS:                                        Your course fees allow us to purchase a site license to the
 FASB standards. The internet address is: http://aaahq.org/FASB/Access.cfm
 Login Information: USER ID: aaa75945 PW: 7A9zAnW
 COURSE REQUIREMENTS
 EXAMS:               There will be two mid-term exams and one final exam. With the exception of the final
 exam, each exam only covers the material covered in that portion of the course. The final is not cumulative, but it
 will have at least two topics from the previous components of the course – the two topics that it will definitely have
 are statement of cash flows and deferred taxes.


   SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                              3
 My exams are problem based. They are not memorization exams. Accordingly, for the three exams, you can
 bring a 4 x 6 inch index card “cheat sheet.” Writing on both sides is acceptable.
 HOMEWORK:                      There will be 13 homework assignments. These homework assignments exist to
 allow you to stay up to date on the material (it’s easy to let things slide and somewhat disastrous in this class if
 you do). Homework is graded on an effort, not accuracy, basis.
 Homework is to be uploaded onto canvas by 10:00 a.m. on the due date (unless otherwise indicated).
 CASES:             There will be two case assignments—they are done in three-person teams. These cases
 are real world situations (names have been changed) where there is no right answer. These cases complement
 the other material in the course which, for the most part, has right answers. As you progress in your accounting
 career, the “right answer” situations will become uninteresting and the “no right answer” situations will become
 much more interesting. Thus, part of your training in this class is to help you deal with (i.e., solve) unstructured,
 no-right-answer situations.
 The cases for this class will be distributed about two weeks before the assignment is due. Your (three-page)
 case write-up should describe alternative solutions, cite references to relevant accounting standards, precedents,
 etc., and recommend a course of action.
 Where to get your teams? Later in the semester, you will be notified by email with the specifics of your three-
 person team for the two cases.
 CLASS ATTENDANCE:                                 Attendance is not part of the course grade.
GRADES
 POINT ALLOCATION:
 Course grades are made on a plus-minus basis and are determined by the following weighting scheme:
    Exam 1                        210 points       21%
    Exam 2                        250 points       25%
    Final Exam                    290 points       29%
    Homework                      100 points       10%
    Team cases                    150 points       15%
    TOTAL POINTS                 1000 points      100%
 HOW DO I DO THE GRADING?
 Exams: Exams are problem based and so we do assign partial credit. To the extent that I can tell you made a
 purely math mistake (i.e., you wrote $100 x 40 = $3000), I do not take off points. Hence, showing your work is
 important!!
 I grade on a curve, which is determined based on the class performance.


   SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                               4
 No make-up exams will be given. Medical emergencies and family emergencies are the only valid reasons that
 will be accepted for missing an exam. You must provide supporting documentation (e.g., signed note from a
 physician) if you do miss an exam. If you are excused from an exam, the other two exams will be re-weighted
 (e.g., if you miss the first exam, the second and final exams will be re-weighted). If you do not have a valid
 reason for missing an exam, you will receive a zero on the exam, which usually implies failing the course.
 Homework: Unless otherwise noted, the homework will be graded on an effort, and not accuracy, basis.
 Homework is scored on a 0, 1, 2, 3 basis. You will receive full credit for a problem if the grader concludes that
 you made a reasonable effort; you will receive a zero if you did not turn in the homework (or turned it in late).
 Scores of 1 and 2 are based on partial completion of homework or signs of “faking out” on effort.
 Two homework assignments will be dropped (i.e., your lowest two scores will automatically be dropped at the end
 of the term). So your homework score will be based out of the highest 11 homework scores you have (out of 13
 homework assignments). Homework is considered late (score of 0) if received after 10:00 a.m. on the due date.
 Cases: Because of the lack of a “right answer” to these cases, they are graded on a relative basis (your case
 write-up relative to the other groups). When grading, we are looking for cogent and articulate arguments that
 “make the case” for the solution you have proposed.
 How to I deal with the free-rider problem on these cases? At the end of the semester, each team member will
 provide a confidential evaluation of him/herself and the other team members for their team. I will consider this
 information and make any necessary adjustments to the case grade for specific individuals in the team (e.g., a
 team member who does not contribute their share will get a deduction from the grade on the cases). The
 maximum downward adjustment is the earned score on the cases.
HOW TO DO WELL IN THE CLASS?
GET GOING WITH A SOLID FOUNDATION:
 I would highly recommend that those of you who feel in any way nervous about your skills at making accounting
 entries to listen to the one-hour video I have done on the topic of “review of accounting.” There also are class
 notes to accompany the video (also on Canvas). Further, you can read through Chapter 3 of the textbook and
 work some problems. Work through as many as you need to feel comfortable with making accounting entries.
 Suggested: E3-1, E3-8, E3-20 (don’t do part B), P3-1, P3-5, P3-6, P3-8, P3-9, and P3-12. Solutions to these
 problems are on Canvas.
CLASS ATTENDANCE AND HOMEWORK:
 In my opinion, class attendance and homework are the two most important components of this course. Why?
 Reason #1: The course moves quickly. So if you miss class, you have to figure out the material on your own.
 That typically takes at least triple the time I spend on it in class. That is, easier to listen to me than to do it on
 your own. There is a lot of material in ACC 380K.1 and I make every effort during class to indicate what is
 important in the real world (and, thus, this class). Students who generally do very well in this class are those who
 attend class and those who don't do as well are those who tend to skip class.
 Reason #2: Much of what I cover in class is not in the textbook.


     SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                           5
   If, for some reason, you have to miss class, I strongly recommend that you obtain the class notes from someone
   else and, if possible, also have them audio record the class. It’s an easy way to ensure that you can get up to
   speed on the material you missed.
   Reason #3: Since the content of this course is largely problem oriented, doing the homework problems on a
   timely basis is a necessity. Exam performance is directly related to systematic preparation, which includes timely
   completion of the homework assignments.
   There are homework problems from the textbook and in my class notes. What is the difference? I generally write
   problems when I feel the textbook is deficient in a particular type of problem. So you should view the two as
   complements and not substitutes. If you don’t do all of the problems for a particular topic, be sure to scan all
   problems and make sure you get coverage on all types of problems/subtopics within a particular topic.
USE THE RESOURCES THAT ARE AVAILABLE:
   CANVAS:                   I am a big user of Canvas. What do I use there, you ask?
       Solutions to homework that is turned in for credit will be available on Canvas the day that you turn it in.
       Discussion boards are available on Canvas. The TA and I will monitor these discussion boards, providing
       timely answers to questions. I have no problem with your answering questions too (the easiest way to learn
       something is to try to explain it to somebody else); we’ll monitor those posts as well, to ensure that nothing
       erroneous gets posted.
       The only kind of question you should not post on Canvas are case-related questions as those need to be
       privately communicated to me or the case TA via email (you don’t want to give away your case insights on
       Canvas!).
       Corrections to homework solutions will be posted on the announcement portion of Canvas for the course –
       I’ll label them as MAJOR and MINOR, depending on their severity.
       Short Adobe Connect videos of Professor Koonce doing the following:
       (1) doing a one-hour review of accounting to shore up your understanding of basic concepts –this should be
              watched, as necessary, no later than next weekend, given the speed of the course – don’t fall behind;
       (2) providing a review of futures, forwards, options and swaps (early March) for those who have not had the
              investments class; and
       (3) working some homework problems for selected topics so you can see somebody solving them (this is
              basically a review session, available when it makes sense for you—works better than having an in-person
              review session where many people cannot attend due to conflicts, etc.).
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT
The Department of Accounting is making a concerted effort to focus students’ attention on their professional conduct.
Why? We are the #1 program in the country, but this ranking can easily be undermined by a lack of professional
conduct.


       SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                            6
Developing and protecting the value of an MPA degree influences everything I do and should influence your behavior
as well. The McCombs MPA brand will open doors for you, but it does not provide you with entitlements. You will
still have to earn the benefits of being branded as a McCombs MPA. Because you are a McCombs MPA student,
many employers will want to hire you BEFORE they get to know you. It is your responsibility to exhibit professional
behavior so that they will want to hire you when they meet you and will be glad they hired you AFTER you begin
work. This of course will also ensure that your degree reflects well on you and your fellow graduates throughout your
careers.
      What does it mean to be professional? Behaving with the highest level of integrity, respect for others, and
      ethics. Stand by your word, make good decisions, and take responsibility for your actions. Respect the views of
      others. This does not mean that you always need to agree with your colleagues or your faculty, but you must
      show courtesy and respect for your fellow students and to faculty, TA’s, program directors, and staff. In turn, we
      will show you the same.
For this class
Professional behavior is not only required when interacting with someone outside of the university environment, but it
also is expected in your classes. Therefore:
1. I expect students to arrive to class on time. It is very disruptive to me and other students when you enter the
classroom after class has begun. You distract us in your search for a vacant space and interrupt the flow of the
lecture/discussion. I do not expect you to waste my time or the time of other students in this fashion.
2. I expect that all electronic devices will be turned off once class begins. Laptops, smart phones, etc. are to be
turned completely off. Getting up in the middle of class to “take a call” outside is unnecessary, absent truly
extraordinary circumstances. Further, I expect that reading of non-class materials will stop once class starts.
3. I expect students to not take personal breaks during class. Of course from time to time a student must leave
class for one important reason or another, but students leaving and returning during class is very disruptive, so please
keep these disturbances to an absolute minimum.
4. I expect that you will be respectful of me, my TA, and of the other students in the class. If someone asks an
odd question during class, think about how you can later help that student understand the material rather than
expressing your displeasure with various facial contortions. Practicing a professional response in the classroom will
serve you well in the future.
5. I expect you to be diligent in working with your teams for the case assignments and to be a team player, not a
problem member.
6. I expect you to be responsible for getting the course notes and in-class handouts on any day that you must
miss class. It is not my responsibility to secure missed material for you.
In return, you can expect me and my TA to:
1. Be in class and office hours on time. If I cannot be in office hours (rarely occurs), then I will reschedule and
double my office hours for the time missed, to compensate for your inconvenience.
2. Be respectful of your need to learn the material in this class. Thus, we will provide timely and enthusiastic
responses to questions made in person or on Canvas and keep you up to date on changes in the syllabus or


      SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                             7
homework solutions, again on a timely basis. You can expect us to return homework, cases, and exams in a timely
fashion to enhance your learning experience.
3. Provide you with an education that will prepare you well for the long-term.
DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably
expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students. Please come to me at any time with any
concerns.
BEING A BUSINESSPERSON
    Being a businessperson involves knowledge. One source of knowledge involves knowing what is going on in the
    business world. Thus, I encourage you to get access to a business publication and to read it on a regular basis. I
    realize that time is a scarce commodity but even a little bit of reading here and there (easy to do with the various
    portable devices almost all of us have now) is much better than no reading. I recommend:
           1.   The Wall Street Journal. It’s THE newspaper of business.
           2.   Financial Times. It’s equivalent to the international version of Wall Street Journal.
           3.   Fortune. It comes out every couple of weeks and has longer and more in-depth articles.
           4.   Forbes.
           5.   The Economist.
           6.   Bloomberg Business Week.
           7.   Barron’s


     SYLLABUS FOR ACC 380K.1 -- SPRING 2020                                                                                     8
              DEPARTMENTAL POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The Department of Accounting has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the department’s
Policy Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty in the MPA Program. By teaching this course, I have agreed to
observe all of the faculty responsibilities described in that document. By enrolling in this class, you have
agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of that
Policy Statement to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me
for clarification.
                 Application of Departmental Policy to Writing Assignments in this Course
CASES
Each team’s case solution should be independently prepared. Each team should not refer to other
students, other team’s solutions, or to solutions prepared in previous semesters. All questions on cases
are to be directed to me or the case TA for my sections. Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of
“scholastic dishonesty.” Evidence of non-independent work will be forwarded to the Dean of Students with
a recommendation that a grade of “F” be assigned in the course.
GRADED HOMEWORK
Working on the homework assignments with other students who are currently enrolled in ACC 380K.1 is
permitted (and encouraged). However, merely copying the work of another student who has previously
completed the homework assignment is not permitted. Copying homework solutions from the solutions
manual, another instructors’ solution packet, a previous semesters’ solution packet, or any other source
also is not permitted. Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of “scholastic dishonesty.” Evidence
of violation of this policy will be forwarded to the Dean of Students with a recommendation that a grade of
“F” be assigned in the course.
EXAMS
Each student is expected to independently complete the exams during the designated exam period. Each
student should not refer to other students’ exam solutions or discuss the exam with other students during
the exam period. Violation of this policy will be treated as an act of “scholastic dishonesty.” Evidence of
non-independent work will be forwarded to the Dean of Students with a recommendation that a grade of “F”
be assigned in the course.
Other
    Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at The University. Syllabi, handouts,
    assignments and other resources are types of information that may be available within these sites. Site activities could
    include exchanging email, engaging in class discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class email
    rosters will be a component of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class
    rosters must restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For information on
    restricting directory information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi02-03/app/appc09.html.
    The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified
    students with disabilities. For more information, contact the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259, 471-4641
    TTY.
