AET 339             The University of Texas at Austin | |
(UID 20678)         Syllabus
spring 2019
Course              Game Production
Information         Mon. & Wed 3:30 - 5:00 in room DFA 4.106
                    Course website at ​http://canvas.utexas.edu
Instructor          David (D.S.) Cohen
                    ds.cohen@austin.utexas.edu
                    office hours: Wednesdays 10:00a - Noon in DFA 4.112
Catalog             Creating and executing plans and roadmaps to strategize how game development will
Description         be executed, organized, scheduled, budgeted, and managed from the high level to
                    day-to-day development.
Course Overview     In-depth look at how to make a video game through the creation of a roadmap that
                    can be used to manage both the high level and day-to-day development of a game.
                    Identifies the tools and techniques used to break down a game into measurable
                    components that can be scheduled, staffed, budgeted and scoped. Analyzes
                    development methodologies to determine the best approach for the project type.
                    Teaches the assembly and execution of flexible plans for multiple types of game
                    productions, from full console and mobile games, to live operations of games as a
                    service.
Objectives &        By the end of the course, students should be able to:
Assessment          1)Construct and propose structured production plan for the development and
Instruments            release of an industry standard digital game
                    2)Compare and identify the proper production methodology and system based
                       on the need of the game, team, and market.
                    3)Formulate and Show a resource structure and budget for a multi- game production
Course materials    All required readings and media will be posted to Canvas.
Required            All students MUST have access to a portable computer capable of running Google
Equipment           Docs, Microsoft Office Suite (Word, Powerpoint, Excel) Photoshop (or comparable
                    software program) and Adobe Acrobat. Cell Phones and Tablets are not acceptable.
UT Electronic Mail  Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor
Notification Policy  communication to students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and
                     regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related


                   communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
                   recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
                   It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed
                   of changes in his or her official e-mail address (do so at
                   https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently,
                   e-mail returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse
                   for missed communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a
                   full inbox or use of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action
                   required of the University or instructor.
                   (see
                   http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-p
                   olicy​)
   Use of Class    The materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, and
   Materials       homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of
                   the class materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions
                   being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials without
                   the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the University's
                   Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further
                   disciplinary action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to
                   websites for the purpose of sharing those materials with other current or future
                   students.
                   (from
                   https://wikis.utexas.edu/display/coursematerials/Sample+Use+Statement+for+Syllabus)
Attendance/        Attendance is tied directly to your professionalism grade. Missing a class will result in
Absences           a zero professionalism grade for that day. If attending a scheduled class meeting is
                   not possible, students are expected to promptly notify the instructor of extenuating
                   circumstances (hospitalization, death in the family, etc.). In addition, see the
                   exception below for religious holy days.
                   Arriving more than ten minutes late at the beginning of class or after a break, leaving
                   class without permission, and leaving class prior to dismissal for the day all count as
                   being tardy. Ponts will be deducted from your professionalism grade for each of these
                   occurrences.
Religious Holidays Section 51.911 of the Texas Education Code states that a student shall be excused
                   from attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the
                   observance of a religious holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose
                   absence is excused under this subsection may not be penalized for that absence and
                   shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an assignment from which the
                   student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence. University policy
                   requires students to notify each of their instructors at least fourteen days prior to the
                   date they will be absent from scheduled classes to observe a religious holy day.
                   (from ​http://www.utexas.edu/provost/policies/religious_holidays/1555_001.pdf​)


Q Drop Policy    The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for
                 academic reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall
                 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not permit an
                 undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course
                 a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the
                 student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Classroom        Please observe the following rules during class as a courtesy to fellow students and
Etiquette        the instructor. These will have an impact on your professionalism grade, so it is
                 important that you follow these guidelines...
                 1) Be on time at the beginning of class and after each break. If you must come in late
                 at the beginning of class, please enter the room and seat yourself as quietly and
                 unobtrusively as possible. And please don’t hold up the entire class by failing to
                 return promptly at the end of an announced break, since often the second part of the
                 class period is when we will engage in group activities.
                 2) Turn your cell phone off or on silent, and put it away. Looking at your cell phone
                 during lectures, exercises and discussions is not acceptable. Use your computer for
                 taking notes, not your cell phone.
                 3) Don’t distract other students. Everyone benefits from a classroom free of
                 distracting sights, sounds, and smells. If you would like to update your Facebook
                 page, talk to your friends, listen to loud music, polish your nails, doodle with Sharpies,
                 Sleep etc., please do so outside the classroom during breaks.
                 4) Headphones and sunglasses are not allowed to be worn during lectures, exercises
                 or discussions. Even if your headphones are not playing music, they should never be
                 in your ears during these times.
Grading       This course is project based. There will be no exams. Grading is based on successful
              completion of project objectives. Assignments are worth 40%, the final project is
              worth 30%, and the remaining 30% of the final grade is based on professionalism
              which is earned by attending class during the scheduled meeting times and
              conducting oneself in a professional manner.
              No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be
              able to complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or
              drop before the deadline for doing so passes.
              Note: If you catch the flu, get a flat tire, or otherwise cannot attend class, please send
              an email and attach any class work as needed.
              Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to
              ensure fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any


              stage. Thus a B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University
              does not recognize the grade of A+.
              Letter grade equivalents:
                         A = 94-100                 C+ = 77-79                 D+ = 67-69
                         A- = 90-93                 C = 74-76                  D = 64-66
                         B+ = 87-89                 C- = 70-73                 D- = 60-63
                         B = 84-86                                             F = 0-60
                         B- = 80-83
File Format   You must use the following file formats and naming convention when submitting your
and Naming    assignment. This is a requirement. No submission will be accepted that does not
Convention:   follow these guidelines...
              Required File Format
              Presentations, docs, spreadsheets, flowcharts, concept art, etc. File Format: PDF;
              Game Builds – File Format: Executable file (.exe), Video Files: MP4, AVI
              Required File Naming Convention:
              FirstInitialLastname_AssignmentName_NumericDateSubmitted
              Example: dcohen_conceptpitch_07042018
              IMPORTANT: Do not use slashes (/) in the date, as the system will not accept it and it
              may not read correctly.
REQUIRED:     You must keep all of your work in cloud storage (IE: UT Box, Dropbox, Google Drive).
Cloud Storage Do not keep your work on a computer hard drive, external hard drive or flash drive. If
              you keep your work offline on a hard drive or flash drive and it is lost, crashes or
              becomes corrupted, you will not have the opportunity to make up that work.
Academic      The University's ​Honor Code​ states that “As a student of The University of Texas at
Integrity     Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
              integrity.” You are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of
              individual honor in scholastic work undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you
              should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the
              utmost honesty, which requires you to:
                   ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
                   ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to
                        seek or obtain assistance in preparing them;
                   ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of
                        your academic discipline; and
                   ● avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or
                        another student.
              (adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)


Academic         In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines
Dishonesty       academic dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved
                 academic advantage, such as:
                      ● Cheating
                      ● Plagiarism
                      ● Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
                      ● Falsifying Academic Records
                      ● Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam,
                          obtain an extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned
                          financial benefit)
                      ● M​ultiple submissions​ (submitting essentially the same written assignment for
                          two courses without authorization to do so)
                      ● Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of
                          academic integrity
                          (adapted from ​http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php​)
                 Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to
                 disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
                 from the University.
                 (from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php)
   Plagiarism       “Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying,
                    receiving as a gift, or obtaining by any means material that is attributable
                    in whole or in part to another source, including words, ideas, illustrations,
                    structure, computer code, and other expression or media, and presenting
                    that material as one’s own academic work being offered for credit or in
                    conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
                    http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/st
                    udent-discipline-and-conduct/).
   Copyright and    Understanding the basic principles of copyright and fair use is of critical
   Fair Use         importance to designers. Many of the uses we will make of texts, images,
                    and videos this semester will be covered by the doctrine of fair use.
                    However, as creators, you need to be aware of your own and other
                    copyright holders’ legal rights, and to properly identify and license your
                    own and others’ works. We will discuss these issues during the semester
                    as needed, but when you have questions about whether or when you can
                    appropriate someone else’s work, a useful resource is Georgia K. Harper’s
                    Copyright Crash Course, available at http://copyright.lib.utexas.edu/.
   Services for     The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate
   Students with    academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For
   Disabilities     more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities
   (SSD)            (512-471-6259, ​ssd@austin.utexas.edu​,
                    http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please


                provide documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if
                possible, so that I can make the necessary accommodations promptly.
   Student      There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to
   Support      students at UT. They include (but are not limited to) the following:
   Services
                Fine Arts Career Services​ (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers)
                provides a full range
                of services and resources to support students and alumni.
                The Undergraduate Writing Center
                (512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of
                writing assignments for their courses.
                The Sanger Learning Center​ (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides
                study skills,
                time-management, and note-taking courses.
                University Health Services​ (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu)
                provides medical and health promotion services for currently enrolled
                students and some non-students who are
                officially enrolled in certain University programs.
                The Counseling and Mental Health Center​ (512-471-3515,
                cmhc.utexas.edu) helps students with their personal concerns so that
                they can meet the daily challenges of student life.
Behavior         If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use
Concerns Advice the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
Line (BCAL)     about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a
                partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling
                and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
                (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
                512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency       Mass e-mails (in addition to sirens and fire alarms, when appropriate) will
Procedures      be used to provide students, faculty, and staff with information regarding
                potential threats to the safety and security of the campus community.
                E-mails will also be used as a way to notify students, faculty, and staff of
                emergency situations and keep them updated on the situation.
                Emergency officials also have the ability to disseminate important
                information via text message directly to the cell phones of users
                subscribed to the service. Please consider subscribing to this service at
                https://utdirect.utexas.edu/apps/csas/text/main/​.
                (adapted from
                http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/plans/EmergencyManagem
                entPlan2013a.pdf)


Overview of            Please be aware that on occasion the order and timing of the course
Schedule               schedule may need to be altered to accommodate UT closures, instructor
                       illness, student needs/interests, and design program workshop
                       opportunities and lectures. Any significant alterations to the schedule will
                       be announced via Canvas.
                        Reading assignments and an agenda for each day of class will be posted
                       to Canvas.
Calendar
Note – This is outline, assignments, and reading are subject to change by the instructor,
without notification in certain cases.
 1        1/21 - No Class MLK Jr. Day
 Week
 of 1/21  1/23 - First Day of Class
 (Classe  In Class
 s start       ● Course Intro
 1/22          ● What is Game Production
          HW:
               ● Exercise 1: Review a ​game postmortem on Gamasutra​. Identify what went right
                    and what went wrong with the production, and what lessons were learned from
                    the process.
 2        In Class:
 Week          ● Phases of Game Development
 of 1/28  HW:
               ● Exercise 2: Examining a game: Take an existing game and break down each
                    component (Design, Tech, Art, Sound) that was used in the creation of the
                    game.
          In Class:
               ● What is an RFP (Request for Proposal)
               ● Executive Summary/Pitch
          HW
               ● Each student will receive an RFP. This will be the basis for their course project.
               ● Project 1: Game Concept Proposal - Create a Executive Summary/Pitch
 3        In Class:
 Week     User Analysis/User Centered Design/UX
 of 2/4   HW
          Identify the User and their needs - Create User Profiles/Persona and Analysis
          LAB


4       In Class:
Week    Game Design Document - The Producers Role
of 2/11 Review GDD Checklist
        HW:​ Create a Game Design Brief that identifies base design, number of levels,
        mechanics, art, audio and tech.
        Lab
5       In Class:
Week    Epics, Stories, Tasks and the Backlog
of 2/18 Stories vs User Stories
        HW:
        Break down the design into Epics and Stories.
        LAB
6       In Class:
Week    Production Methodologies in game development
of 2/25 HW:
        Break the stories related to your highest Epics into tasks
        Identify which methodology your production will follow.
        LAB
7       In Class:
Week    Milestones and the Milestone Schedule
of 3/4  HW:
        Create a milestone schedule for your game production
        LAB
8       In Class:
Week    Staffing: Teams, Structures and Dynamics
of 3/11 HW:
        Create a staffing plan for your game production
        Lab
9       Spring Break: No Class
Week
of 3/18 Spring Break: No Class
10      In Class:
Week    Time Estimates
of 3/25 HW:
        Create time Estimates for the tasks and stories.
        In Class:
        Break into groups to play planning poker.


11      In Class:
Week    Tools, licenses, hardware
of 4/1  HW:
        Research what tools and hardware needs are necessary for your game production.
        Review licenses and costs.
        LAB
12      In Class:
Week    Budgeting a game production
of 4/8  HW:
        Create a full budget for your game production
        Lab
13      Scoping and Rescoping throughout development
Week    HW:
of 4/15 Will be announced in class
        Lab
14      Live Service Game Production
Week    HW:
of 4/22 To be announced in class
        Lab
15      Prepping materials for clients, teams and first parties
Week    Final Prep
of 4/29
        Lab / Check-In
16      Video Game Legal
Week    Lab / Check-In
of 5/6
        In Class:
        Where do you go from here.
        FINAL DUE
