                                                 Supervised Teaching
                                  ANT 398T Fall 2018 -- Updated 29 Aug 2018
                                                         Unique 31975
Course Meets Wed 9-12 in SAC 4.120.
Instructor Dr. Denné Reed
office hours: Tu 3-4; Wed 3-5 or by appointment
office: SAC 5.146
e-mail: reedd@austin.utexas.edu
phone: (512) 471-7529
Course Description This course provides graduate students an introduction to the theory and practice
of teaching at the college and university level. The course covers pedagogical theory, instructional
methods, and active learning strategies, which provide the broader context for teaching in higher
education. The course covers the practical aspects of designing and implementing a course including:
curriculum development, organizing a syllabus, classroom management, lecturing and presenting
material, problem-based learning, student engagement, course assessment, and developing a personal
teaching philosophy articulated in a written teaching statement. Students will also have the opportunity
to practice teaching and to receive feedback on their teaching methods. This course fosters
introspection, organization and communication – skills that that are widely valued.
Main Learning Objectives
 •   Pedagogical theory for higher education
 •   Curriculum and course design
 •   Effective presentation and educational engagement
 •   Course evaluation and improvement
Expected Learning Outcomes
 1.   Understand  and  articulate  various  pedagogical  strategies  in  higher  education  
 2.   Empathize  with  the  challenges  undergraduate  students  face  in  the  classroom  
 3.   Feel  confident  developing  a  curriculum,  syllabus  and  course  schedule  
 4.   Be  able  to  employ  a  variety  of  teaching  strategies  and  methodologies  in  the  classroom  
 5.   Write  a  teaching  statement  that  expresses  their  pedagogical  philosophy  and  personal  vision  
Course Structure The course is organized into three sections. The first part of the course introduces
students to the background and theory of effective pedagogy. This part emphasizes readings and
discussions. The second part of the course has a more practical focus and examines the common
workflows and activities involved in organizing a course including developing the curriculum, organizing
the syllabus and planning out the semester. The final part of the course emphasizes practical teaching
through practice short lectures, and in class activities. Here students have the opportunity to practice a
variety of classroom techniques and to receive feedback from their peers.
Required Materials
Lewis, Karren and Michael Sweet (2007). Teaching Pedagogy to Graduate Student Instructors.
ANT 398T Fall 2018                                                 1                                          Reed


Recommended Materials
W. McKeachie (2014) McKeachies Teaching Tips. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
K. Bain (2004). What the best college professors do. Cambridge: Harvard U. Press.
S. Blum (2016) I love learning I hate school: an anthropology of college. Ithaca: Cornell U Press.
Classroom Protocol. Civil and courteous behavior is expected during lectures and labs (It’s a good
idea outside of class too). Cell phone ringers must be turned off prior to the beginning of class.
Attendance Students are expected to attend all classes.
Assignments This course features four assignments:
Assignment 1 Statement of Teaching Philosophy (draft due 26 Sept., revised version due 5 Dec.):
It is common when submitting applications for faculty position to include a teaching statement (2-4
pages) that articulates your philosophy on teaching, your beliefs about the role of higher education,
student learning and your role as an educator. In this class you will draft a personalized teaching
statement that reflects your evolving ideas throughout the course starting with a preliminary draft that is
due after the first section on teaching pedagogy. These drafts will be circulated and reviewed by me
and your peers in class. You will revise and submit a final statement before the end of the course.
Assignment 2 Course Design (due 31 October):
Select a topic in your area of expertise and design a preliminary syllabus and schedule for at least 6
class meetings. Students will provide lesson plans for two of the six classes that include:
  •   Learning objectives
  •   Active learning strategies
  •   Instructional methods
  •   Classroom Assessment Techniques
Assignment 3 “Mini” lecture (due 2 November):
Prepare and teach a 25 minute class for the introductory course you developed for Assignment 2.
Following the class, your peers and I will provide constructive feedback about the lesson.
Assignment 4 Lecture observation and peer review (due 30 November)
Students will identify two undergraduate classes they can attend and evaluate, one large format class
and one small discussion class.
Participation This is a small discussion format class that requires active student participation. Students
are expected to articulate their thoughts, concerns, insights and questions during each class session.
Grading This course is offered on a credit/no credit basis. Students will receive credit fi they complete
all the necessary assignments, participate in class, and demonstrate competency in each of the main
learning objective.
ANT 398T Fall 2018                                   2                                              REED


Course Schedule
 Week 1
 Aug.    29     Course Introduction          Introductions, syllabus, writing exercise
 Week 2
 Sep.    5      Ideas on teaching.           Teaching Pedagogy (TP) Chapter II Effective
                                             Teaching pp 29-38.
                Introduction to pedagogical
                theory.                      Gannon, Kevin. Radical Hope: A Teaching
                                             Manifesto, July 6, 2016.
                                             http://www.thetattooedprof.com/archives/624#more
                                             -624
                                             Montell, Gabriela, "What's Your Philosophy on
                                             Teaching, and Does it Matter?" The Chronicle of
                                             Higher Education. March 27, 2003.
                                             http://chronicle.com/jobs/news/2003/03/200303270
                                             1c.htm
                                             Bain, Ken. (2004). What the best college teachers
                                             do. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
                                             eBook available through UT libraries. Chapters 1-2
                                             Assignment 1 – draft teaching statement due.
 Week 3
 Sep     12     The modern university.       Arum, Richard and Josipa Roksa. Academically
                                             Adrift: Limited Learning on College Campuses.
                A look at how universities   University of Chicago, 2011. eBook available
                are changing and the role of through the UT libraries.
                higher education in society.
                                             View Documentary
                                             Starving the Beast: the battle to disrupt and reform
                                             America’s public universities.
ANT 398T Fall 2018                                  3                                            Reed


 Week 4
 Sep.    19     Students and learning.     TP Chapter III Getting to know your students. Pp.
                                           40-52.
                Understanding and          Chapter IV Developing authority as a teacher 53-
                empathizing with the       70.
                student experience and
                differences in how people  Blum, Susan. I Love Learning, I Hate School: An
                learn.                     Anthropology of College. Cornell U. Press, 2016.
 Week 5
 Sep.    26                                TP Chapter V Instructional Design pp. 71-90
                                           Assignment 1 – revised draft due for peer review.
                Course Development         Suggested websites on how to write a teaching
                                           statement.
                 Writing a syllabus and
                 course schedule: require- http://www.princeton.edu/mcgraw/library/for-grad-
                 ments, recommendations.   students/teaching-statement/
                                           http://www1.umn.edu/ohr/teachlearn/tutorials/philos
                                           ophy/index.html
 Week 6
 Oct.    3      Lectures and               TP Chapter VI Lecturing and Giving Presentations
                Presentations
                How to deliver an engaging
                presentation.
 Week 7
ANT 398T Fall 2018                               4                                           REED


 Oct.    10     Breaking it Down and        TP Chapter VII Questions and Questioning
                Flipping it                 Techniques. Pp. 106-124
                Leading smaller             Chapter VIII Leading Discussions pp. 125-137
                discussions, promoting      Assignment 2 – Syllabus due
                student participation,
                flipping a class
 Week 8
 Oct.    17     Classroom Technology        TP XIII Using Instructional Technology
                The benefits and challenges
                of using deploying
                technology in the classroom
 Week 9
 Oct.    24     Grading and Assessment      TP Chapter IX Assessing Student Learning
                Grading philosophies,       TP Chapter X Student Learning and Study Skils
                polies and methods of
                student and course
                assessment.
 Week 10
 Oct.    31     Practice Makes Perfect      TP XIV Microteaching
                                            Assignment 3 – Mini lecture due
                Micro-teaching
                presentations
 Week 11
ANT 398T Fall 2018                               5                                        Reed


 Nov.       7    Practice Makes Perfect         Assignment 3 – Mini lecture due
                 Micro-teaching
                 presentations
 Week 12
 Nov.       14   AAA meetings no class
 Week 13
 Nov.       21   Thanksgiving
 Week 14
 Nov.       28   Hit the Market!                Assignment 1 – Teaching statement, revisions and
                                                final version due.
                 Developing your CV and
                 teaching statement.
 Week 15
 Dec.       5    Closing remarks and
                 evaluations
Religious Holidays If you will not be able to attend class due to religious services, let me know at least
a week ahead of time. We will make every effort to help you keep up with course assignments in such
situations.
Canvas In this class we use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with password-
protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu—to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys.
You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m.
to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students. E-mail is recognized as an official mode of
university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your e-mail for university and
ANT 398T Fall 2018                                    6                                           REED


course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed
about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—we
recommend daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related
communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions
for updating your e-mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
Academic Integrity Please pursue rigorous honesty in everything you do, including your work for this
class. It will serve you well in life, and in this class as well since we report all cases of suspected
academic dishonest to the dean of students. Each student in the course is expected to abide by the
University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the
core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at
UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you have used in previous
class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to academic
disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the          University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php. Dishonesty will result at least in a failed grade
for the assignment and perhaps also for the course. For more info, see
http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagiarism. You are encouraged to work
together in study groups and often in lab exercises, however the work you submit (unless otherwise
indicated) must be your work.
Q drop Policy. Texas law limits the number of course drops for academic reasons to six. Senate Bill
1231 says: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education may not
permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped courses, including any course a
transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good
cause for dropping more than that number.”
Important Dates (2018)
•   4 Sep. - Fourth class day; Last day of the official add/drop period; after this date, changes in
     registration may require the approval of the department chair and usually the student's dean.
•   14 Sep. - Twelfth class day; Last day an undergraduate student may add a class except for rare
     and extenuating circumstances. Last day to drop a class for a possible refund.
•   25-26, 29-31 Oct. - Academic advising for continuing and readmitted students for the spring
     semester.
•   1 Nov. - Last day an undergraduate student may, with the dean’s approval, withdraw from the
     University or drop a class except for urgent and substantiated, nonacademic reasons. Last day an
     undergraduate student may change registration in a class to or from the pass/fail basis.
•   19 Dec. – Default final exam date.
Disability Services Students with documented disabilities may request appropriate academic
accommodations from the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students
with Disabilities, 471-6259. Please let me know about any arrangements we can make that will assist
you in your learning.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL). If you are worried about someone who is acting differently,
you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another
individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
ANT 398T Fall 2018                                        7                                             Reed


Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
Resources for Learning & Life at UT Austin. The University of Texas has numerous resources for
students to provide assistance and support for your learning.
•   Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://lifelearning.utexas.edu/
•   Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
•   Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
•   Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
•   Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded
educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free
from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university
can:
             1.   Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2.   Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
                  or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3.   Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu
Emergency Evacuation Policy. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to
evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be
aware of the following policies regarding evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the
classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
you entered the building. If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first
week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors. Do not
re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police
Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
ANT 398T Fall 2018                                       8                                           REED
