MAN 374                               Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                           Summer 2020
                    MAN-374 - GENERAL MANAGEMENT AND STRATEGY
                                                - SUMMER 2020 –
Instructor       Professor Shiva Agarwal (CBA 4.250 ) & Professor Michele A Hildrum (GSB 4.126E)
Office
Office Hours Agarwal (Friday 9 – 10am or by appointment); Hildrum (F 9-10am or by appointment)
E-Mail           via Canvas INBOX
Webpage          via Canvas
TA/ Grader       TBD
Required Materials
1. Textbook: Contemporary Strategy Analysis, 2019, Custom Edition, based on 10th Edition, Grant, Wiley
Publishing. ISBN 978-1119580911 (B&W printed version available at the Co-op) or ISBN 978-
1119495727 – One of these version is REQUIRED
2. Course packet: Available at the Co-Op. (Note: Please do not duplicate course packets.)
3. SquareCap: An online tool used for your homework assignments, attendance, and classroom
contribution/discussions ($10 – available at https://squarecap.com) – REQUIRED (although, if you’ve
already purchased it for another current course, you don’t need to purchase it again)
Course Overview & Objectives
Why do some companies outperform others? In this course we will explore possible answers to this
fundamental question of "strategy" using a combination of readings, in-class case discussions and
individual as well as group assignments. The course will expose you to a variety of theories and analytical
frameworks that help in identifying the drivers of company performance. You will learn to apply these
across a variety of companies and industries, in the process developing your ability to examine strategic
issues from the perspective of the general manager of a corporation. As the general manager’s task cuts
across functional areas, this course builds on your previous work in the program and provides a
comprehensive and integrated management perspective.
Course Evaluation
    1.   Attendance & Participation 15% (lowest score dropped)
    2.   Case Homework 20% (2 lowest scores dropped)
    3.   Midterm Exam (Take home) 30%
    4.   Group Project 35%
Course Details
1.       Attendance & Class Participation (15%)
1|Page


MAN 374                                 Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                             Summer 2020
a.       Class Attendance: Attendance will be taken by the TA each class session with the exception of
those that are indicated as “NO CLASS”. You’ll need to be online when class begins, with your video on,
and present the whole class in order to get credit for attendance. If you’re present, you’ll receive 1 point.
If you’re absent, you’ll receive a zero for that session. If you have a pre-approved excuse which requires
appropriate documentation, you’ll be given 1 point (as if you were in attendance). Your lowest attendance
score is dropped with no excuse necessary (this is meant to be used for emergencies, interviews, or just a
bad day).
If you have questions related to attendance, please address them to the TA.
b.       Participation: During class, I may call upon any student to lead off the discussion, answer
questions or comment/elaborate on the ongoing discussion. Thus, you should not only be well-prepared
with the content of the case and assigned materials, but also listen carefully to what others are saying in
the class. I am aware that many students may not be used to active class participation in their other
coursework, or may not be comfortable with speaking in front of others. However, in modern day
organizations many critical interactions are verbal and your success in defining and executing a particular
strategy rests on your ability to provide a compelling argument in front of your colleagues. Therefore,
please consider the classroom a laboratory in which you can test your ability to convince your peers of the
correctness of your approach.
Your grade for class participation will be based on your overall participation throughout the semester. The
quality of your discussion comments also matters; it’s not just how many times you speak in class (although
it is impossible to assess quality without sufficient quantity) but rather, how valuable your comments were
toward advancing the discussion.
You can view how many points you received for a given class session by looking at the Participation
assignment rubric on Canvas. Your overall course participation grade will be computed at the end of the
semester based on how well you did compared to the average of the class. If you have any questions, please
speak with the TA.
For each class session you participate in, your contribution score will be a 1, 2, or 3, depending on the
quality, and to a lesser degree quantity, of your contribution.
If you are unable to contribute in class verbally for some reason, you will have the opportunity to
contribute your thoughts in writing; however, you will be restricted to receiving a maximum of 2 points,
rather than 3.
When asked by Squarecap, you may contribute notes on EITHER your verbal communication OR your
written contribution, but not both. And, of course, you must be present in class in both cases in order to
gain credit.
NOTE: Having an excused absence does not give you credit for participation/contribution for that day.
You must be present in order to get participation/contribution credit.
2. Case Homework (20%)
During the course, you will be required to read, analyze, and answer a series of questions regarding 9 cases
that address aspects of strategy that are relevant to where we are in the overall discussion. Seven of these
will count toward your grade—your lowest two scores will be dropped.
Your homework submissions will be made via Squarecap. Without this tool your homework submission
won’t be graded and therefore, no grade will be assigned to you. If you have trouble paying for or
registering the Squarecap tool, please let the TA or me know immediately. If you are using Squarecap in
2|Page


MAN 374                                 Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                             Summer 2020
another course this semester, there is no need to purchase it twice. It automatically shows all of the Canvas
courses you’re registered in.
Assuming your written answers indicate thought and effort and you answered all questions noted (usually
5), the grade given for this category of work will be a ‘completion’ grade. The day after you do the
homework, we will have an open discussion in class about the case. Please be prepared to participate in
that discussion as you may be called upon to do so.
3. Midterm Exam (30%)
The midterm examination is in the format of a take-home case analysis. All instructions will be provided
with the exam. Students will receive the exam on Monday, July 27th on Canvas. Students must submit
an electronic copy of their answers to the exam on Canvas before midnight on Sunday, August 2nd.
Early submissions are encouraged. No extensions will be granted. Late submissions will not receive any
credit.
The exam is due six days after its distribution to provide students with flexibility. This does not mean that
the students need to spend all six days working on the exam. Students can decide specifically when between
exam distribution and the submission deadline they will work on and submit the exam. It is your
responsibility to plan and manage your time effectively, taking into account other activities and unforeseen
circumstances that might arise in that period.
Please keep in mind that the midterm exam is an individual assignment and students are not allowed to
discuss any part of the exam with others. The minimum penalty for academic dishonesty will be a zero the
exam.
4. Group Company Paper (35%)
This assignment is intended to apply your understanding of the concepts discussed in class and to
simultaneously allow for the development of the teamwork and oral and written communication skills that
have become a centerpiece of contemporary organizations. You will form a group of ~6 people with other
members of your class. Your group will develop a detailed write-up and an oral presentation about one
company and how the company's situation can be better understood by applying some key principles from
the course. The goal is not to produce a “biography” of your firm, but to develop a specific thesis,
hypothesis, or central question that you wish to answer, use class frameworks to analyze the information
you collect on your subject, and use that analysis to craft real recommendations and/or conclusions.
Additional information (including details on structure of the paper and evaluation) will be available as the
course progresses. Note that groups will be finalized by Wednesday, July 15th. The oral presentations will
be held during sessions 18, 19 & 20 and the final written paper is due at noon on Thursday, August 13th.
Additional interim deadlines are noted on the session plan.
While the goal is for everyone in the group to receive the same grade, I will institute a peer-review
mechanism to deal with group process issues that will penalize free riders, and groups with concerns to
this effect should immediately contact me as soon as they become aware of the issues.
Any student who misses his/her group presentation due to an unexcused absence will forfeit (for him or
herself) 50% of the oral presentation points earned by the group.
5. Extra Credit – What Have You Learned Discussion (0%, up to 2% EC points added to your
     total)
3|Page


MAN 374                                   Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                           Summer 2020
In addition to the graded work, you will have an opportunity to earn up to 2% extra credit points by
posting up to 5 comments (either original or replies to other people’s postings) on what you’ve learned
during the course. Consider this to be like a blog or a journal. I'm interested in what you've learned in
this course - not the little stuff, but rather the things that might have been a surprise or epiphany to
you. For instance, "I learned that not everything in the business world is black and white; but rather, most
things are very complicated and therefore result in there being more than one option of how to proceed
with that issue. This surprised me because....". Don't do these all at once. You could; but I think it would
be best to spread them out, as you will likely learn some pretty cool things later on in the semester.
However, the beginning of class on the last class-day of the session for our course is the last time / day to
post these and receive credit.
AND, only one of these posts will be allowed during the last 2 days of the course. So, don’t wait until the
last minute.
Additional Important Information
Attendance:
The course emphasizes case analysis and, accordingly, an integral part of learning takes place interactively
in the classroom. Therefore, attending all classes is critical. Note that the textbook is only a starting point
for our discussions and I will be integrating content from other sources as well during the lecture. Thus,
quizzes and exams may be based on content that is discussed in class but outside the text. If for some
unavoidable reason you miss a class, it is your responsibility to find out from your classmates what material
we covered and what additional assignments or handouts you missed. You are of course always welcome
to see me during office hours to discuss this content.
Class Policies and other administrative details
        As the course progresses, I will post information on the Canvas system. So please check the
         website regularly.
        I urge you to take notes during class. Additional materials that I present in class may not always
         be circulated.
        You must turn your camera on during class; if you do not have a laptop or camera, please contact
         me immediately.
        All classes are being recorded. Class recordings are confidential to the class and only for
         educational purposes. They should not be shared outside the class in any form, and any
         violation of this restriction will be subject to Student Misconduct proceedings. I will post a
         link to the recording on Canvas after class has ended.
        Make sure you have a picture of yourself (not your pet or anything else) associated with your
         profile.
        All students will be expected to act professionally while "in class". Anyone not behaving
         professionally will be asked to leave the "classroom". This includes keeping the camera focused
         on you during class.
        If technology goes down, continue to stay in the meeting or try to get reconnected for 10 min; if
         technology is still failing us, then I will send a note on Canvas of next steps.
        While in class, please be sure to minimize disruptions by turning off all cell phones, pagers and
         other devices.
4|Page


MAN 374                                  Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                            Summer 2020
Office Hours
I will be happy to discuss the course, your progress, or any other issue of interest to you on an individual
basis. Please see me during office hours. I am also available, within reason, to meet with you outside these
times. To set up an appointment, please send me an e-mail. Do not wait until the end of the semester to
see me regarding your concerns with the course material or your performance.
Writing Flag
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester,
complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve your
writing. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work.
I encourage you to use the Undergraduate Writing Center, FAC 211, 471-6222:
http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/). The UWC offers free, individualized, expert help with writing for any UT
undergraduate, by appointment or on a drop-in basis. These services are not just for writing that has
"problems": Getting feedback from an informed audience is a normal part of a successful writing project.
The UWC’s trained consultants work with students from every department on both academic and non-
academic writing. Using methods that preserve the integrity of your work, they help you develop strategies
to improve your writing and become a more independent writer.
Independent Inquiry Flag
This course carries the Independent Inquiry Flag. Independent Inquiry flag courses are designed to engage
students in the process of inquiry and provide them with the opportunity for independent investigation of
a question, problem, or project. To that end, courses carrying this flag require students to complete projects
and assignments involving independent investigation and presentation of their work. In this course, the
Independent Inquiry Flag is implemented through the Written contribution (case write-ups) and the Group
Project – both of these give students the opportunity to learn and demonstrate an in-depth inquiry of the
course subject matter in the context of specific firms and industries.
Prerequisites
Upper-division standing; seventy-five semester hours of coursework, including: Management 336 or 336H;
credit or registration for Finance 357 or 357H, and Marketing 337 or 337H; and credit or registration for
one of the following: Accounting 353J, 366P, Business Administration 353H, Finance 353, 366P,
Management 353, 366P, Management Information Systems 353, 366P, Marketing 353, 366P, Operations
Management 353, or 366P.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives will be well served by this
course, that students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this
class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit. Please let me know
right away if this ever is not the case.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date
of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a
5|Page


MAN 374                                 Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                              Summer 2020
project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/.
Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities
of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA
Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://www.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-
Ethics.aspx. By teaching this course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that
document. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed to observe all student responsibilities described in
that document. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments
is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University
rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the
course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be
strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Judicial Services website at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/ to access the official University policies and procedures on
scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Plagiarism:
Students should be aware that all required writing assignments may be submitted to a plagiarism-detection
tool such as Turnitin.com. Turnitin is a software resource intended to address plagiarism and improper
citation. The software works by cross-referencing submitted materials with an archived database of
journals, essays, newspaper articles, books, and other published work. In addition, other methods may be
used to determine the originality of the paper. This software is not intended to replace or substitute for
the faculty member's judgment regarding detection of plagiarism. Note that self-plagiarism (the re-
submission of an original work written by that same student for another course) is still plagiarism.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
         1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
         2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
         become
            involved in a Title IX investigation.
         3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
6|Page


MAN 374                                  Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                          Summer 2020
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
Campus Safety
Please note the following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus
Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
. Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
. Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform their instructor in writing during the first week
of class.
. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
. Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050
. Further information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
www.utexas.edu/emergency
7|Page


MAN 374                              Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                                Summer 2020
                                          SESSION PLAN
                             (*****Note: This plan is subject to revision*****)
1. INTRODUCTION
Session 1: Course Overview & The Concept of Strategy                                         Mon, Jul 13
       Readings:
        Course pack: Syllabus
        Textbook, Chapter 1: The Concept of Strategy
        The Perils of Bad Strategy (Optional Reading)
       Case:
        Whole Foods Market
       Discussion questions:
       a) What opportunity has Whole Foods tapped into? What changes in the environment have
       enabled its success?
       b) What are Whole Foods‟ key strengths?
       c) Who will be Whole Foods key competitors going forward? Will Whole Foods be able to
       compete with these players successfully? Why / why not?
2. STRATEGY ANALYSIS
Session 2: Industry Analysis I                                                               Tue, Jul 14
       Readings:
        Textbook, Chapter 3: Industry Analysis: The Fundamentals
        Course pack: The Five Forces: Competing for Profits-Understanding Michael Porter's Best-Known
            Framework
       Case:
        Cola Wars Continue: Coke and Pepsi in 2006
Session 3: Industry Analysis II                                                              Wed, Jul 15
       Due:
        Group Project: Group composition & company posted by end of day
       Readings:
        Textbook, Chapter 4: Further Topics in Industry and Competitive Analysis
        Course pack: The books business: Great digital expectations
       Case:
        Leadership Online: Barnes and Noble versus Amazon.com
8|Page


MAN 374                            Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                              Summer 2020
Session 4: Firm Analysis I                                                              Thu, Jul 16
       Readings:
        Textbook, Chapter 5: Analyzing Resources and Capabilities
        Course pack: Competing on Resources
       Strategy Simulation in the class (Details will be uploaded on canvas)
3. BUSINESS STRATEGY CHOICES
Session 5: Competing on Cost                                                            Mon, Jul 20
       Readings:
        Textbook, Chapter 7: The Sources and Dimensions of Competitive Advantage (pg 155 to pg 173)
       Case:
        Matching Dell
Session 6: Competing on Differentiation                                               Tue, Jul 21
       Readings:
        Textbook, Chapter 7: The Sources and Dimensions of Competitive Advantage (pg 173 to pg 188)
       Case:
        Walmart Inc. Takes on Amazon.com
Session 7: Competing on Innovation - I                                                  Wed, Jul 22
       Readings:
        Textbook, Chapter 9: Technology-based Industries and the Management of Innovation
       Case:
        Apple Inc. 2010
Session 8: Project Workday I                                                            Thu, Jul 23
          No Class
          Use the time to work on the project outline
Session 9: Competing on Innovation – II                                                Mon, Jul 27
       Due:
9|Page


MAN 374                                Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                             Summer 2020
            Group Project: Project outline due at start of session
            Mid-term will be uploaded on canvas after the class
        Readings:
         Network effects and Winners Take All Market (To be uploaded on canvas)
Session 10: Midterm Exam                                                                 Tue, Jul 28
         No Class
        Due:
        *******THE MID-TERM EXAM IS DUE BY Midnight on August 2nd . Upload the softcopy
        of the mid-term on canvas.
         LATE SUBMISSIONS WILL NOT BE ACCEPTED. NO EXCEPTIONS *******
        There will be no in-class activity or discussion during this session to enable you to complete your
        mid-term exam.
4. CORPORATE STRATEGY CHOICES
Session 11: Vertical Integration and Firm Scope                                             Wed, Jul 29
        Readings:
         Textbook, Chapter 10: Vertical Integration and the Scope of the Firm
Session 12: Diversification                                                                 Thu, Jul 30
        Readings:
         Chapter 12: Diversification Strategy
        Case:
         Walt Disney Company: The Entertainment King
Session 13: Mergers & Acquisitions                                                          Mon, Aug 3
         Guest speaker
        Readings:
         Course pack: The new M&A playbook
Session 14: Alliances                                                                      Tue, Aug 4
        Readings:
         Course pack: When to Ally and when to Acquire
        Case:
         Millennium Pharmaceuticals
5. GLOBAL STRATEGIES
10 | P a g e


MAN 374                               Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                         Summer 2020
Session 15: Global Strategy                                                               Wed, Aug 5
        Readings:
         Textbook, Chapter 11: Global Strategies and the Multinational Corporation
        Case:
         L’Oreal and the Globalization of American Beauty
6. GROUP PROJECTs
Session 16: Meeting with Instructor /Project Work Day II                                 Thu, Aug 6
         Groups 1, 2, 3 and 4 option to meet with the Instructor.
         Other groups to continue working on Company paper. There will be no in-class activity.
Session 17: Meeting with Instructor /Project Work Day III                                Mon, Aug 10
         Groups 5, 6, 7 and 8 option to meet with the Instructor.
         Other groups to continue working on Company paper. There will be no in-class activity.
        Group Project: ALL GROUPS TO SUBMIT PRESENTATION SLIDES BY 11am
        Tuesday August 11
Session 18: Project Presentations                                                       Tue, Aug 11
        Due:
         Complete Class Feedback survey after class for the groups that presented
        In-Class:
         Three groups to present; other groups to attend and participate
         Note: I will be grading class oral participation even though you may not be presenting
Session 19: Project Presentations                                                       Wed, Aug 12
        Due:
         Complete Class Feedback survey after class for the groups that presented
        In-Class:
         Three groups to present; other groups to attend and participate
         Note: I will be grading class oral participation even though you may not be presenting
Session 20: Project Presentations & Wrap Up                                             Thu, Aug 13
    Due:
            Group Project: Final report midnight, August 13th. No extensions please!
            Group Project: Project team member evaluations due midnight, August 13th
11 | P a g e


MAN 374                              Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                         Summer 2020
            Complete Class Feedback survey after class for the groups that presented
    Readings:
     Course pack: What is Strategy?
    In-Class:
         Two groups to present; other groups to attend and participate
         Note: I will be grading class oral participation even though you may not be presenting
12 | P a g e


MAN 374                                 Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                                                                   Summer 2020
                                                       SUMMARY OF SESSION PLAN
                                                                                        Case
Class # Day   Date                   Topic                 Textbook chapter                          Other course materials        Assignments Due
                                                                                  (in course pack)
                     Course overview,
  1      M    13-Jul The Concept of Strategy           Syllabus, Chapter 1      Whole Foods        The Perils of Bad Strategy
                                                                                                   The Five Forces: Competing
  2       T   14-Jul Industry Analysis I               Chapter 3                Cola Wars          for Profits
                                                                                                                              Project team & company
                                                                                Barnes & Noble vs. The Books Business: Great  selection
  3      W    15-Jul Industry Analysis II              Chapter 4                Amazon.com         Digital Expectations
                                                                                                                              Strategy Simulation (to be
  4      TH   16-Jul Firm Analysis                     Chapter 5                                   Competing on Resources     done in class)
  5      M    20-Jul Competing on Cost                 Chapter 7 (p. 155 - 173) Dell
                                                                                Walmart Inc. Takes
  6       T   21-Jul Competing on Differentiation      Chapter 7 (p. 173 - 188) on Amazon.com
  7      W    22-Jul Competing on Innovation           Chapter 9                Apple, Inc. 2010
  8      TH   23-Jul NO CLASS – Work on Outline
                                                                                                                              Project outline due;
  9      M    27-Jul Platforms                                                                                                Midterm begins
  10      T   28-Jul NO CLASS – MIDTERM
  11     W    29-Jul Vertical Integration & Firm Scope Chapter 10
                                                                                                                              Submit mid-term by Sunday
  12     TH   30-Jul Diversification                   Chapter 12               Disney                                        mid-night
  13     M    3-Aug Mergers & Acquisitions                                                         The New M&A Playbook
                                                                                Millennium         When to Ally and When to
  14      T   4-Aug Alliances                                                   Pharmaceuticals    Acquire
  15     W    5-Aug Global Strategy                    Chapter 11               L'Oreal
  16     TH   6-Aug NO CLASS - Project Work Day
  17     M   10-Aug NO CLASS - Project Work Day
  18      T  11-Aug Class Presentations                                                                                       Slides due
  19     W   12-Aug Class Presentations
                     Class Presentations                                                                                      Final paper and Project team
                     Wrap Up and Further Topics                                                                               member evaluations by
  20     TH  13-Aug FINAL PAPER DUE TODAY                                                          What is Strategy?          11:59 AM
13 | P a g e


MAN 374                                   Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                                   Summer 2020
                                                 APPENDIX A
                                       Why We Use the Case Method1
The case method is one of the most effective means of management education. It is widely used in
schools of business throughout the world, and this use is predicated upon the belief that tackling real
business problems is the best way to develop practitioners. Real problems are messy, complex, and very
interesting.
Unlike other pedagogical techniques, many of which make you the recipient of large amounts of
information but do not require its use, the case method requires you to be an active participant in the
closest thing to the real situation. It is a way of gaining a great deal of experience without spending a lot
of time. It is also a way to learn a about how certain businesses operate and how managers manage, and
it will expose you to a variety of companies and industries you may consider working for. There are few
programmable, textbook solutions to the kinds of problems faced by real general managers. When a
problem becomes programmable, the general manager gives it to someone else to solve on a repeated
basis using the guidelines he or she has set down. Thus, the case situations that we will face will require
the use of analytical tools and the application of your personal judgment.
Preparing for Class
When you prepare for class, it is recommended that you plan on reading the case a few times. The first
reading should be a quick run-through of the text in the case. It should give you a feeling for what the
case is about and the types of data that are contained in the case. For example, you will want to
differentiate between facts and opinions that may be expressed. In every industry, there is a certain
amount of "conventional wisdom" that may or may not reflect the truth.
In a subsequent reading you should read in more depth. Your major objective on a subsequent reading
should be to understand the business and the situation. You should ask yourself questions like: (1) Why
has this company survived? (2) How does this business work? (3) What are the economics of this
business? Carefully examine the exhibits in the case. It is generally true that the case writer has put the
exhibit there for a purpose. It contains some information that will be useful to you in analyzing the
situation. Ask yourself what the information is when you study each exhibit. You will often find that you
will need to do some analysis in order to benefit from the information in the raw data.
You should have a good idea of the fundamentals of the case. Now you will be searching to understand
the specific situation. You will want to get at the root causes of problems and gather data from the case
that will allow you to make specific action recommendations. You may want to review the assignment
questions in the course description and go through the case again. You should now be able to prepare
your outlined answers to the assignment questions.
Class Discussions
In each class, I may ask one or several people to lead off the discussion. If you have prepared the case,
and are capable of answering the assignment question, you should have no difficulty with this lead-off
assignment. An effective lead-off can do a great deal to enhance a class discussion. It sets a tone for the
class that allows that class to probe more deeply into the issues of the case.
The instructor's role in the class discussion is to help, through intensive questioning, to develop your
ideas. This use of the Socratic Method has proven to be an effective way to develop thinking capability
in individuals. The instructor manages the class process to ensure that the class achieves an
understanding of the case situation. There is no single correct solution to any of these problems. There
are, however, many wrong solutions. Therefore, we will try to come up with a solution that will enable us
to deal effectively with the problems presented in the case.
1
  This note was prepared by Dan R.E. Thomas and was modified by the instructor for this course. It is intended solely as
an aid to class preparation.
14 | P a g e


MAN 374                                 Professor Agarwal & Hildrum                             Summer 2020
After the individual lead-off presentation, the discussion will be opened to the remainder of the group. It
is during this time that you will have an opportunity to present and develop your ideas about the way the
situation should be handled. It will be important for you to relate your ideas to the case situation and to
the ideas of others as they are presented in the class. The instructor's role is to help you do this.
The Use of Extra or Post-Case Data
You are encouraged to deal with the case as it is presented. You should put yourself in the position of
the general manager involved in the situation and look at the situation through his or her eyes. Part of
the unique job of being a general manager is that many of your problems are dilemmas. There is no way
to come out a winner on all counts. Although additional data might be interesting or useful, the "Monday
morning quarterback" syndrome is not an effective way to learn about strategy. Therefore, you are
strongly discouraged from acquiring or using extra- or post-case data. It is, however, interesting and
occasionally useful to know what actually occurred. Therefore, whenever possible, we will tell you what
happened to a company since the time of the case, but you can and should draw your own conclusions
from that.
15 | P a g e
