ADV322/PR322/ADV391K: HEALTH COMMUNICATION ‐ MESSAGES, CAMPAIGNS, AND THE MEDIA
                        Spring 2020       •     M W 2:00‐3:30pm      •     CMA 3.120
Professor: Michael Mackert, Ph.D.
Office: CMB 3.120 (Center for Health Communication)
E‐mail: mackert@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Thursdays 9:30am‐11:00am (or by appointment)
COURSE OBJECTIVES
There are three primary areas to be covered for this health communication course:
    1. A discussion of health communication theories. Basic health communication theories, such as
         the Health Belief Model and Theory of Planned Behavior, will be covered as useful frameworks
         for approaching the design of health communication campaigns. Other fundamental concepts,
         such as health literacy, will also be discussed.
    2. Instruction in health communication campaign design. This course will also cover the effective
         development of health communication campaigns. This will range from the process of
         formative research to developing messages to evaluating campaign effectiveness.
    3. A review of health communication in the media and trends in health communication. This will
         include health information in different media (traditional mass media vs. new digital media),
         embedding of health messages in popular media (e.g., Grey’s Anatomy), health‐oriented
         advertising (e.g., direct‐to‐consumer prescription drug advertising), and coverage of media
         controversies related to health (e.g., the link between vaccines and autism).
The overall objective for the course is to introduce students to a range of health communication topics,
supplementing existing health and communication knowledge with new contexts and communication
techniques. The course will also provide practical experience designing health communication
campaigns, including strategies for evaluating the success of those campaigns.
COURSE MATERIALS
There is one required book for this class: Designing Effective Health Messages (Mackert, Lazard, and
Love). Additional readings and materials will be posted to Canvas. Some class discussions will be driven
by materials – ads, articles, etc. – generated by the class.
While it is not required reading for the class, I always highly recommend Jon Steel’s Perfect Pitch. It is an
extremely useful book about making presentations and winning new business. It will be useful not only
for the presentations in this class, but for presentations you make in other classes and as you move
forward with your careers.


COURSE GRADING
In general, team members receive the same grades for group exercises and projects. The individual
project offers a chance for personal distinction, since you will have time to work on it and can use
essentially all the resources at your command. Plus/minus grades will be assigned for the final grade.
The assignments for this class include:
        Crash Exercises: These will be short (5‐day) exercises conducted in conjunction with clients.
        Team Projects: These longer‐term team projects will involve solving communication problems
         for clients.
        Individual Paper: An individual paper will challenge you to determine your personal approach
         to health communication and what it means for your future education and career.
        Class Participation: Your participation in class – during in‐class exercises and discussions – is an
         important element of completing the class. It is important to show up prepared for class
         discussions, and effective participation includes balancing of quality and quantity.
        Peer Evaluations: Your teammates will evaluate your performance for the class.                Their
         evaluations will be averaged and included as a component of your final grade.
   Assignment                        Weight                 Letter Grade     Number Grade
   Crash Exercise #1                   5%                   A                93‐100
   Crash Exercise #2                   10%                  A‐               90‐92.9
   Team Project #1                     20%                  B+               87‐.89.9
   Team Project #2                     25%                  B                83‐86.9
   Individual Paper                    20%                  B‐               80‐82.9
   Class Participation                 15%                  C+               77‐79.9
   Peer Evaluations                    5%                   C                73‐76.9
                                                            C‐               70‐72.9
                                                            D+               66‐69.9
                                                            D                63‐66.9
                                                            D‐               60‐62.9


COURSE SCHEDULE
It is expected readings for each class day have been read prior to attending class. Additional materials
will be provided in class and on Canvas. The class schedule is subject to change.
     DATE      TOPICS                                                NOTES/READINGS
     1/22      Course Overview and Introductions
     1/27      Models of Individual Health Behavior                  Designing Effective Health Messages
                                                                          Introduction
                                                                          Theories: Tools for Solving
                                                                             Problems
     1/29      Models of Interpersonal and Group Behavior
      2/3      Health Literacy                                       Designing Effective Health Messages
                                                                          Principles of Clear Communication
      2/5      Intercultural Issues in Health Communication
     2/10      Planning and Strategy Development                     Designing Effective Health Messages
                                                                          Campaign Development Process
     2/12      Developing and Pre‐testing Concepts and Messages
     2/17      Account Planning and the User‐Based Approach          Designing Effective Health Messages
                                                                          Account Planning
     2/19      Crash Exercise #1 Launch
     2/24      Crash Exercise #1 Presentations
     2/26      Team Project #1 Consultations                         Consultations will be held in the Center for
                                                                     Health Communication: CMB 3.120
      3/2      Team Project #1 Consultations                         Consultations will be held in the Center for
                                                                     Health Communication: CMB 3.120
      3/4                                                   NO CLASS
      3/9      Team Project #1 Presentations
     3/11      Team Project #1 Presentations
     3/16                                           NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK
     3/18                                           NO CLASS: SPRING BREAK
     3/23      Crash Exercise #1 & Team Project #1 Review            Designing Effective Health Messages
               Case Studies in Health Communication                            Section 3: Case studies
     3/25      Implementing a Program and Assessing Effectiveness
               Direct‐to‐Consumer Drug Advertising
     3/30      Health Journalism
               Media Depictions of Health and the Healthcare
               System
      4/1      Digital and Social Health Communication
      4/6      Health Communication Office Hours
      4/8      Crash Exercise #2 Launch


    4/13       Crash Exercise #2 Presentations
    4/15       Crash Exercise #2 Review
               Public Health, Social Marketing, and Ethics
    4/20       Guest Lecture TBD
               Health Communication Office Hours
    4/22       Team Project #2: Consultations                       Consultations will be held in the Center for
                                                                    Health Communication: CMB 3.120
    4/27       Team Project #2: Consultations                       Consultations will be held in the Center for
                                                                    Health Communication: CMB 3.120
    4/29       Team Project 2 Presentations
     5/4       Team Project 2 Presentations
     5/6       Selling Yourself as a Health Communication Problem   Designing Effective Health Messages
               Solver & Wrapping Up                                      Conclusion
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS OBSERVANCE POLICY
The Texas Education Code specifies that an institution of higher education shall excuse a student from
attending classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious
holy day, including travel for that purpose. A student whose absence is excused under this subsection
may not be penalized for that absence and shall be allowed to take an examination or complete an
assignment from which the student is excused within a reasonable time after the absence.
A student who misses classes or other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of
a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so that
arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi03‐04/ch4/ch4g.html#attendance for more.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Please notify your instructor of any modification/adaptation you may require to accommodate a
disability‐related need. You will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Student's Office
in order that the most appropriate accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are
available on campus through Services for Students with Disabilities.
Visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/ for more.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY
The University defines academic dishonesty as cheating, plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration,
falsifying academic records, and any act designed to avoid participating honestly in the learning process.
Scholastic dishonesty also includes, but is not limited to, providing false or misleading information to
receive a postponement or an extension on a test, quiz, or other assignment, and submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two courses without the prior permission of the instructor.
By accepting this syllabus, you have agreed to these guidelines and must adhere to them. Scholastic
dishonesty damages both the student's learning experience and readiness for the future demands of a


work‐career. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Visit http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php for more.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the
Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512‐232‐5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel
right – it probably isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
TITLE IX REPORTING
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
     1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
     2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have
          become involved in a Title IX investigation.
     3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one‐on‐one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff
member about a Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you
want to speak with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university,
e‐mail advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
http://titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
