                                THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS
                       STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
 Course Number:         SW 393T30                  Instructor:       John Feather, PhD, CFRE
 Unique Number:         87670                      Email:            jfeather@giaging.org
 Semester:              Summer 2020                Office:           3.104A
 Meeting Time/Place:    Mondays & Wednesdays       Office Phone:     202-725-6731
                        5:30pm – 8:00pm Online     Office Hours:     By appointment
                  GRANT WRITING AND RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT
                                      IN HUMAN SERVICES
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This course examines the context of how mission-based human service organizations engage
funding institutions and philanthropic donors to invest financial and technical resources into their
community initiatives. The course explores the processes and frameworks of cultivating critical
resources – through development of compelling grant proposals, donor-engagement programs,
and collaborative resource development networks – amidst a competitive external environment
and seemingly scarce resources. Within the context of organizational and administrative social
work practice, there will be continuous focus in the course on the strategies for funding the basic
needs and priorities of populations at-risk and diverse populations.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of the course the student should be able to:
    •  Apply the principles, knowledge, skills, values, and ethics of social work in the planning
       and implementation of resource development initiatives as strategies for advocacy, self-
       sufficiency and empowerment on behalf of at-risk and affected populations.
    •  Demonstrate understanding of federal (IRS) and state-based laws authorizing the mission,
       structure, governance, operations, and financing of 501(c)(3) tax exempt not-for-profit
       organizations, relating to philanthropic fund raising, grant writing, stewardship of donor
       gifts and grants, and engagement of financial resources that generate organizational
       sustainability.
    •  Demonstrate the ability to construct a mission-based and evidence-based case for giving,
       drawing on research principles in the gathering of constituent data, needs assessments,
       and within the projection of specific, measurable, constituent outcome objectives, for
       which funding is sought.
    •  Demonstrate an understanding of the identities and funding criteria of key institutional
       funders: government grant funders, private foundations, community foundations, family
       foundations, operating foundations, corporations, corporate foundations, and individual
       donors.
    •  Demonstrate an understanding of the core processes of grant writing: funder research,
       program development, organizational development, network-building, community


          relationship-development, program development, and financial management; and,
          demonstrate the ability to construct the core components of a grant proposal.
    •     Demonstrate an understanding of the core processes of fund development – annual giving
          programs, campaigns, special events, direct solicitation, direct marketing programs – as
          well as emerging strategies such as social entrepreneurship, web-based donor cultivation,
          and social accounting principles such as social return on (philanthropic) investment and
          social cost-benefit analysis.
III. TEACHING METHODS
Teaching methods will consist of lectures, discussion, individual exercises, presentations, guest
lectures by practitioners-in-the-field, and case studies.
IV. REQUIRED TEXTS
Ciconte, B. & Jacob, J. (2009). Fundraising Basics: A Complete Guide (Third Edition). Sudbury,
MA: Jones and Bartlett.
Additional required readings are noted in the schedule and are listed by date in Section X
(Bibliography) below. They are all be available online.
V. COURSE REQUIREMENTS – ASSIGNMENTS
Grant Proposal
The major project of the term, worth 50% of the final grade, is to develop a funding proposal for
a specific human services organization of your choosing. Students will choose a non-profit
organization, develop a case for support, research funding opportunities, and write a proposal for
funding. This agency will also be utilized for the special event project. The segments of the
project are:
Part 1: Choose a non-profit. Students need to carefully select a human service organization to
use in their project, since this will be the basis for your funder research, your funding proposal,
and your special event plan. This can be a local, regional, national, or international agency, and
can include one is which you have worked or interned. It will be important for the student to be
able to access programmatic information from this agency (brochures, annual reports, websites,
etc.). It is not necessary for students to contact the agencies, but it is allowable. Note that the case
for support and grant proposal must be the original work of the student, and not drawn from
actual grant proposals or case statements from the agency. Certain information (outputs and
outcomes, need, mission, history, short quotes) may be drawn on, but it is expected that the final
proposal is a new product developed by the student.
    •     Output – one-page description of non-profit agency with:
              o Name of agency
              o Mission
              o Particular program for which you are seeking support (if you are not fund raising
                  for the entire organization)
                                                                                                       2


              o Population served
              o 2-3 programs of the agency that serve community needs
     •   Due Date – June 15
     •   Points – not graded (no points)
Part 2: Funder Research. Students will research potential funders (foundation, government,
corporate, individual) to which they will submit their grant proposal. Students will turn in their
list of at least three potential funders with explanation on the process utilized to identify them
and the reasoning of the choices. If you are fund raising for a particular program rather than the
entire organization, make sure the funders are applicable to that program.
     •   Output – Funder research description with at least 3 potential funders, descriptions of
         process and reasoning, and copies of secondary sources used (i.e. researching non-profit
         websites to see who funds them and then looking up those foundations).
     •   Due Date – June 24
     •   Points – 10
Part 3: Grant Proposal. Students will write a grant proposal to one of the selected potential
funders to fund an aspect of the services/programs provided by their agency. The grant proposal
will be 6-10 pages in length and will have all of the following elements:
     •   Summary
     •   Introduction
     •   Problem Statement / Needs Assessment
     •   Objectives
     •   Methods
     •   Evaluation
     •   Future Funding
     •   Budget
Note that you may turn in a draft proposal for my review on July 6. This is not required, but you
may find my feedback to be useful for your final draft.
     •   Output – grant proposal
     •   Due Date
              o Draft Proposal: July 6 (not graded; comments will be given)
              o Final Proposal: July 22
     •   Points – 40
Special Event Plan
Students will plan a special event for their selected organization. You will plan an event that the
organization does not currently do. It can range from innovative (Hack-A-Thon) to well-tested
(Fun Run; gala banquet event). The following guiding questions can help you with your
planning. Use these as a “jumping-off point”, not as a list of questions to answer.
What – type of event, logistics (be specific on how it will work)
                                                                                                    3


When – day, time, reasoning behind choices, what else is going on (are you against a
         Longhorns football game? Are you planning a Fun Run in August? What other agencies
         do this type of event? What other non-profit events are scheduled against yours?)
Where – be specific (not “at a hotel” but “at the Four Seasons in their ballroom” or “at
         Peter Pan Mini-Golf”)
Who – who plans, who staffs event, who are your volunteers, who are your intended
         guests, who is the entertainment / emcee / speaker / celebrity / etc.
Why – raise money (how much?), raise awareness (to what end?), etc.
And... how will you market this? How will you gauge effectiveness? Is the event
         mission-related? How? How will you engage the media / your donors / policy makers /
         young tech workers / stay-at-home moms / people affected by a specific cause/
         whomever you need to engage.
What is your budget? What does it consist of? What are your goals? How will you follow-up
with attendees / nurture relationships?
This assignment should be presented as a paper or plan but can include PowerPoint or Prezi
presentations; web site for the event; mock event materials; or some combination of these things
and/or other creative ways to showcase the event. For electronic elements, please provide a
digital copy. Include timelines, budgets, and other charts, lists, and attachments you need to
showcase your planned event. Students should be prepared to answer questions about their event.
There will not be a formal presentation.
Output – Special Events Plan (paper / plan approximately 3-4 pages plus attachments as needed)
Due date - July 15
Points - 20
Five Class Exercises
Students will do five short exercises to allow you to prepare for specific classes and the learn
more about resources and tools available to learn about different aspects of fund raising. For
each exercise, you will be asked to read specific material and answer several short questions.
There is no need for in depth analysis; the questions are designed to get you thinking so that you
can better participate in the class discussion.
The important thing is to make sure you turn in the assignment on the date it is due, since it is
tied to a specific class. There will be no late assignments accepted. The five exercises are worth
15 points altogether (3 points each).
Exercise 1: Personal Giving
Due June 10
Think about a time in the past two years that you have personally given to an organization. This
can be your money, your time, or your energy but something you wanted to be involved in.
    • What was the project or agency you gave to? You do not need to give a name; just a
         short description will suffice.
    • Why were you attracted to this organization/agency/program?
    • Has this agency been in contact with you since you gave the last time?
                                                                                                   4


Exercise 2: Employment Equity for Everyone LGBT
Due June 22
Our guest will be Charlie Rounds, founder and Board member of Mossier, an organization that
assists in the economic development of some of the most marginalized LGBT populations in the
world. He was a pioneering leader in developing the LGBT-specific travel industry and has now
used his international connections to work around the world with those most in need.
Read the website for Mossier (https://www.mossier.org). Look at the projects described under
their international activities (https://www.mossier.org/global).
    • Choose the one project that is most of interest to you. Why? Would you give to this
         effort personally?
    • How much do you think a project at this scale costs on an annual basis? (This is just your
         best guess. You do not need to research this.)
    • Develop one question for Mr. Rounds that intrigues you about this work.
Exercise 3: Finding and Mobilizing Donors of Color
Due June 29
Our guest will be Hali Lee, MSW, Co-Director of the Donors of Color Network
(http://www.donorsofcolor.org), the only national project that is researching, engaging and
networking high net worth donors of color across race and experience.
Read the Donors of Color website, as well as their special report: Urvashi Vaid and Ashindi
Maxton (2017). The Apparitional Donor: Understanding and Engaging High Net Worth Donors
of Color
    • Executive Summary: http://www.donorsofcolor.org/wp-
         content/uploads/2019/01/FinalExSumm4.17.pdf
    • Full report: http://www.donorsofcolor.org/wp-
         content/uploads/2019/01/FinalAppDonreport4.17.pdf
Answer these questions:
    • Why do the authors call these clients ‘apparitional donors?’ What do they mean by the
         term?
    • What is the most important conclusion of the report for you?
    • Develop one question for Ms. Lee that intrigues you about this work.
Exercise 4: Finding Government Grants
Due July 6
    • Look at the federal grants portal (https://www.grants.gov). Read the material under the
         tab ‘Learn Grants,’ subheading ‘Grants 101.’
    • Do a search on a topic of interest to you. For example, you can search for ‘social work’
         or ‘child welfare’ or ‘aging.’
    • Once you have chosen a specific Federal Opportunity Announcement (FOA) and gone to
         that listing, open the ‘Link to Additional Information,’ which provides the entire grant
         announcement. Read it.
    • For your chosen FOA, answer these questions:
             o Which federal agency is sponsoring this grant? Are other agencies involved?
                                                                                                  5


            o Is this FOA open to individual applicants (that is, applying as individuals and not
                as a representative of an organization)?
            o Is there a specified limit to how much the individual grant total can be?
            o What is the timeframe?
Exercise 5: Social Justice Through Law
Due July 20
Our guest will be Kevin Prindiville, Executive Director of Justice in Aging, an organization
dedicated to using the legal system to protect the rights of low-income and marginalized older
people. Kevin has spent his entire legal career in social justice advocacy.
Read the Justice in Aging website: https://www.justiceinaging.org. Read the cases described
under their current litigation section: https://www.justiceinaging.org/our-work/litigation/.
    • Which of these cases is of the most interest to you? Why?
    • Do you see yourself working in policy work in the future?
    • Develop one question for Mr. Prindiville that intrigues you about this work.
VII. ASSIGNMENTS & POINTS
Assignment                     Points    Percentage of Final Grade    Due Date
Non-Profit Selection           0         0%                           June 15
Five Short Exercises          20         20%                          5 times during course
Funder Research               10         10%                          June 24
Special Event Plan            20         20%                          July 15
Grant Proposal                40         40%                          July 22
Attendance and Participation  10         10%                          Each class session
Totals                        100        100%
VI. GRADES
        94. 0 and Above          A
        90.0 to 93.999           A-
        87.0 to 89.999           B+
        84.0 to 86.999           B
        80.0 to 83.999           B-
        77.0 to 79.999           C+
        74.0 to 76.999           C
        70.0 to 73.999           C-
        67.0 to 69.999           D+
        64.0 to 66.999           D
        60.0 to 63.999           D-
        Below 60.0               F
                                                                                                  6


Grading of all written assignments will take into account the quality of the writing as well as the
content. Since these are specific development outputs, it is not necessary to utilize the American
Psychological Association (APA) – fourth edition format. Written material should be carefully
proofread and errors (punctuation, typographical, spelling) corrected. Good writing requires a
reiterative process that must be followed if quality is to improve. I strongly encourage you to
read your paper several times and, if possible, have someone else proofread it.
VII. CLASS POLICIES
    •    Students are expected to attend class sessions regularly and to participate in an interactive
         framework between collegiate students and professor. Students are expected to complete the
         readings prior to class and should be well prepared to participate in discussions and experiential
         learning assignments. Failure to regularly attend the class and demonstrate through discussions
         that one has comprehended the readings will be considered in assigning the final grade. The
         instructor appreciates advance notice that classes will be missed. Students are responsible for any
         material missed due to absences.
    •    Except in the case of extreme emergencies, and then only with the permission of the professor,
         late assignments will not be accepted without penalty. Students are expected to turn in all
         required assignments on the agreed-upon due dates. If the due date is a problem, then the student
         should contact the professor and negotiate another due date well in advance.
    •    Student feedback is welcome. Students are also encouraged to provide feedback during by phone,
         by e-mail, and by appointment if they desire.
VIII. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas
at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility.
Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special
accommodations must obtain a letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students
with Disabilities area of the Division of Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice
or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of hearing). A student should present the letter
to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that needed accommodations can be
discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any testing accommodations
no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor
expects students to act as professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for
class, be prepared to participate in the class discussion, and show respect for one another’s
opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse individuals with various backgrounds.
Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity, gender, sex, physical
abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among others.
We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism,
                                                                                                            7


heterosexism, and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and
controversial issues. These issues may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be
impossible to offer a substantive classroom experience that did not include potentially difficult
conversations relating to challenging issues. In this environment, we will be exposed to diverse
ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the ideas expressed by others.
Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with civility, respect, and
professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing
reactions to course readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are
encouraged to inform the professor. The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding
students’ participation in course assignments and activities, but students are responsible for
communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If counseling is needed, students may
contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT Counseling Center at 512-471-
3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social
networks are not private. Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be
certain that privacy will exist among the general membership of sites. If social work students
choose to participate in such forums, please assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and
critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be
accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms
of electronic communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be
perceived by clients, colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make
every effort to minimize material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional
social worker in training. Because of this, social work students are advised to manage security
settings at their most private levels and avoid posting information/photos or using any language
that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are
obliged to block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client
material should not be referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that
might lead to the identification of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way.
Additionally, students must critically evaluate any material that is posted regarding community
agencies and professional relationships, as certain material could violate the standards set by the
School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social Workers, and/or the NASW Code
of Ethics.
Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work
practice as well as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in
the classroom, the university community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on
scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in
                                                                                                     8


the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all
students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly
enforced. For further information, the student may refer to the Web Site of the Student Judicial
Services, Office of the Dean of Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited
to exams, quizzes, and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized
duplication of the course materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary
action being taken against the student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the
specific, express approval of the professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor
Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary action. This
sharing includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of
distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and
personal matters is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational
supervision and is protected by regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act
(FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this information with individuals outside of the educational
context is not permitted. Violations of confidentiality could result in actions taken according to
the policies and procedure for review of academic performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and
3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is
recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible
for reading their email for university and course-related information and announcements.
Students are responsible for keeping the university informed about a change of e-mail address.
Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—daily, but at minimum twice a
week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-
sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a
pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If
the student must miss a class, examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a
religious holy day, the professor will give the student an opportunity to complete the missed
work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972,
the University of Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free
from discriminatory conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field
instructors, staff, and/or teaching assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of
incidents of sex discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or
any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students who report such incidents will be informed of
University resources. Incidents will be reported to the University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further
information, including student resources related to Title IX, may also be found at
https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
                                                                                                    9


CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found
here: https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick
Links menu on the School’s website.
SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that
involve working in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may
present some risks. Sound choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is
the student's responsibility to be aware of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency
and/or community safety. Students should notify the professor regarding any safety concerns.
BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their
behavioral health, or if they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students
may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is
provided through a partnership between the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus
are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated, or an announcement
is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
    · Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that
         the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
    · If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first
         week of class.
    · In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
    · Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire
         Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
IX. COURSE SCHEDULE
[Note: All readings marked as ‘online’ are listed in detail under Section X Bibliography below.]
   Date                      Topics                     Assignment Due                  Readings
             Class Overview and Introductions
             Review of Syllabus and Projects                                    C&J, Chapters 1 and 2
             Overview of Projects                                               (C&J = Ciconte and
  6/8        The Not-For-Profit Sector                                          Jacob)
                                                     Exercise 1: Personal
  6/10       Developing a Fundraising Plan           Giving                     C&J, Chapter 5
             Annual Giving: The Foundation of        Selection of a
  6/15       Any Fundraising Effort                  nonprofit agency for       C&J Chapter 6
                                                                                                  10


                                         your research and       Davis, Writing a
                                         proposal                Successful Grant
                                                                 Proposal (online)
                                                                 C&J Chapter 13
     Building the Case for Support/                              Frameworks Institute
6/17 Fundraising Communication                                   (online)
                                         Exercise 2: LGBT
6/22 Fundraising for Social Justice      Employment Equity       Mossier (online)
6/24 Writing the Proposal                Funder Research         C&J Chapters 4 and 15
                                                                 C&J Chapters 8 and 9
     Developing Individual Donors/       Exercise 3: Cultivating Vaid and Maxton
6/29 Major Gifts                         Donors of Color         (online)
                                                                 C&J Chapter 10 and 11
7/1  Foundations and Corporations                                Feather (online)
                                         Draft Grant Proposal
                                         (optional)
                                         Exercise 4:             Federal Grants Portal
7/6  Government Grants                   Government Grants       (online)
7/8  Special Events                                              C&J Chapter 12
     Capital Campaigns and Planned
7/13 Giving                                                      C&J Chapters 14 and 15
7/15 Who Does the Work?                  Special Events Plan     C&J Chapters 3 and 18
                                         Exercise 5: Social
7/20 Fundraising for Policy Issues       Justice Through Law     Justice in Aging (online)
     Grant Writing Reflections: What Did
7/22 We Learn?                           Final Grant Proposal
                                                                                   11


  7/27       Class wrap-up
X. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Textbook
Ciconte, B. & Jacob, J. (2009). Fundraising Basics: A Complete Guide (Third Edition). Sudbury,
MA: Jones and Bartlett. [Note that if you are using an earlier version of this text, the chapter
numbers may not match exactly.]
Required Online Resources
June 15: Davis, B. (2005). Writing a successful grant proposal. Available at
https://mcf.org/writing-successful-grant-proposal.
June 17: Frameworks Institute (2015). Gauging Aging: Mapping the Gaps Between Expert and
Public Understandings of Aging in America.
https://frameworksinstitute.org/assets/files/aging_mtg.pdf
June 22: Mossier: Employment Equity for LGBTQ https://www.mossier.org
June 29: Donors of Color Network http://www.donorsofcolor.org
Urvashi Vaid and Ashindi Maxton (2017). The Apparitional Donor: Understanding and
Engaging High Net Worth Donors of Color
    • Executive Summary: http://www.donorsofcolor.org/wp-
         content/uploads/2019/01/FinalExSumm4.17.pdf
    • Full report: http://www.donorsofcolor.org/wp-
         content/uploads/2019/01/FinalAppDonreport4.17.pdf
July 1: John Feather (2015). Successful Corporate and Foundation Fundraising for Nonprofits,
https://www.giaging.org/documents/170323_For_Grantseekers_Feather_PPT_Corp_and_Founda
tion_Funding_with_notes.pdf
July 6: Government Grants
    • Federal grants portal (https://www.grants.gov). Read the material under the tab ‘Learn
         Grants,’ subheading ‘Grants 101.’
    • https://grantsgovprod.wordpress.com/category/learngrants/grant-writing-basics/
         Please read this general guide to grant writing for federal proposals.
July 20: Justice in Aging: Fighting Senior Poverty Through Law. https://www.justiceinaging.org
                                                                                                 12
