                  THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
            DEPARTMENT OF SPANISH AND PORTUGUESE
           FIRST YEAR SPANISH II– SUMMER 2020 Session 1
                                      SPN 610D - 82710
NOTES:
    A. This course will be taught synchronously online via Zoom at the time indicated on the
        Registrar’s course schedule. Attendance is required. Please make sure you have access
        to reliable internet so you can attend class sessions. Please locate your Zoom room
        within your Canvas course.
    B. This class is part of a 3-semester language sequence designed specifically for non-native
        and non-heritage speakers of Spanish. If you were exposed to Spanish on a regular basis
        while growing up, you should be enrolled in our 2-semester heritage language sequence
        (SPN 604 & SPN 612).
    ●   This document contains important information and represents an agreement between the
        Department of Spanish and Portuguese and its students.
    ● You are responsible for knowing all of the information contained in this document.
    ● You indicate acceptance of these policies by registering for this course.
1. OBJECTIVES OF THE LANGUAGE PROGRAM
The objectives of the Spanish & Portuguese Language Program address the basic tenet of a
liberal arts education: the development of a critical thinking approach towards the analysis of
language in society. This objective is framed in an overall worldwide trend towards political and
economic internationalization and an increasingly diverse and multicultural work environment.
The Language Program promotes the development of multilingual literacies through the analysis
and use of Spanish & Portuguese as a second or third language. The program focuses on three
major types of competencies (all equally ranked in terms of importance):
1) linguistic competence: phonetics/phonology, morphosyntax, lexicon, discourse, etc.
2) communicative / interactional competence: sociocultural uses of language, pragmatics,
cultural backgrounds, perspectives, etc.
3) metalinguistic competence: language as a conceptual, symbolic system
2. COURSE DESCRIPTION AND GOALS


SPN 610D is the second course in The University of Texas lower-division Spanish program. The
course focuses on further developing speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills in Spanish
while building vocabulary, learning basic rules and terminology of Spanish grammar, and
gaining a better understanding of Hispanic cultures in order to communicate in an accurate,
effective, and informed manner within a variety of sociocultural situations.
By the end of the semester, you should be able to do the following in Spanish:
        (a)     express opinions, reactions and recommendations
        (b)     discuss possible, probable and certain future events and situations;
        (c)     narrate past events and react subjectively to them;
        (d)     speak hypothetically about various events and situations;
        (e)     analyze moderately complex language and draw meta-linguistic conclusions
        (f)     recognize dialectal, social and contextual variation;
        (g)     understand the main ideas of moderately complex written texts and oral discourse
        (i)     maintain conversations of a substantial length
        (j)     produce written work of a substantial length
3. PLACEMENT / PREREQUISITES /EXPECTATIONS
PREREQUISITE for 610D: SPN 601D, 604, 507, or 508K (or equivalent transfer course), with
a grade of at least C, or an appropriate score on the University of Texas Placement Test. If you
have any questions regarding placement, please speak with Liz Hastings, the Liberal Arts
Advisor for Spanish & Portuguese, either in person (BEN 2.108) or via email
(eyhastings@austin.utexas.edu).
EXPECTATIONS OF STUDENTS ENTERING SPN 610D
Students are expected to enter this course with a working knowledge of:
· basic word order (placement of adjectives, etc.)
· adjectives (demonstrative, possessive, etc.)
· pronouns (direct object, indirect object and reflexive)
·       special verbs (ser and estar, gustar, etc.)
· conjugations of regular, irregular and stem-changing verbs (present, present
    progressive, preterit and imperfect, periphrastic future)
·       syntactic constructions (comparison formulas, “tener que” “acabar de,” etc.)
· reading strategies (skimming, recognizing cognates, making inferences, etc.)
· listening strategies (tone, content, context, intonation, etc.)
· speaking strategies (circumlocution, fluency, etc.)
· writing strategies (process writing, discourse connectors, paragraph organization,
    paraphrasing, etc.)
· metalinguistic skills (recognizing parts of speech, recognizing dialectal variation,


    identifying functional uses of grammar, etc.)
If you feel you have weaknesses in any of these areas, it is your responsibility to review your
beginning Spanish materials (corresponding to chapters 1-9 in Conectándonos) as soon as
possible and consider working with a tutor if necessary.
4. CONTACT INFORMATION
Your instructor will be glad to assist you with any questions or problems you may have relating
to the class. If you have a concern that you wish to discuss with someone other than your
instructor, you may contact the Director of the Language Program.
Course Instructor
Name: Jae Johnson, Ph.D.
Office: our zoom room, or phone: 512-771-8226
Office Hours: immediately after class / as needed
Email: jane.span@gmail.com
Program Director
Name: Dr. Melissa Murphy
Office: BEN 4.136
Office hours: By appointment
Email: mmurphy@mail.utexas.edu
5. COURSE TEXTBOOK AND RESOURCES
Textbook:              Acercándome (Murphy, Ogando-Lavín and Méndez-Montesinos). 3rd
edition. Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt, 2014. [at the Co-op or online at www.kendallhunt.com]
TalkAbroad:            You must purchase TWO “conversations” ($15 each) at Talkabroad.com.


Canvas:                This course uses Canvas as its course management system. You are
responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for important documents, assignments,
grades, etc.
6. ATTENDANCE POLICY
Attendance is required at all classes and is checked daily, via Zoom. Most absences count.
The only “excused” absences are for religious holidays, documented jury duty, documented
military duty, and university-sponsored activities. Your instructor will take attendance at the
beginning of each 75-minute session. Up to 6 75-minute session absences are permitted with no
absence penalty. However, each missed session beyond four will result in a 1-point deduction
from your final grade. The only absences that don’t contribute to this penalty absences due to
the 4 reasons listed above. For example, if you have a 90% average, but have missed 7 75-
minute sessions, your average will be lowered to an 89% and you will receive a B+. Note:
Arriving more than 25 minutes late or leaving more than 25 minutes early counts as an absence.
3 tardies (arriving to class at least 5 minutes late or leaving more than 5 minutes early) equal
one absence.
7. POLICY ON MISSED WORK
Please familiarize yourself with the following procedures:
Reason for        Procedures
absence
Religious           · Notify your instructor via email as soon as you are aware of the
holiday               conflict (first week of class for religious holidays).
                    · For written in-class assessments (exams, essays, etc.), you will
Jury duty             receive a make-up upon return. Make arrangements with your
                      instructor at least 2 weeks in advance.
Military duty       · For oral in-class assessments, you will receive “grade averaging”.
                    · At-home assignments (e.g. HW, reading, etc.) should be turned in
University-           upon return.
sponsored
activity


Documented             · Notify your instructor immediately via email.
illness or             · No make-ups are permitted.
emergency              · Fill out and submit to your instructor a “Request for Grade
                          Averaging Form” (posted on Canvas), along with the appropriate
                          documentation within one week of the absence. A Supervisory
                          Committee will determine whether or not you may receive grade
                          averaging for your missed assessment(s).
Grade averaging = The average from your other scores in the same category will be used as your score on the
missed assessment. Note: No grade averaging is available for labs or quizzes, since the lowest score is already
dropped in these categories.
8. FINAL EXAM
THERE WILL BE NO FINAL EXAM DURING SUMMER 2020.
9. GRADING SCALE
There is no curve or extra credit available in this course. If your final average is 89.9, your
course grade will be a B+. Do not expect to receive a passing grade simply because you complete
all requirements. To receive an “A”, all or most of your work must be excellent. A “B” indicates
that your work is very good. A “C” means that your work is adequate and you may continue with
the next course. Please keep in mind that a grade of C or higher in this course is required in
order to continue in Spanish. A grade of C- or Pass is not sufficient to go to the next level.
Final letter grades are assigned according to the following scale:
    93-100 A                  83-86.9 B                 73-76.9 C                     63-66.9 D
   90-92.9 A-                 80-82.9 B-                70-72.9 C-                    60-62.9 D-
   87-89.9 B+                 77-79.9 C+                67-69.9 D+                     0-59.9 F


10. GRADE DISTRIBUTION AND COURSE ASSESSMENTS
The grade distribution in SPN 610D is as follows:
Exams (4)                                                             25%
In-Class Work (Quizzes, participation, tareas finales, etc.)          25%
Homework                                                              25%
¡A Hablar! (4 minimum)                                                15%
Talk Abroad (2)                                                       10%
TOTAL                                                                 100%
EXAMS: There will be four comprehensive exams throughout the semester, after each chapter.
They will be administered online. The focus of each exam is the material from the most recent
chapter. However, since learning a second language is a cumulative process, you should also
expect to encounter previous material on exams. Exam dates are listed on your course calendar
and you will receive more information from your instructors.
IN-CLASS WORK: You will be assessed on a variety of in-class assignments during the
semester. These may take the form of quizzes, group activities, in-class activities, listening
comprehension activities, participation assessments, etc.        Different assignments will carry
different weights within this group depending on the complexity of the task, as determined by
your instructor. There is a Tarea Final at the end of each chapter, and your instructor may adapt
these assignments so that they may be completed online. If that is the case, they will be counted
as part of this category.
TALK ABROAD: Twice during the session, you will have a 30-minute conversation online
with a native speaker from a Spanish-speaking country. This assessment will consist of a pre-
activity (which will help you prepare), the conversation itself, and an in-depth follow-up activity,
in which you will comment on the content of your conversation, as well as observations you
have made about your language skills. You must purchase two conversations for $15 each at
TalkAbroad.com.
HOMEWORK: Your Instructor will assign homework on a daily basis. Some of it may be
completed online via Canvas, and some of it may be done by hand and handed in or checked by


other methods. Homework is a substantial part of your grade, so be sure to be diligent about
your work outside of class time. Please see the important notes about the use of translation sites
in Section 14 (Academic Integrity).
¡A HABLAR!: This is one of the oral components of the course. At least once per chapter, you
will spend 25-30 minutes speaking in small breakout groups on Zoom. These discussions will be
        unrehearsed, and will relate directly to the chapter themes. Your grade will be based on
your ability to express yourself, maintain a conversation and interact effectively with others. The
dates are for four ¡A Hablar! Activities are listed on your course calendar, but be aware your
instructor may add additional ¡A Hablar! Activities that will be communicated to you in class or
via email.
11. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT ASSESSMENTS
Throughout the semester, you will be acquiring knowledge (e.g. vocabulary, grammar) and you
will be developing skills (e.g. reading strategies, data analysis). Therefore, course assessments
are designed to reflect your progress in both of these areas. Assessments can include material
not explicitly studied, but that is closely related to the course content and tests a student’s ability
to apply acquired information and abilities to unfamiliar situations and contexts.
KNOWLEDGE
Vocabulary: You are responsible for all words and phrases on the vocabulary lists. You should
know the meaning, gender and spelling of these items. Furthermore, you will be expected to use
these words within a context. Therefore, make sure you know not only the English translations
for the words, but also understand how they would be used in Spanish discourse.
Grammar: You are expected to know all grammar structures included in the course syllabus.
Make sure you fully understand all formulas and rules. For verb conjugations, you will be
expected to know how to conjugate not only regular verbs, but also irregular verbs and verbs
with spelling and stem changes.
Terminology: In order to talk effectively about language, you will be expected to know the
appropriate terminology. You should be prepared to answer questions involving technical
linguistic terminology and/or identify these elements both in class and on exams or other
assessments.
Sociocultural: Your instructor will expose you to different interactional contexts and a variety of
dialects and their principal characteristics throughout the semester. You must familiarize yourself
with this material and will be expected to recognize these features on exams and other graded
assignments.


SKILLS
Reading: Of the four skills (reading, writing, listening, speaking), the ability to read is typically
retained for the longest period of time. With this natural tendency in mind, one of the main goals
of our program is to develop strong reading skills that will stay with you for years to come. In
this course, you will be given many opportunities to develop these skills, both in groups and
individually, both at home and in-class. You will develop skills such as skimming, recognizing
cognates, making inferences, etc. It is in your best interest to work pro-actively on developing
these reading skills at home, since you will be tested on your ability to read and comprehend
unfamiliar texts containing unfamiliar vocabulary and to do so with relative speed.
Data analysis: Our department implements a guided inductive approach to language learning.
This means that you will be exposed to language data (written or oral) and will be encouraged to
formulate your own rules and test your own hypotheses regarding language forms and structures.
Since a substantial part of the course will involve this type of data analysis, you should expect to
be tested on this skill via graded assignments and exams. In other words, you will not only be
expected to reproduce language practiced in the classroom, but will also be given new data,
about which you will be asked to draw conclusions.
12. STUDENT RESPONSIBILITIES
In order to be successful in this course, students must fulfill several responsibilities both in class
and at home and must also be able to demonstrate their progress in course assessments.
Homework: Your instructor will assign homework regularly. Many of these assignments are
given in order to prepare you for the following class day. Therefore, it is imperative that you
complete this work in order to be able to participate in class. Homework is also given to provide
you with ample opportunities to practice the course material and identify potential areas of
weakness. As a result, you will experience an increase in self-awareness, which will enable you
to take a pro-active stance in your progress, thus becoming a more effective learner overall.
Studying: You should not limit your work at home only to homework assignments collected by
your instructor for a grade. Instead, you should also study the course material on a regular basis,
since attempts to memorize large amounts of material quickly before an exam are not normally
successful. You should frequently review grammar rules, vocabulary lists, etc. and take note of
any items you may not understand. This will enable you to ask your instructor important
questions and resolve issues before a quiz or exam.
Practice: Students often rely exclusively on more passive activities such as re-reading or staring
at tables and lists of words / rules. This type of traditional studying is not sufficient in a
language course. Students who don’t actively use the target language at home often don’t


develop the automaticity necessary to successfully complete exams and compositions within a
limited time frame. Therefore, on a regular basis, you should also set aside time to:
    ● practice conjugating verbs
    ● practice writing sentences, letters, essays, etc.
    ● practice reading newspaper articles, ads, etc.
    ● practice speaking with friends and/or classmates
    ● practice listening via news broadcasts, television or online videos
Interaction: Language courses are not lecture courses. Instead, classes are student-centered and
rely heavily on interaction and collaboration between you and your peers. Much of your work
will be pair work and group work, where students are the main participants and the instructor is
the facilitator. All students are expected to participate equally in these activities.
Focus: The focus of your attention should be on classroom activities while you are in class.
Smart phones, tablets, laptops and outside reading materials are NOT allowed in class, as they
limit your participation and are also generally disruptive and disrespectful.
Spanish: In order to improve your oral communication skills, you must practice both listening
to and speaking Spanish! Therefore, your instructor will speak almost exclusively in Spanish,
which will not only help you learn new vocabulary and grammar structures, but will also
increase your comfort level over the course of the semester. In turn, you are expected to speak in
Spanish during all activities and for basic functional language (e.g. saying hello, asking to go to
the bathroom, asking the instructor to repeat something, etc.). Don’t be shy! You won’t be
graded on the accuracy of your speech in these situations. You are, however, expected to make
the effort.
13. STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
The University provides, upon request, appropriate academic adjustments for qualified students
with disabilities. Any students with a documented disability (physical or cognitive) who require
academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students, 471-6259, as soon as possible to request an official letter
outlining authorized accommodations. Before course accommodations can be made, the letter
from SSD must be presented to the instructor. Approved accommodations will not change the
basic elements of the course.
14. ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
The University’s honor Code states: “the core values of the University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.” Please note that all graded work
(e.g. essays, homework) done inside or outside of class must be your own work. Writing that


appears to be the work of someone else (e.g. a friend more proficient in Spanish, a Web or print
source) or that appears to have been written in English and then translated by an online
translation program will not be accepted, and may entail severe penalties beyond just a zero on
the particular assignment. Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal
from the university. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the
university, policies on academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For more information, visit
the Student Judicial Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/
15. STUDENT CONDUCT
Any student who, acting singly or in concert with others, obstructs, disrupts, or interferes with
any teaching, educational, research, administrative, disciplinary, public service, or other activity
or public performance authorized to be held or conducted on campus or on property or in a
building or facility owned or controlled by the U.T. System or institution is subject to discipline.
For more information, visit http://www.utsystem.edu/bor/rules/50000Series/50101.pdf.
16. EMERGENCY EVACUATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you
may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering
the building. Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or
class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin
Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police department, or Fire Prevention
Services office. Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
can be found at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.


              SPN 610D: CALENDARIO
                     Summer 1 2020
             Capítulo 1: El ritmo de la vida
1 June 4  ● Syllabus / Presentaciones /Prueba diagnóstica
          ● ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema (p. 1-4)
          ● Entrando en materia: La vida universitaria (p. 5-12)
2 June 5  ● ¡Gramaticando! Los mandatos informales (p. 13-21)
          ● Entrando en materia: El dinero y el consumismo (p. 22-26)
3 June 8  ● ¡Gramaticando! Los mandatos formales y plurales (p. 27-33)
          ● Entrando en materia: La tecnología y el estrés (p. 34-41)
          ● Due today at latest: Pre-Activity for Talk Abroad #1
4 June 9  ● El lenguaje vivo: Lenguaje chat (p. 64)
          ● ¡Gramaticando! El presente del subjuntivo: Deseos y
            recomendaciones (p. 42-54)
5 June 10 ● ¡A Hablar!
          ● Mejorando el discurso: La fuerza ilocucionaria y el registro (p.
            66-67)
          ● Repaso para el Examen 1
6 June 11 ● Tarea Final 1
          ● Examen 1
             Capítulo 2: Abriendo fronteras
7 June 12 ● Due Today at Latest: Talk Abroad #1 Post-Activity
          ● ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema (p. 75-77)
          ● Entrando en materia: El bienestar social (p. 78-83)
          ● ¡Gramaticando! Verbos como “gustar” (p. 84-92)


8  June 15  ● Continue: ¡Gramaticando! Verbos como “gustar” (p. 84-92)
            ● Entrando en materia: La inmigración (p. p93-99)
9  June 16  ● ¡Gramaticando! El presente del subjuntivo con emociones y
              reacciones (p. 100-106)
            ● Entrando en materia: La tolerancia (p. 107-110)
10 June 17  ● ¡Gramaticando! El presente del subjuntivo para dudar y negar
              (p. 111-119)
            ● Mejorando el discurso: Actos de habla (p. 130-132)
11 June 18  ● ¡A Hablar!
            ● Repaso para el Examen 2
            ● Preparación para la Tarea Final 2.
12 June 19  ● Tarea Final 2
            ● Examen 2
             Capítulo 3: Ni el cielo es el límite
13  June 22 ● ¡Déjate volar! y Abriendo el tema (p. 139-142)
            ● Entrando en materia: Descubrimientos y avances (p. 143-
               148)
            ● Due Today at Latest: Talk Abroad #2 Pre-Activity
14  June 23 ● ¡Gramaticando! El futuro (p. 149-157)
15  June 24 ● Entrando en materia: Exploración (p. 158-161)
            ● ¡Gramaticando! El subjuntivo después de conjunciones
               (SPACE) (p. 162-177)
16  June 25 ● ¡Gramaticando! El subjuntivo después de conjunciones
               (HEAD CT) (p. 162-177)
            ● Entrando en materia: La ingeniería genética (p. 178-183)


17 June 26 ●  ¡Gramaticando! El subjuntivo con antecedentes inexistentes
              e indefinidos (p. 184-190)
           ● ¡A Hablar!
18 June 29 ● Mejorando el discurso: Conectar la escritura (p. 203-204)
           ● Preparación para la Tarea Final 3
           ● Repaso para el Examen 3
19 June 30 ● Tarea Final 3
           ● EXAMEN 3
             Capítulo 4: El poder de la imagen
20 July 1  ●   Due Today at Latest: Talk Abroad #2 Post-Activity
           ● Explanation of Tarea Final & Mejorando el discurso:
              Formular preguntas (p. 285-286)
           ● ¡Déjate volar! & Abriendo el tema (p. 213-216)
           ● Entrando en materia: Brecha generacional (p. 217-223)
21 July 2  ●   ¡Gramaticando! Los tiempos pasados (p. 224-239)
           ● El lenguaje vivo: Variación lingüística (p. 281-283)
22 July 3  ●   Entrando en materia: Identidad cultural (p. 240-244)
           ● ¡Gramaticando! El pasado del subjuntivo (p. 245-256)
23 July 6  ● ¡A Hablar! 4
           ● Entrando en materia: Las artes (p. 257-263)
24 July 7  ●   ¡Gramaticando! Las hipótesis (p. 264-273)
           ● Preparación para la Tarea Final #4
25 July 8  ● Tarea Final 4
           ● Repaso para el Examen 4


26 July 9 ● EXAMEN 4