AET 334M Video Game Systems Design
 UID​: 20915                               Instructor:​ Tyler Coleman
 Meetings​: MW 12:30-2:00                  Office Hours: ​T/TH 12:30-2
 Location​: DFA 4.106
Abstract
An introduction to game systems in a myriad of structures used commonly today. Create
and apply play systems which establish the framework for user experience (UX) and
content design.
Outcomes
Upon successful completion of this course, students will have a working understanding of
gameplay systems and how they interact with the user and each other. We will apply
these lessons in class with development of projects utilizing the systems taught.
Modules
   ● Introduction to Systems (1 weeks) - What are game systems, what is a system
        designer, etc.
   ● “Core”; Combat, Movement, Puzzle, Decision Trees (4 weeks, applied) - We’ll
        discuss and create a myriad of ‘core’ loop systems, gameplay structures that
        traditionally are used as the primary system.


   ● “Secondary”; Env. Manipulation, Social, Inventory & Menus (4 weeks, applied) -
       We’ll investigate and develop a variety of secondary systems, including inventory,
       its various inputs and outputs, including crafting and loot tables.
   ● Progression Systems (3 weeks, applied)- Handling the progression of gameplay in
       games today, including the meta structures of economies, social spaces, and
       gameplay content updates.
   ● Cohesion (3 week) - Finalizing their projects, understanding of gameplay balancing
       and fine tuning.
Calendar
Week 1- What Are Systems
Week 2 - Primary Systems & Decision Trees
Week 3 - Movement
Week 4 - Puzzles
Week 5 - Combat
Week 6 - Secondary Systems, Inventory & Crafting
Week 7 - Inventory, Looting
Week 8 - Environmental Systems
[Spring Break]
Week 9 - Social Systems
Week 10 - RPG Progression
Week 11 - Challenges/Leaderboards/Achievements
Week 12 - Collections & Economies
Week 13 - Cohesion & Updates


Week 14 - Balance
Week 15 - Final
Assessment
Four individual homework assignments are equally weighted toward 20% of the final class
grade, 5% each. The group project presentations will be worth 55% of the grade, and an
additional 10% based on team assessments. The remaining 15% will be based on
attendance and professionalism. Assignments are due by the start of class on the due date.
A bonus opportunity to publish your final project will be worth 5% of the final grade.
No late work will be accepted. No incompletes will be given. If you feel you will not be able
to complete all work on time, you should ask the instructor for a grade of Q or drop before
the deadline for doing so passes.
Note: If you cannot attend class for any reason, please send an email and attach any class
work as needed, and talk to your classmates to find out what you missed.
Assignments
1/27: First Week Card Game - Individual (5 points)
2/21: Core Loop Game Analysis - Individual (5 points)
2/24: Core Loop Impl. & Presentation - Team (15 points)
3/27: Secondary Systems Game Analysis - Individual (5 points)
3/30: Secondary Impl. & Presentation - Team (15 points)
4/17: Progression Systems Game Analysis (5 points)
4/20: Progression Systems Impl. & Presentation - Team (15 points)
5/4: Team Assessment - Team (10 points)
5/4: Final Impl. & Presentation - Team (10 points)


Attendance (15 points)
Grades
Final grades will be determined on the basis of the following rubric. Please note: to ensure
fairness, all numbers are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. Thus a
B- will be inclusive of all scores of 80.000 through 83.999. The University does not
recognize the grade of A+.
    A       A-      B+        B       B-    C+      C     C-      D+       D       D-      F
 94-10     90-9    87-8     84-8    80-8   77-7   74-7   70-7    67-6    64-6    60-6     0-6
    0        3       9        6       3      9      6      3       9        6      3       0
Class Attendance Policy
As detailed above, attending class during the scheduled meeting times earns
professionalism credit. Credit is NOT earned for arriving late, leaving early, or failing to
attend class meetings. If attending a scheduled class meeting is not possible, students are
expected to promptly notify the instructor of extenuating circumstances.
Q Drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:“Beginning with the fall 2007 academic
term, an institution of higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total
of more than six dropped courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at


another institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping
more than that number.”
University Attendance Policy: Religious Holy
Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will
give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD)
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (512-471-6259, ssd@austin.utexas.edu,
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/, or videophone 512-471-6644). Please provide
documentation of your needs during the first week of class, if possible, so that I can make
the necessary accommodations promptly.
Academic Integrity
The University's Honor Code states that “As a student of The University of Texas at
Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic integrity.”
You are expected to maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in
scholastic work undertaken at the University. At a minimum, you should complete any
assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost honesty, which
requires you to:
    ● acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
    ● complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or
       obtain assistance in preparing them;
    ● follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
       academic discipline;


    ● and avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or
        another student.
(adapted from​ http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php (Links to an
external site.) ​)
Academic Dishonesty
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines
academic dishonesty as including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved
academic advantage, such as:
    ●   Cheating
    ●   Plagiarism
    ●   Unauthorized Collaboration / Collusion
    ●   Falsifying Academic Records
    ●   Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam,
        obtain an extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial
        benefit)
    ● Multiple submissions (submitting essentially the same written assignment for two
        courses without authorization to do so)
    ● Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic
        integrity
(adapted from http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_whatis.php)
Students who violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary
penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University.
(from​ http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_faculty_syllabus.php (Links to an
external site.) ​)
Plagiarism
“Plagiarism” includes, but is not limited to, the appropriation of, buying, receiving as a gift,
or obtaining by any means material that is attributable in whole or in part to another
source, including words, ideas, illustrations, structure, computer code, and other


expression or media, and presenting that material as one’s own academic work being
offered for credit or in conjunction with a program course requirement (from Sec. 11-402,
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline
-and-conduct/).
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s
behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of
Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call
512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation: • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the
classroom and the building. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you
used when you entered the building. • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in
writing during the first week of class. • In the event of an evacuation, follow my
instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given
instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire
Prevention Services office.
Student Support Services
There are numerous free and/or low-cost support services available to students at UT.
They include (but are not limited to) the following:
Fine Arts Career Services​ (512-232-7333, utexas.edu/finearts/careers) provides a full
range
of services and resources to support students and alumni.


The Undergraduate Writing Center
(512-471-6222, uwc.utexas.edu) helps students with every phase of writing assignments
for
their courses.
The Sanger Learning Center​ (512-471-3614, utexas.edu/ugs/slc) provides study skills,
time-management, and note-taking courses.
University Health Services​ (512-471-4955, healthyhorns.utexas.edu) provides medical
and health promotion services for currently enrolled students and some non-students
who are
officially enrolled in certain University programs.
The Counseling and Mental Health Center​ (512-471-3515, cmhc.utexas.edu) helps
students with their personal concerns so that they can meet the daily challenges of
student life.
UT Electronic Mail Notification Policy
Electronic mail (e-mail) is a mechanism for official University and instructor
communication to students. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and
regular basis in order to stay current with University- and course-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week.
It is the responsibility of every student to keep the University and instructor informed of
changes in his or her official e-mail address (do so at
https://utdirect.utexas.edu/utdirect/bio/address_change.WBX). Consequently, e-mail
returned to the University with "User Unknown" is not an acceptable excuse for missed
communication. Similarly, undeliverable messages returned because of a full inbox or use
of a spam filter will be considered delivered without further action required of the
University or instructor.


(see
http://www.utexas.edu/cio/policies/university-electronic-mail-student-notification-polic
y (Links to an external site.)​ ​)
