                     EDP 382F: Dysfunction in Human Behavior and Social Organization
                                                         74375
                                                   Summer 2019
 Class Meets: TWTH 1:00 p.m. – 4:00 p.m. in SZB 432
Instructor: Lindsay Webster, Ph.D., LPC, CSC, NCC             Office:
Pronouns: she, her, hers                                       Office hours:
Email: Lindsay.webster@austin.utexas.edu                       Tuesday/Thursday 4:00-5:00pm and by appointment
Phone: (512) 471-0179
                                              Course Description
Course Description:
While counseling is a field that specializes in wellness, counselors and other mental health professionals need
to be understand and recognize abnormal behavior. Multiple theories abound on the etiology, promulgation
and maintenance of abnormal behavior. Counselors need to understand the construct of abnormal behavior is
a social construction and thus may be defined differently by cultures, families and society. We will examine
the theories of abnormal psychology, current research through the lens of a socio-cultural model. We will also
examine social and group dynamics that can elicit abnormal behavior from “normal” people. Furthermore, we
will address how to intervene when abnormal behavior and/or traumatic events lead to a crisis situation.
 What will I learn?
 Learning Outcomes
    •   Identify history of definitions of abnormal psychopathology
    •   Prepare students for a study of psychopathology as outlined in DSM-5
    •   Explore the role of cultural context in identifying abnormal behavior (including nationality, culture, race and
        ethnicity, gender, sexual orientation, etc.)
    •   Understand research and diagnostic approaches in understanding abnormal behavior
    •   Understand treatment approaches, both historical and current and the underlying beliefs of those treatment
        approaches.
    •   To learn where, when, and how to apply specific interventions to alleviate crises, prevent problems from
        developing, and/or address existing needs and problems.
    •   To explore conceptual, strategic, and technical components of mental health interventions with an in-depth
        focus on those that protect personal safety or prevent problems from escalating.
 How will I learn?
    o   Lecture
    o   Group discussion
    o   Case study application
    o   Individual reflection
    o   Project-based learning
                                                               1


                                              Course Requirements
   Required Materials
   There is 1 required textbook, listed below. Additional readings will be posted on Canvas or assigned in class
   throughout the semester. You are also encouraged to find relevant readings and supplemental resources you find
   interesting or that may be helpful for your own counselor development.
   Required Textbook:
   Miller, R. B. (2015). Not so abnormal psychology: A pragmatic view of mental illness. Washington, DC:
            American Psychological Association.
   Recommended Resource:
   American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA:
            Author.
   Required Devices
   Most of your assignments for this course will need to be submitted through Canvas or UT Box. Access to these internet
   platforms is required for success in this course. Please let your instructor know ASAP if you encounter technical
   difficulties that might delay your completion or submission of a course expectation. Contact IT Services for assistance
   resolving technical issues at help@utexas.edu or (512) 475-9400.
   Classroom expectations
   Class attendance Class will begin promptly at 1:00 pm. Please plan for traffic, conversations with peers, and
   other obligations to the best of your ability to ensure that you are ready to learn at the beginning of class. Consistent
   tardiness will negatively impact your final grade. All students are permitted one excused absence this term without
   penalty. This allowance is intended to help account for unanticipated illness and/or crises. More than one absence
   jeopardizes your ability to pass the class. You must notify the instructor at least 24- hours prior to any absence, except
   in cases of emergency.
   Class participation Because this course focuses on the didactic and experiential learning of knowledge and
   skills through lecture, discussion, case application, and group exercises, active participation is essential for a passing
   grade.
   Assignments
1) Reading Response Forms (24 pts.) At the beginning of class meetings #2-7, you will be given 10 minutes to complete a
    reading response form using a survey link on Canvas. The reading response forms will vary in topic but will serve as a
    beginning intention for each class meeting. All of the prompts will ask you to reflect on or apply concepts from
    assigned readings. Complete via Canvas during class on 7/17, 7/18, 7/23, 7/24, 7/25, and 7/30.
2) Quiz #1 (15 pts.) This quiz may consist of multiple-choice, true/false, and case application questions. It will be
    administered on Canvas via the quizzes platform. The quiz will be open for approximately three days, beginning at 9
    am on Friday, July 19th and ending at 11:59 pm on Sunday, July 21st. You will have one hour to take the exam from
    the moment you begin. You will not be allowed to stop and return to it later. This is an individual, open note quiz. It
    will cover information from class and reading assignments July 16th through July 18th.
3)   Quiz #2 (15 pts.) This quiz may consist of multiple-choice, true/false, and case application questions. It will be
    administered on Canvas via the quizzes platform. The quiz will be open for approximately three days, beginning at 9
    am on Friday, July 26th and ending at 11:59 pm on Sunday, July 28th. You will have one hour to take the exam from
    the moment you begin. You will not be allowed to stop and return to it later. This is an individual, open note quiz. It
    will cover information from class and reading assignments July 23rd through July 25th.
                                                                  2


4) Psychological First Aid Training (10 pts.) Psychological First Aid (PFA) is an approach designed to reduce initial distress
    from traumatic events and crisis situations. You will be expected to complete an interactive 6-hour online course on
    PFA through the National Child Traumatic Stress Network. You may register for free at
    https://learn.nctsn.org/course/index.php?categoryid=11. You will need to submit proof of course completion by
    uploading your training certificate to Canvas by 11:59pm on Thursday, August 1st.
5) Chat Participation (16 pts.) This course will become 100% online on July 31st. Beginning with the fourth week of class,
    you will participate in 4 live, 20-minute, online discussions about the assigned readings with your group members. Dr.
    Webster will provide a list of discussion prompts to guide your conversations. Either Dr. Webster or her TA will be
    monitoring each of these discussions. Your group’s chat schedule will be determined during our first class meeting.
    You will log on to the OI2 Chat App on Canvas at the assigned times – twice during week 4 and twice during week 5.
6) Diagnostic Group Project (20pts.) You will work in assigned groups of 4-5 students to explore a diagnostic category
    from the DSM 5. Your group will need to create or find a case example of selected diagnostic category (e.g., character
    from the media, myth, parable, tv show, or media). You will then produce a presentation on this category that
    examines the following:
       • Diagnostic criteria according to DSM-5
       • Etiology from a minimum of two theoretical categories
       • Societal factors that contribute to the dysfunctional behavior
       • A minimum of one evidence-based treatment approach for this behavior.
       The presentation may be submitted in one of the following formats: slide show, academic paper, film, or webpage.
       The presentation will be evaluated according to a) the degree to which the presentation covers the criterial listed
       above, b) the degree to which all members participate as evidenced in the presentation, and c) by peer evaluation
       of each member’s participation. Submit your presentation on Canvas by 11:59pm on Thursday, August 15th.
   Grading for this Course
     Assignments & Graded Activities                                      Points possible         Percent of Total Grade
     1. Reading Response Checks (six @ 4 points each)                         24 pts.                      24%
     2. Quiz #1                                                               15 pts.                      15%
     3. Quiz #2                                                               15 pts.                      15%
     4. Psychological First Aid Training                                      10 pts.                      10%
     5. Chat Participation (four @ 4 points each)                             16 pts.                      16%
     6. Diagnostic Group Project                                              20 pts.                      20%
     TOTAL                                                                    100 pts.                     100%
   Dr. Webster is grateful to the following colleagues for their help and shared resources in designing this course:
           Leslie Moore, Ph.D., Dept. of Educational Psychology, University of Texas at Austin
   Course Outline
   All instructions, assignments, readings, rubrics and essential information will be on the Canvas website at
   https://utexas.instructure.com. Check this site regularly and use it to ask questions about the course schedule.
   Changes to the schedule may be made at my discretion and if circumstances require. It is your responsibility to note
   these changes when announced (although I will do my best to ensure that you receive the changes with as much
   advanced notice as possible).
                                                                  3


                                                         Assigned Readings
Week           Date             Class Topics                                                    Assignments Due
                                                           WEEK 1
1          July 16     Course Overview                   Miller, Ch. 1
                       What is abnormal?
2          July 17     Context & Culture                 Miller, Ch. 2               : Reading Response Form (in class)
3          July 18     Theories: Biomedical Models       Miller, Ch. 3 (pp. 61-75)   : Reading Response Form (in class)
                                                                                                              th         st
                       and Psychodynamic                 Kring, pp. 115-127          Quiz #1 available July 19 – July 21
                                                         Szyf, video
                                                            WEEK 2
4          July 23     Theories: Attachment and          Codrington, PDF
                       Neuroscience                      Gillath, video              : Reading Response Form (in class) K 1
                                                         Murphy, article             WEEK 1
                                                                                     WEEK 1
5          July 24     Theories: Humanistic and          Miller, Ch. 3 (pp. 75-83)   : Reading Response Form (in class)
                                                                                     WEEK 1
                       Cognitive                         Kuyken, article
                                                                                     WEEK 1
                                                         Winter, article
6          July 25     Theories: Beyond the Individual   Brock, article              : Reading Response Form (in class)
                                                                                                              th         th
                       (Systems & Psychosocial           Lim, article                Quiz #2 available July 26 – July 28
                       Approaches)
                                                           WEEK 3
7          July 30     Crisis Intervention: Suicidal     Batty, article              : Reading Response Form (in class)
                       Ideation                          Brown, article
                                                         Juhnke, article
                                                                                                                                   st
8-9        July 31,    Crisis Intervention & Trauma:     Miller, Ch. 4               Psychological First Aid Training due Aug. 1
           Aug. 1      Traumatic Events and Disasters    Shelby, article
                                                           WEEK 4
10-12      Aug.        Anxiety & Related Conditions      Miller, Ch. 5               First OI2 Chat at scheduled time
           6, 7, 8     Depression & Related              Greenfieldboyce, mp3        Second OI2 Chat at scheduled time
                       Conditions                        Neighmond, mp3
                                                         Miller, Ch. 6
                                                         King, article
                                                         Bray, article
                                                           WEEK 5
13-15      Aug. 13,    Personality Disorders             Miller, Ch. 7               Third OI2 Chat at scheduled time
           14, 15      Schizophrenia                     Harvard, article            Fourth OI2 Chat at scheduled time
                                                                                                                          th
                                                         Campbell, video             Diagnostic Group Project due Aug. 15
                                                         Miller, Ch. 8
                                                         Longden, video
                                                         Prosek, article
    : = Bring technology to class
                                                                4


                                                         Policies
 Classroom Policies
 Statement on Learning Success
 Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently.
 If there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
 possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. I also
 encourage you to reach out to the student resources available through UT. Many are listed on this syllabus, but
 I am happy to connect you with a person or Center if you would like.
 Grading Policies
          Grade            Cutoff
          A                94%
          A-               90%
          B+               87%
          B                84%
          B-               80%
          C+               77%
          C                74%
          C-               70%
          D                65%
          F                <65%
 Late work
 Late work policy: All assignments must be turned in on time. At the discretion of the instructor, late
 assignments may be docked a letter grade for that assignment for each day it is late (e.g., an assignment
 graded as an "A” would receive a “B” if a day late, a “C” if two days late, and so on).
Student Rights & Responsibilities
     •  You have a right to a learning environment that supports mental and physical wellness.
     •  You have a right to respect.
     •  You have a right to be assessed and graded fairly.
     •  You have a right to freedom of opinion and expression.
     •  You have a right to privacy and confidentiality.
     •  You have a right to meaningful and equal participation, to self-organize groups to improve your learning
        environment.
     •  You have a right to learn in an environment that is welcoming to all people. No student shall be isolated, excluded
        or diminished in any way.
With these rights come responsibilities:
     •  You are responsible for taking care of yourself, managing your time, and communicating with the teaching team
        and with others if things start to feel out of control or overwhelming.
     •  You are responsible for acting in a way that is worthy of respect and always respectful of others. • Your experience
        with this course is directly related to the quality of the energy that you bring to it, and your energy shapes the
        quality of your peers’ experiences.
                                                                 5


    •     You are responsible for creating an inclusive environment and for speaking up when someone is excluded.
    •     You are responsible for holding yourself accountable to these standards, holding each other to these standards,
          and holding the teaching team accountable as well.
Personal Pronoun Preference
     Professional courtesy and sensitivity are especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with
     differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class
     rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I will gladly honor your request to address you
     by a name different than what appears on the roster, and by the gender pronouns you use. Please advise me of this
     preference early in the semester so that I may make appropriate changes to my records.
University Policies
Academic Integrity
      Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code: “As a student of The
      University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold academic
      integrity.” Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own
      (or that you have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism
      and subject to academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for
      understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the
      following web address: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
 Q Drop Policy
      If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
      which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while you
      are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
      http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
 University Resources for Students
      Your success in this class is important to me. We will all need accommodations because we all learn differently. If
      there are aspects of this course that prevent you from learning or exclude you, please let me know as soon as
      possible. Together we’ll develop strategies to meet both your needs and the requirements of the course. There are
      also a range of resources on campus:
 Services for Students with Disabilities
      This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances
      that make our learning environment and activities difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share
      with me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am
      committed to creating an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your
      needs with me as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. If appropriate, also
      contact Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329- 3986 (video phone).
      http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
Counseling and Mental Health Center
     Do your best to maintain a healthy lifestyle this semester by eating well, exercising, avoiding drugs and alcohol,
     getting enough sleep and taking some time to relax. This will help you achieve your goals and cope with stress.
      All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful resources available
      on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for help. Asking for support sooner
      rather than later is often helpful.
     If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety or depression,
     we strongly encourage you to seek support. http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
                                                                  6


The Sanger Learning Center
     Did you know that more than one-third of UT undergraduate students use the Sanger Learning Center each year to
     improve their academic performance? All students are welcome to take advantage of Sanger Center’s classes and
     workshops, private learning specialist appointments, peer academic coaching, and tutoring for more than 70 courses
     in 15 different subject areas. For more information, please visit http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc or call 512-471-3614
     (JES A332).
Undergraduate Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Important Safety Information:
     If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
     Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
     isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
Title IX Reporting
     Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
     sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
     institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from
     discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
             1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
             2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
                  involved in a Title IX investigation.
             3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
     Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
     Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator. I
     am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in writing,
     discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a Title IX
     related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak with
     someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
     advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
     titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-
471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire
alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest
     exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless
     given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or
     Fire Prevention Services office.
 • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
     www.utexas.edu/emergency
     Recording Policy
                                                               7


Excluding students with a documented disability, the use of electronic recording devices in class are prohibited
without prior permission of the instructor. Also, the recording of clinical material presented in the in-class portion is
prohibited to all students.
Class Visitor Policy
Visitors of any age are not allowed without prior permission of the instructor.
Campus Carry
Students who hold a license to carry are asked to review the following university policies:
General Information
Information for Students
Per her right, the instructor prohibits carrying of handguns in her personal office, SZB 262J. This information will also
be conveyed to all students verbally during the first week of class. This written notice is intended to reinforce the
verbal notification and is not a “legally effective” means of notification in its own right.
                                                          8
