ARC 388R-17 (# 01125)/ CRP 389C (# 01515):
Historic Preservation History & Theory                                                          Fall 2019
                                                             Associate Professor Michael Holleran
Thursday 2:00 – 5:00                                                                holleran@utexas.edu
Sutton Hall 3.112                                                      o: 512.471.3792 m: 303.898.5535
                                                                                       office: Sutton 2.122
                                                      office hours Tu/Th 5:00 – 6:00 (for short questions),
                                                             other days by appointment (longer questions)
History of the historic preservation movement and the preservation professions, and the
principles by which they operate. Evolution of preservation standard approaches, critiques and
alternatives, and problems within the field. The first section of the course explores the early
history of preservation, and of preservation ideas, in Europe and the United States. The second
part frames the philosophical questions of preservation: the ways significance is ascribed to
artifacts, symbols, and forms in the environment; different ways of balancing significance with
natural decay, organic evolution and demands for change.
This course is required for the Masters of Science in Historic Preservation, the PhD in
Architecture, the Preservation specialization within the Masters of City and Regional Planning,
the MAAD track in Historic Preservation and the M.Arch I Certificate in Historic Preservation.
Others are welcome.
Class schedule
1.            “Preservation”?     brief overview
                                  of the field and the course
8/29
              Current events:
                 Notre Dame
                      de Paris
             History: Europe,
                  antiquity to
                        19th c.


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran           Fall 2019 :: 2
2.                discussion       due: 1.1. little paper 1 (by end of day 9/4)
9/5
            History: Europe,       • Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
                 antiquity to      • National Register of Historic Places: Criteria for Evaluation
                  19th c. (2)      (these two are on the last page of this syllabus)
                                   Course readings (at Canvas site):
                                   • John Ruskin, “The Lamp of Memory” from The Seven Lamps of
                                   Architecture (1849). New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1986: 167-
                                   89. [for discussion]
                                   • Miles Glendinning, The Conservation Movement: A History of
                                   Architectural Preservation: Antiquity to Modernity (Routledge, 2013),
                                   ch. 2: “Antiquarian antecedents: 17th & 18th centuries,” 35-62; ch. 3:
                                   “International revolutions and national heritages: 1789-1850,” 65-115;
                                   ch. 4: “The life-force of age: Restoration and Anti-Scrape, 1850-90,”
                                   116-137.
                                   Additional readings:
                                   • Max Page and Randall Mason, “Rethinking the Roots of the Historic
                                   Preservation Movement”: 3-16.
                                   • David Lowenthal, “The Heritage Crusade and Its Contradictions”:19-43.
3.                                 Course readings:
                                   • Eugène-Emmanuel Viollet-le-Duc, “Restoration,” in The
9/12       History & theory:       Foundations of Architecture: Selections from the Dictionnaire raisonné.
             Europe, 19th &        New York: George Braziller, 1990: 193-227. [for discussion]
                early 20th c.      • Alois Riegl, “The Modern Cult of Monuments: Its Character and
                                   Origins,” (1903) trans. Kurt W. Forster and Diane Ghirardo. Oppositions
                                   25 (Fall 1982): 20-51 [for discussion]
                                   • Rudy J. Koshar, “On Cults and Cultists: German Historic Preservation
                                   in the Twentieth Century,” in Page & Mason, 45-78.
                                   Additional readings:
                                   • Sir John Summerson, “Ruskin, Morris, and the Anti-scrape Philosophy,” in
                                   Williams, Kellogg, and Gilbert, eds., Readings in Historic Preservation: 18-24.
                                   • William Morris, “Restoration” (1877), in Madsen, Restoration and Anti-
                                   Restoration: 144-46.• Nicholas Pevsner, “Scrape and Anti-scrape,” in Jane
                                   Fawcett, ed., The Future of the Past: Attitudes to Conservation, 1174-1974.
                                   London: Thames & Hudson, 1976: 35-53.
                                   • John Ruskin, “The Opening of the Crystal Palace Considered in some of its
                                   Relations to the Prospects of Art” (1854), in Stephan Tschudi Madsen,
                                   Restoration and Anti-Restoration: A Study in English Restoration Philosophy.
                                   Oslo: Universitetsforlaget, 1975: 110-19.
                                   • W. J. Loftie, “Thorough Restoration” (1877), in Madsen, Restoration and Anti-
                                   Restoration: 141-43.
                                   • Nikolaus Boulting, “The Law’s Delays: Conservationist Legislation in the
                                   British Isles,” in Fawcett, Future of the Past: 9-33.
                                   • Mark Girouard, “Living With the Past: Victorian Alterations to Country
                                   Houses,” in Fawcett, Future of the Past: 117-39.


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran           Fall 2019 :: 3
4.                                 Course readings:
                                   • Holleran, Boston’s “Changeful Times,” ch. 1-7.
9/19                               • Michael Holleran, “America’s Early Historic Preservation Movement in
           U.S. 19th-20th c.
                                   a Transatlantic Perspective,” in Melanie Hall, ed., Towards World
                                   Heritage: International Origins of the Preservation Movement, 1870-
                                   1930 (Ashgate, 2011)
                                   • Barbara J. Howe, “Women in the Nineteenth-Century Preservation
                                   Movement,” in Gail Lee Dubrow and Jennifer B. Goodman, Restoring
                                   Women’s History through Historic Preservation (Johns Hopkins, 2003),
                                   17-36.
                                   Additional readings:
                                   • Butler, Report on Current Status of Research for the History of Historic
                                   Preservation in Texas (October 2014)
5.                                 course readings:
                                   • Holleran, Boston’s “Changeful Times,” ch. 8-conclusion.
9/26                     U.S.      • Chris Wilson, “Place Over Time: Restoration and Revivalism in Santa
               preservation,       Fe”: 185-206, in Page & Mason.
                 20th-21st c.      Murtagh: ch. 3: ‘The Preservation Movement and the National Trust for
                                   Historic Preservation’; ch. 4: ‘Government and the Preservation
                                   Movement’; ch. 5: ‘Government and Preservation Since World War II’
                                   Additional readings:
                                   • Carl R. Lounsbury, “Beaux-Arts Ideals and Colonial Reality: The
                                   Reconstruction of Williamsburg’s Capitol, 1928-1934,” Journal of the Society of
                                   Architectural Historians (December 1990): 373-89.
                                   due: case choices for 2. Design + standards
6.           Multiple Values       due: 1.2. last date for little paper 2 (by end of day 10/2)
10/3                   in the
                                   Course readings:
                Environment
                                   • Christopher Koziol, “Historic preservation ideology: A critical
                                   mapping of contemporary heritage policy discourse,” Journal of
                Significance       Preservation Education and Research 1 (2008), 41-50.
                                   • Fitch: ch. 1, ‘Why Preserve the Prototype?’
                                   ch. 2, ‘The Heritage as Cultural Resource’
                                   • National Register Bulletin: How to Apply the National Register Criteria
                                   for Evaluation (1990, rev. 1997), 11-24.
                                   • John J. Costonis, Icons and Aliens, ch. 3: ‘Icons and Aliens,’ 45-70.
                                   • Michael R. Allen, “What Historic Preservation can learn from
                                   Ferguson,” in Max Page & Marla R. Miller, eds., Bending the Future
                                   (UMass, 2016), 44-48.
                                   Additional readings:
                                   • Charlene Mires, Independence Hall in American Memory, vii-xviii: Introduction
                                   topic due for 3. Theory in Practice


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran          Fall 2019 :: 4
7.                    Physical     The Secretary of the Interior’s 4 approaches, the Secretary of the
                                   Interior’s Standards, the Venice Charter, and James Marston Fitch
10/10          Interventions:      each state or imply a hierarchy of desirable approaches to physical
                Stabilization,     interventions for historic preservation. Be prepared to list these
               Preservation,       hierarchies and compare to one another.
                 Restoration,      Fitch: ch. 4, ‘Conceptual Parameters of Historic Preservation’
             Reconstitution,       ch. 6, ‘Preservation, Restoration, Conservation’
                   Relocation      ch. 7, ‘Reconstitution of Damaged Fabrics’
                                   Course readings:
                                   • “Declaration of the International Congress of Architects, Madrid”
                      Integrity    (1904); “Conclusions of the Athens Conference” (1931); “Athens
                   National Trust  Charter” (1933); “Venice Charter” (1964), in Cevat Erder, Our
                      conference   Architectural Heritage: 209-23.
             Denver, Oct. 10 - 12  • “The Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the Treatment of Historic
                                   Properties”:
                                   http://www.cr.nps.gov/hps/tps/standguide/overview/choose_treat.htm
                                   • Stewart Brand, How Buildings Learn, viii – 51; ch. 8: ‘The Romance of
                                   Maintenance’
8.                Information      Fitch, Historic Preservation: ch. 9, ‘Reconstruction, Reproduction, and
10/17
               Interventions:      Replica: Use and Abuse’; ch. 10, ‘The Architectural Museum, Indoors
            Documentation,         and Out’; ch. 15: ‘Documentation of the Heritage: Quantification,
              Interpretation,      Analysis, and Classification’; ch. 17, ‘Two Levels of Interpretation’
             Reconstruction
9.                 library and     guest: Katie Pierce Meyer, Architecture Library
10/24       online research
                      methods
10.                     Design     2. Design and standards:
                                   Student presentations and discussion.
10/31
                                   Fitch, ch. 11, ‘Cosmetic Consequences of Intervention’
                Old and new        Course readings:
                                   • Kevin Lynch, What Time Is This Place? (MIT Press, 1976), ‘Temporal
                                   Collage’
                                   • Steven W. Semes, “’Differentiated’ and ‘Compatible’: Four Strategies
                                   for Additions to Historic Settings,” Forum Journal 21:4 (Summer 2007),
                                   14-25.
                                   • In John Warren, John Worthington, Sue Taylor, eds., Context: new
                                   buildings in historic settings (Butterworth/ Architectural Press, 1998):
                                   John Worthington, “Introduction: managing and moderating change,” 1-
                                   7; Mansell Jagger, “The planner’s perspective: a view from the front,”
                                   71-82; Sherban Cantacuzino, “Assessing quality: the pertinent criteria
                                   for designing buildings in historic settings,” 83-94; John Wells-Thorpe,
                                   “From Bauhaus to Boilerhouse,” 101-114; Edward Cullinan,
                                   “Contributing to historic settings without kow-towing,” 115-129; Spencer
                                   de Grey, “The essential elements in developing new designs for historic
                                   settings,” 143-53.
                                   Additional readings:
                                   • David Lowenthal, The Past is a Foreign Country (1985), ch. 4.2:
                                   ‘Appreciating the Look of Age,’ 148-182.
                                   • de Teel Patterson Tiller, “Obey the Imperatives of Our Own Moment: A Call
                                   for Quality Contemporary Design in Historic Districts,” Forum Journal 21:4
                                   (Summer 2007), 6-13.
Monday                             due: 2. Design and standards paper
11/4


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran     Fall 2019 :: 5
11.                    Design      due: 1.4. last date for little paper 4 (by end of day 11/6)
11/7        Old and new (2)
12.             Authenticity:      Fitch, Historic Preservation: ch. 8: ‘Extended and Adaptive Use’
11/14           Restoration,       Course readings:
              Reproduction,        • Travis C. MacDonald, Jr., “Restoration, Re-restoration and Real
                                   History,” Historic Preservation Forum 7 (November/ December 1993):
                       Replica     21-26.
                                   • Eric Gable and Richard Handler, “After Authenticity at an American
               Adaptive Use        Heritage Site,” American Anthropologist 98 (1996): 568-78.
                                   • Ada Louise Huxtable, “Inventing American Reality,” New York Review
                                   of Books, 3 December 1992: 24-28.
                                   • Paul Goldberger, “Landmark Kitsch,” The New Yorker, August 18,
                                   1997: 38-41.
                                   • Osbert Lancaster, “What Should We Preserve?” in Fawcett, The
                                   Future of the Past: 64-73.
                                   • US/ICOMOS, “The San Antonio Declaration” (1996):
                                   http://www.icomos.org/docs/san_antonio.html
13.               Place and        Page & Mason:
                                   Ned Kaufman, “Conclusion: Moving Forward: Futures for a
11/21                 Context      Preservation Movement,” 313-28.
                                   Course readings:
                   Intangible      • George Kramer, “Primary Goal Poll: Type As and Type Bs Debate
                      heritage     Online,” Forum News 9:2 (Nov./ Dec. 2002).
                                   • Edward T. McMahon, “Saving Our Sense of Place,” Historic
                 Association for   Preservation Forum 5 (January/ February 1991): 30-35.
                    Preservation   • Dolores Hayden, The Power of Place: Urban Landscapes as Public
                     Technology
                     conference
                                   History (MIT, 1995), ch. 3: ‘Place Memory and Urban Preservation,’ 44-
             Miami, Nov. 19 - 23   78.
                                   • Thomas King, Places That Count: Traditional Cultural Properties in
                                   Cultural Resource Management (Altamira Press, 2003), 1-98.
                                   • The Australia ICOMOS Charter for the Conservation of Places of
                                   Cultural Significance (Burra charter, 1999),
                                   http://www.icomos.org/australia/burra.html
11/28                              Thanksgiving
                   Changing
14.                  buildings
12/5
              Sustain ability
Monday                             Due: 3. Semester paper: Theory in Practice
12/9
Readings
Readings are posted to the class Canvas™ site (“Course Readings”). Additional readings will be
assigned.
Available at UT Coop:
James Marston Fitch, Historic Preservation: Curatorial Management of the Built World


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran        Fall 2019 :: 6
Recommended:
Tyler, Ligibel and Tyler, Historic Preservation: An Introduction to Its History, Principles and Practice (3d
edition 2018 or 2d edition 2009; assignments in syllabus are from 2d edition) [may be available at UT Co-
op bookstore]
Michael Holleran, Boston’s “Changeful Times”: Origins of Preservation and Planning in America (Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1998)
Max Page and Randall Mason, Giving Preservation a History: Histories of Historic Preservation in the
United States (Routledge, 2004)
William Murtagh, Keeping Time: The History and Theory of Preservation in America
Kevin Lynch, What Time Is This Place? (MIT Press, 1976)
Miles Glendinning, The Conservation Movement: A History of Architectural Preservation: Antiquity to
Modernity (Routledge, 2013)
Stewart Brand, How Buildings Learn
David Lowenthal, The Past is a Foreign Country
Seminar format
This course is taught as a seminar, with the expectation that students participate at a high level
of engagement, in discussions and readings, and in engagement with current events and
professional practice.
Little papers (see assignments) are an opportunity to initiate and participate in discussions in a
medium that allows greater preparation and reflection. All students are expected to read one
another’s little papers on the Canvas discussion board before class.
Screens in class: some faculty ban the use of screens (computer, phone ...) in class, in order
to ensure live face-to-face engagement. I will not go that far, because I have seen students use
these devices in ways that advance the conversation: e.g. looking up names, dates and
references, checking locations, learning unfamiliar words. In my ideal seminar IT environment,
every participant’s private screen (if you choose to use one) would be displayed as a thumbnail
on the main class screen, and each of you would be able to promote your screen to the main
screen when you speak (I’ve seen this in fancy conference rooms, though not with as many
participants as our class). Readings are really best consumed in hard copy, in my experience,
but I recognize the environmental arguments against this, as well as functional arguments such
as text searchability. In this realm I will trust to your own agency as to work habits.
Taking notes on screen is strongly discouraged – an impediment to participation (hard-copy
notetaking does not usually present this problem unless you are a shorthand transcriber).
Recording for later review can be an even greater impediment (and in any case is prohibited
without the permission of all participants). Using the screen for anything unrelated to this class
is not allowed.
Assignments
All assignments are to be submitted in electronic form (.docx or .pdf for papers; .pptx or .pdf for
presentations) on Canvas. Any revisions to the syllabus will be announced in class, and the
current version of the syllabus will be posted on the Canvas site.
Format requests:
• name, date, page numbers are all helpful;
• the instructor’s eyes have been reading longer than most of yours; when you’re deciding
whether to reduce the font size, the answer is no.


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran Fall 2019 :: 7
• for presentations, please include source citations for images, either on the slide or in a notes
field.
All assignments will be evaluated based on content, and also on form (verbal, graphic). Take
word counts seriously (you may include additional material as appendices).
1. Little papers: current events, class readings,
At least 4 papers (≤300 words each), due the night before class, to Canvas discussion
board
no. 1 due for class 2, others on your schedule (only one per week),
no. 2 by week 6, no. 4 by class 11
You are encouraged to include images, or web links, as appropriate.
Suggested topics include current events, as they relate to the class, as well as readings, your
own professional or other experiences, past or present, as they relate to class topics. Please
use your imagination to propose speculative topics, or subjects you find missing from the scope
of the course.
Current events: the semester will start with a discussion of questions around rebuilding Notre
Dame. Examples of other issues that may erupt in the news and you may find related to our
class:
     • Confederate statues and other built commemorations, and monuments of parallel
     divisiveness in other cultures and countries;
     • destruction of monuments as acts of war, and questions of how to respond afterward;
     • gentrification and displacement, here and elsewhere, tangible and cultural – and its
     relationship, if any, to preservation.
2. Design and standards
Presentations class 10, papers due Monday after class 10 (1200 words + illustrations)
Case study choice due class 5.
You will choose a case study building that has undergone a major addition or renovation. The
building may be in Austin or elsewhere. A list will be provided, or you may propose your own
selection subject to the instructor’s approval. The project should be one to which serious design
attention was given. You may choose a landscape or urban design project. The case should be
one that you are able to visit or already know well, or one that is well documented.
1. Concisely explain the facts and intentions of the project. What was there before, and what
was added, subtracted, or changed? What was the reason for the project – what was the
program to be satisfied, what were the problems to be solved? This portion of the assignment
must include before and after illustrations, and plans, elevations or sections as appropriate.
2. Does the project comply with the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards? First, did it undergo
any review according to SOI standards, or any parallel criteria? (If the project is outside the US,
please explain briefly what standards and reviews are used in your case study country; you may
exceed the word limit for this purpose.) What were the results of this review – was the design
found to comply, was it changed in order to comply, or did it go ahead despite noncompliance?
Second, please provide your own independent analysis of whether the building complies with
the SOI standards, focusing on whichever ones are most in question in this case. This portion of
the assignment will be completed regardless of whether the project was actually subject to SOI
standards or review. Cases outside the US should be analyzed according to US SOI standards,
not their own.


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran Fall 2019 :: 8
3. Do the Secretary’s standards work well as applied to this case? If the standards and the
design are in conflict, would a better outcome result from changing the design, or the
standards? If the project complies with the standards, does that compliance result in the best
outcome for both old and new, or did it close off alternatives that might have been better?
3. Semester paper: Theory in practice
Due 5pm last day of semester classes (2500 – 4000 words). Topic proposal due class 6.
A paper exploring the theory underlying a significant issue in contemporary preservation
practice. While this paper will involve some factual research, the core of the paper will be a
question that needs answering not from fact but from principles. Worthy examples:
    • Restoring Modernism: does the machine aesthetic of the International Style challenge
    basic principles of the Secretary’s Standards in ways that require their revision?
    • Replication: should the Secretary of the Interior’s standard 9 be revised to drop the
    requirement that new work be differentiated from the old, allowing fully replicative additions?
    Replicative new infill buildings?
    • New ruins: should planned neglect be accepted as a legitimate treatment for remote
    National Park Service properties that have no forseeable use?
    • Climate change and authenticity: as historic designed landscapes become threatened,
    when do we take extraordinary measures to preserve original plant materials in situ and
    when do we reinterpret the designs in different, more sustainable species?
    • What is the relevance of Preservation’s cultural emphasis to the mainstream,
    environmentally-oriented discourse in Sustainability?
Topic proposal: what is your contemporary issue? What question of principle is at its core?
Grades
1. Little papers + class participation*                        25 %
2. Design and standards (presentation + paper)                 30
3. Theory in practice                                          45
                                                                  100 %
Course grade will be assigned as ABC+/-
* Class participation and little papers are ungraded but evaluated for thoughtfulness, preparation
(class readings; little paper readings; attentiveness to outside sources such as current events);
respectfulness and collaboration. Class participation requires attendance; if you are unable to
attend a class please consult with the instructor beforehand and make arrangements with a
classmate for notes.


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran                  Fall 2019 :: 9
                                               Important                 Boilerplate                     Fine         Print
                                            PRIVATE      Assignments in this class may require you to visit sites off-campus.
                                                         The School has not obtained permission for you to enter any
                                         PROPERTY        property not ordinarily open to the public. If you wish to enter
                                                         private property, it is your responsibility to get permission to do so.
                                       PLAGIARISM,       Plagiarism is the presentation of someone else’s work as your
                                                         own. It is a serious offense - an academic felony - and we will
                                           MULTIPLE
                                                         prosecute cases of plagiarism to the maximum extent possible
                                     SUBMISSION OF       under University rules.
                                              WORK
                                                         Multiple submission of work to more than one course is not
                                                         ordinarily permitted. It will be allowed only by permission of both
                                                         instructors, in advance, where the project is separately appropriate
                                                         to the assignments in each course. Requirements and grading will
                                                         be adjusted to maintain an equitable work load.
                                                         When in doubt, ask.
                                                         For the UT Libraries’ unit on plagiarism:
                                                         http://www.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/learningmodules/plagi
                                                         arism/index.html
                                     NOISY DEVICES       Should be quiet during class. Students may make arrangements
                                                         with the instructor in exceptional circumstances.
                                         RELIGIOUS       By UT Austin policy, you must notify the instructor of your pending
                                                         absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
                                  ACCOMMODATIONS
                                                         religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a
                                                         work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy
                                                         day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work
                                                         within a reasonable time after the absence.
      New Yorker, October 8, 1990   STUDENTS WITH       May request appropriate academic accommodations from the UT
                                                        Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for
                                       DISABILITIES
                                                        Students with Disabilities, 512.471.6259.
                                         DEADLINES       Count.


UT SOA :: ARC 388R/ CRP 389C :: Historic Preservation History & Theory :: Michael Holleran     Fall 2019 :: 10
National Register of               Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
Historic Places
                                           A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed
Criteria for Evaluation:             1.    in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining
The quality of significance in             characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
American history,
                                           The historic character of a property shall be retained and
architecture, archeology,
engineering, and culture is
                                     2.    preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of
present in districts, sites,               features and spaces that characterize a property shall be
buildings, structures, and                 avoided.
objects that possess
                                           Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its
integrity of location, design,
setting, materials,
                                     3.    time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of
workmanship, feeling, and                  historical development, such as adding conjectural features
association,                               or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be
and:                                       undertaken.
                                           Most properties change over time; those changes that have
A.     That are associated           4.    acquired historic significance in their own right shall be
       with events that have
                                           retained and preserved.
       made a significant
       contribution to the
                                           Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or
       broad patterns of our         5.    examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall
       history; or
                                           be preserved.
       That are associated
B.     with the lives of             6.    Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than
                                           replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires
       persons significant in
                                           replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall
       our past; or
                                           match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual
                                           qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of
       That embody the
C.     distinctive
                                           missing features shall be substantiated by documentary,
                                           physical, or pictorial evidence.
       characteristics of a
       type, period, or
                                           Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that
       method of                     7.    cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The
       construction, or that
                                           surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be
       represent the work of
                                           undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
       a master, or that
       possess high artistic
                                           Significant archeological resources affected by a project shall
       values, or that               8.    be protected and preserved. If such resources must be
       represent a significant
                                           disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
       and distinguishable
       entity whose
                                           New additions, exterior alterations, or related new
       components may lack           9.    construction shall not destroy historic materials that
       individual distinction;
       or                                  characterize the property. The new work shall be
                                           differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the
                                           massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the
       That have yielded, or
D.     may be likely to yield,
                                           historic integrity of the property and its environment.
       information important
                                           New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall
       in prehistory or            10.     be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future,
       history.
                                           the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its
                                           environment would be unimpaired.
