                               The University of Texas at Austin
                            ACC 387.4: Strategic Control Systems
                                    Unique 2869; UTC 4.112
                                         TTH 3:30 – 5:00
                                   Fall 2019 Course Syllabus
Lecturer
Jim Albrecht
James.Albrecht@mccombs.utexas.edu
Phone: 512-461-1230
Office Location: 5.126C
Office Hours: By appointment
Teaching Assistant
None
About the Lecturer
James W. (Jim) Albrecht, Jr., has lectured in the Department of Accounting in the McCombs
School of Business since 2005. In addition to that role, he currently provides Chief Financial
Officer advisory guidance to emerging companies in the Austin area. From 2012 to 2018, he was
Chief Financial Officer of Globalscape, Inc., a publicly-traded, NYSE-listed software company
providing managed file transfer solutions to Fortune 500 and other enterprises. Prior to that
position, he was Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer of Express Digital
Graphics, Inc., an Austin-based software and e-commerce company providing workflow and
image management solutions to the photography and digital imaging industries through its
PhotoReflect.com brand. From 1995 to 2008, he was Chief Financial Officer of Introgen
Therapeutics, Inc., a publicly-traded, NASDAQ-listed biotechnology company. From 1987 to
1994, he worked with various technology companies in a controller position and operated a
consulting business providing chief financial officer services to the technology and real estate
industries. Mr. Albrecht worked eleven years at Arthur Andersen after graduating in 1975 from
The University of Texas at Austin with a B.B.A in accounting. He is a Certified Public
Accountant.
Class Objectives and Overview
This course exposes students to concepts and methods embraced by strategic business control
techniques. These techniques support decision-making by those aspiring to be in positions of
business leadership. The course emphasizes viewing an organization from the perspective of a
chief financial officer, chief operating officer or chief executive officer.
Organizations have missions. These missions are supported by strategies, which in turn are
executed through a set of tactical, operating activities. The level of achievement of an
organization’s mission and the execution of its strategies must be monitored using strategic
controls and measurements for the organization to be successful. This course focuses on the
design, development, operation and use of these strategic controls and measurements.
                                                   1


While understanding activities of the past is an important component of predicting future events,
historical accounting information alone is not adequate to provide a map for navigating an
unpredictable future. The forward-looking information provided by strategic control and
measurement systems can provide executives and managers with the timely quantitative and
qualitative information they need to forecast the future in an informed manner.
Managers can use strategic control systems to maintain or alter operational and behavioral
patterns in organizational activities. Desirable patterns may include efficiency and error-free
processing, such as yield rates in manufacturing environments. In other instances, they may
relate to patterns of ongoing creativity and innovation in products or internal processes, such as
percentage of sales from new products or year-over-year improvement in processing speed.
Rather than simply identifying good business measurements, this course emphasizes the
identification and utilization of measurements that drive results consistent with corporate
missions and strategies.
Major themes covered in the course include:
       Linking strategies to operations.
            o How can management leverage the potential for innovation while ensuring
                adequate control and protection from unpleasant surprises by employees?
            o How do managers organize and allocate various resources to support
                implementation of strategies?
            o How is focus maintained when a plethora of business opportunities exist?
       Aligning people with corporate objectives.
            o How can managers communicate business strategy and goals effectively to all
                employees?
            o How can senior managers move information from employees, who are in day-to-
                day contact with operations and consumers of goods and services, up the
                hierarchy to those responsible for formulating and supporting strategies?
            o What is the role of compensation and recognition systems in motivating
                employees to achieve corporate objectives?
       Measuring results to control, learn about and improve performance.
            o How can managers drive growth that enhances, rather than dilutes, profitability
                and cash flow?
            o What are the best ways to measure and track performance toward strategically
                important goals?
            o How are performance measures linked with external markets?
            o How can managers ensure their business is not exposed to unacceptable levels of
                risk?
The course is organized into three major sections to develop these themes:
       Foundations for implementing strategy.
            o Tensions that are the essence of successful strategy implementation.
            o Formulating and implementing business strategy.
            o Organization design.
       Creating performance measurement systems.
                                                  2


            o  Using information to control critical outputs.
            o  Building effective profit plans.
            o  Using strategic profitability analysis.
            o  Tools for allocating resources.
            o  Linking profit plans and other measurement systems to internal and external
               markets.
            o Building a balanced scorecard.
       Achieving profit goals and strategies.
            o Diagnostic and interactive control systems.
            o Goal setting and alignment of incentives.
            o Identifying strategic risks.
            o Business conduct and strategic boundaries to control risk.
            o Levers of control.
This course emphasizes how to use information to manage a business at a managerial level.
While it addresses information created through accounting and financial processes, it equally
focuses on non-financial measures critical to business success. This course is not about how to
create or compute accounting information, i.e. it is not about debits and credits. It is about
how to identify and organize existing information into understandable and manageable
systems and reports created from an accounting and finance perspective that appropriately
leverage management’s limited time and attention.
Even though the name of the course is Strategic Control Systems, this course is not specifically
about the design and use of computer systems. Computer systems are referenced from time-to-
time in the course as one of many tools management can use to promote the achievement of an
organization’s mission.
Teaching and Learning Approach – Qualitative vs. Quantitative
This course emphasizes the student’s ability to apply qualitative analytical skills in the context of
class concepts. This course emphasizes insightful thinking such that there are often no
absolutely correct or incorrect answers to a problem or situation. Grades are directly dependent
upon the breadth and depth of the student’s ability to demonstrate an understanding of class
concepts through qualitative, insightful analysis. Students who focus primarily on finding
right or wrong, quantitative answers using the facts of the various cases addressed in the
class typically receive a grade on their work that is lower than they desire.
Since this class addresses key drivers for managing a business, students are expected to apply
thought processes as if they are presenting their understanding of a situation to senior level
executives or members of a board of directors. Those environments seldom focus on a person’s
tactical problem-solving skills since it is assumed those quantitative skills exist. Instead, those
situations focus on a person’s ability to think and talk insightfully, conceptually and strategically
and to apply higher level qualitative insight. Students demonstrating these qualitative
analytical skills typically receive the higher grades in this course.
To expand on this point by example, a situation being evaluated by the student may warrant
considering the implementation of a performance measurement and reward system for
employees. The student should focus on evaluating the merits of such a system in the
environment at hand and why such a system could yield benefits (or alternatively, be a burden).
The student could even go so far as to discuss how a project to implement this system might be
                                                  3


designed and managed. All of that is a qualitative analysis. However, the student should refrain
from actually creating the tactical aspects of a performance measurement and reward system to
try to solve the problem presented by the case as this course assumes the student already has
those basic skills and further demonstrating that ability (which is a quantitative process) in this
course adds little value to this learning experience. Using the concept of a SWOT analysis as
another example, an ability to identify when a SWOT analysis would be beneficial is a
qualitative assessment that is responsive to the objectives of the course. Actually performing the
SWOT analysis is a quantitative exercise that is not germane to the course since this course
assumes a student already has the skill to perform a SWOT analysis when asked to do so.
The facts of case studies are to be used as a platform upon which to build a discussion of the
application and relevance of class concepts in those environments from a qualitative perspective.
That discussion should provide a path and direction pointing toward solving the problem without
getting into an actual quantitative analysis that provides a solution to the problem.
When analyzing case studies, students will be assessed on their ability to present why they
believe certain class concepts are relevant. Students are expected to bolster those observations by
citing facts from the case that illustrate the concept in action. Students will receive little or no
credit for reciting what an organization in a case study is doing operationally if there is no
insightful analysis of a course concept relevant to those operations.
Class Sessions
Most class sessions consist of a lecture introducing a particular concept that is part of an overall
strategic control system environment along with discussion of a case study of a company
exploring the application of the concept in a real-world environment. Students receive reading
assignments in advance of each class session to allow them to become familiar with the concepts
and cases to be discussed. The classroom case study review is designed to be highly interactive
between the instructor and students.
Individual Written Case Study Reports
Each student prepares two written case study reports on their own during the semester. These
reports address the same case studies discussed in the classroom but must be completed and
submitted for grading prior to the discussion of the relevant case study in the classroom. Once
discussion of a case study has commenced in the classroom, that case study cannot be used as
the basis for an individual written case study.
Only case studies listed in the course calendar at the end of this syllabus are eligible for writing
as an individual case study. There are more case studies in the textbook than listed in the course
calendar. Case studies in the textbook not on the course calendar are not eligible for writing
as an individual written case study.
A written case study should not consume time and space reciting the facts of the case that are
clearly evident from reading the case study in the textbook. Repeating facts evident from the
textbook in the written case study ineffectively consumes the allowed word capacity thereby
using valuable resources that could otherwise be applied to concept exploration. The result
could be a lower grade on the written case study than desired by the student.
                                                  4


The textbook poses a series of questions for most of the case studies. It is not necessary for the
written case study to answer those questions. In many cases, those questions ask for
quantitative analysis that is contrary to the qualitative objectives of this course. Accordingly,
individual written case studies that disregard those textbook questions and instead focus on the
student’s qualitative analysis and thinking typically receive the higher grades.
Individual written case studies may be up to 750 words in length, although shorter is acceptable
if it effectively delivers the message. (A word of caution: Historically, written case studies
materially shorter than this allowed length typically tend to score a lower grade due to
insufficient depth of analysis.) Inclusion of financial analyses or graphical charts (which do not
count toward the maximum word length) is acceptable (but not required) as a means to enhance
the effectiveness of the report (although caution is encouraged to avoid undue quantitative
analysis that detracts from qualitative observations). All reports must be submitted electronically
by email using Word. Paper copies will not be accepted. The quality of writing skills could
influence the grade.
Consistent with the objective of the class, to earn a high grade on an individual case study, it is
important that the writing focus on the qualitative application of class concepts and avoid undue
focus on quantitative problem-solving.
Each student gets one free pass on the first individual case study only. This pass means that if a
student is not pleased with the grade received on their first individual case study, the student may
elect to have that grade disregarded and may replace it with another case study involving a
different case (i.e. a student does not get two attempts on the same case). This “second chance”
is available only on the first attempted case study. It is not available on subsequent case studies.
This “second chance” election must be made in writing delivered by email and before the
replacement paper is submitted for grading. When this election is made, the grade on the second
paper is the one that counts toward the overall course grade, i.e. the grade on the first attempt is
fully disregarded such that the student may not choose between the first attempt and the second
attempt grades. Historically, most students who take advantage of this “second-chance” received
a lower than desired grade on their first individual case study due to too much emphasis on
quantitative problem-solving in their first attempt. There is no guarantee that the grade on the
“second chance” writing will be higher than the grade on the first writing.
             o Each written case study is a 20% component of the student’s overall course grade
                with these two case studies comprising 40% of the student’s overall course grade.
Team Case Study Presentations
Teams consisting of typically four to six students each are formed by about the middle of the
semester. The instructor will select the students comprising each team. Each team selects a
company (either privately owned or publicly traded) or organization (such as a not-for-profit
charitable organization) as a basis for analysis of how the concepts of strategic control systems
are applied in that environment. During the latter part of the semester, each team does a stand-up
presentation to the class addressing their qualitative assessment of strategic control systems
relative to the organization they have chosen. PowerPoint or any other multimedia may be used
to enhance a presentation’s effectiveness but are not mandatory. These presentations should be
about 30 minutes in length with each member of the team having a speaking role in the
presentation. Each person on a team receives the same grade.
                                                  5


            o The team presentations are a 20% component of the student’s overall course
                grade.
Final Course Exam
During the latter part of the semester, the instructor announces a company selected at random
from Corporate America. Students then analyze this company in the context of concepts
addressed throughout the course. Students have a couple of weeks to apply their accumulated
course knowledge to illustrate their qualitative analysis of the challenges faced in designing,
implementing and applying strategic control systems to managing this company. This analysis
may be up to 1,200 words in length. This work is done individually by each student. It is due by
the end of the scheduled time published for the final exam for this course although it may be
submitted earlier at the student’s option.
Consistent with the objective of the class, to earn a high grade on the final course exam, it is
important that the writing focus on the qualitative application of class concepts and avoid undue
focus on quantitative problem-solving.
            o The final course exam is a 30% component of a student’s overall class grade.
In-Class Quizzes and Participation
This course anticipates a high level of class attendance and active, student participation in the
classroom as case studies are analyzed. Practical experiences, insights and analysis from the
students form an integral part of stimulating development and exchange of thoughts and ideas to
promote learning. The instructor may conduct ad hoc discussions or quizzes that yield points
toward the student’s grade in the class and for which the student’s presence in class on that day is
necessary to earn those points. The instructor will also use observations and judgment as to a
student’s level of participation to possibly assign additional points toward the overall class grade.
Historically, there have been students who fell just short of their desired letter grade for the
semester who could have avoided that disappointment through a higher level of attendance
and/or participation in class discussions.
            o Class attendance and participation is a 10% component of a student’s overall
                class grade.
Grading Recap
Grades are determined using the following proportional breakdown:
                   Two individual case analyses – 20% each for 40% of total grade.
                   One team case presentation - 20% of total grade.
                   Final course exam - 30% of total grade.
                   In-class participation – 10% of total grade.
Each work product is graded on a 100 point scale to which the above percentages are applied to
arrive at the class points earned on that piece of work. Fractional grades on each work product
are rounded up to the next highest whole number if the fraction is .5 or higher and down to the
next lowest whole number if the fraction is below .5. The points earned on the work products are
                                                  6


summed to arrive at total points earned for the class. Total points earned for the class translate
into letter grades as follows:
                              Total Class Points         Letter Grade
                                    95-100                    A
                                     91-94                    A-
                                     89-90                    B+
                                     85-88                    B
                                     81-84                    B-
                                     79-80                    C+
                                     75-78                    C
                                     71-74                    C-
                                     61-70                    D
                                  Below 61                    F
This course is graded on an absolute basis using the instructor’s judgment as to the learning
achieved by the student and an assessment of the student’s resulting capability to apply the
teachings and objectives of the class in future career and business environments. Grading is
not necessarily relative to other students in the class. While grades usually fall into typical
distribution patterns, it also possible that an atypical number of A’s, B’s, C’s or other grades
could be given for this class based on the demonstrated capabilities of the students in the class
during this particular semester.
Textbook
The course will utilize the readings and cases of Performance Management & Control Systems
for Implementing Strategy (Text and Cases), Robert Simons, Prentice Hall, 2000. (ISBN
9780132340069).
The case studies in this textbook often reference dates from several years ago. The actual year
referenced is irrelevant and should not be a cause of distraction as the concepts illustrated by the
cases are as applicable today as when the events in the case actually occurred.
The textbook is available only electronically at the following links:
         Text: https://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/cbmp/import/ptos/57600539
         Cases: http://cb.hbsp.harvard.edu/cbmp/access/57753714
Name Cards/Name Tents
Each student should display their name card/name tent during each class session to promote
identification between the students and the instructor.
McCombs Classroom Professionalism
                                                  7


The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the McCombs community.
The collective class reputation and the value of the McCombs experience hinges on these
standards.
Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and every class
session. Students are expected to be professional in all respects.
The McCombs classroom experience is enhanced when students:
        Arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and finish at the
         scheduled time. On time arrival shows respect for both fellow students and faculty and it
         enhances learning by reducing avoidable distractions.
        Display their name cards. This permits fellow students and faculty to learn names,
         enhancing opportunities for community building and evaluation of in-class contributions.
        Minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment improves when
         disruptions are limited.
        Fully prepare for each class. Much of the learning at McCombs takes place during
         classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they cannot contribute to the
         overall learning process. This affects not only the individual, but their peers who count on
         them, as well.
        Attend the class section to which they are registered. Learning is enhanced when class
         sizes are optimized. Limits are set to ensure a quality experience. When section hopping
         takes place some classes become too large and it becomes difficult to contribute. When
         they are too small, the breadth of experience and opinion suffers.
        Respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and debate are
         encouraged. Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.
Class Websites
Password-protected class sites will be available for all accredited courses taught at The
University. Syllabi, handouts, assignments and other resources are types of information that may
be available within these sites. Site activities could include exchanging e-mail, engaging in class
discussions and chats, and exchanging files. In addition, class e-mail rosters will be a component
of the sites. Students who do not want their names included in these electronic class rosters must
restrict their directory information in the Office of the Registrar, Main Building, Room 1. For
information on restricting directory information see: http://www.utexas.edu/student/registrar/catalogs/gi02-
03/app/appc09.html.
Notebook/Laptop Computers in Class
Students are welcome to use their notebook computer during class to view class slides and to
take notes. Since attention to the instructor’s presentation and the thoughts and comments of
classmates is important, using notebooks during class to perform non-class related activities,
including browsing the internet or reading or composing email or similar messages, is
inappropriate, just as it would be in a business meeting. Notebooks are to be off and closed
during the group case study presentations to the class and during presentations by guest speakers.
                                                   8


Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division
of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259, http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by
this course, that students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring
to this class can be comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to
all students. Please come to me at any time with any concerns.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an
opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The
responsibilities of both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described
in detail in the BBA Program’s Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at
http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this course, I have agreed to
observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have agreed
to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on
Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic
dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course
and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms the individual, all students, the
integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic
Integrity website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University
policies and procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what
constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by
the Office of Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
        Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
         evacuate buildings and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
                                                  9


 Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
 If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing ASAP.
 In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
 Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire
  authorities.
 Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
 In case of emergency, further information will be available at:
  http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                           10
