                             Learning Tuscany, ART 319T / ART 320K / ART 379T / ART 320L
                                          Photography and Tourism : Observing Travel and Culture in Italy
                                                                                    1-5pm, Location TBD
                                                              Professor Eli Durst, eli.durst@gmail.com
                                                                                      TA: Hannah Spector
Course Description and Objectives:
The concept of pilgrimage has been central to photography since the medium's invention. In
the mid-nineteenth century, demand exploded for daguerrotypes (an early type of photograph)
depicting the most important wonders of the world, from the pyramids of Egypt to the
Pantheon in Rome. Suddenly, anyone could see treasures of antiquity that few people would
ever be able to see in person. This marked the beginning of the photographic pilgrimage. With
the advancement of technology and the democratization of travel, people all over the world
were traveling to society's most cherished monuments not only see them for themselves, but to
photograph them and share them—to use photographic representation to transform that place
into a commodity.
In this course, we will learn and use the fundamentals of digital photography to explore the
modern pilgrimage in contemporary Italy. Instead of simply reproducing the same images that
we've seen countless times, students will be encouraged to think critically about how today's
global world thinks about and interacts with historical western spaces.
The objective of this course is to actively investigate Italy and the phenomenon of travel travel
through the lens of fine art photography. Student’s observations of Italian works of art, design,
architecture, and urban and rural environments, will directly influence your understanding and
conceptualization of the contemporary pilgrimage. The impact of seeing these works in real
time and at full scale, will significantly change the way you think about art and architecture in a
historical context and your own works and interests.
Attendance:
    • Attendance is mandatory.
    • Tardiness is not acceptable. Two late arrivals constitute an absence.
    • Leaving class early will result in an absence for the day.
    • If students are absent for a technical demonstration or lecture it is their responsibility to
         find out what they missed. I do not repeat demos or lectures. Please consult the course
         website (canvas).
    • Religious holy days. A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
         examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as
         far in advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to
         complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. (UT Academic
         policies 2006)


Grading Policy:
Grades are based upon the following factors: Synthesis, Craft, Effort and Discourse. You will be
required to participate in a student exhibition in Siena before we leave, and another during the
Fall 2018 semester on UT campus.
There will be four overlapping projects for this course. All five projects will be graded on the
following criteria and weighted equally toward your final grade:
Synthesis includes conceptualization, creative problem-solving, innovative thinking,
understanding and utilizing context, and processing ideas into a successful, final project.
Craft is a student’s demonstrated care regarding their work and presentation. Craftsmanship
refers to the quality of design and technique involved in constructing photographs. Making an
interesting photograph (and collection of photographs) is not as simple as clicking a button.
There are many technical and stylistic concerns that contribute to the emotional tenor and
thematic reading of a photograph.
Effort concerns a student’s effort demonstrated in and out of class. A student can be in class
without actually working on their project. Are you working in class or talking to your neighbor?
Are you prepared and ready at the start of class?
Discourse relates to the student’s level of engagement with the class and the degree to which
the student is a contributing member of class. It is not enough for a student to be a sponge-
they need to contribute.
Grades for this course will utilize the +/- system, making the possible range of grades: A, A-,
B+, B, B-, C+, C, C-, D+, D, D-, F.
A Overall excellence, exceeds expectation. Outstanding: work demonstrating significant
growth; process; participation in class; critical thinking; meeting deadlines; attitude; depth of
inquiry; willing to take risks and explore challenging solutions.
B Impressive but not excellent. Very good: work demonstrates growth and progress; healthy
process; good participation in class and critical thinking; meeting deadlines; attitude; depth of
inquiry; some risk taking.
C Overall average: work as expected at this level but without demonstrable growth. Average:
work demonstrates aptitude but not measurable growth or progress; little risk taking or
experimentation; somewhat resistant to change, experimentation, challenge; lack of openness.
D Overall below average: work below that expected at this level and without demonstrable
growth. Below average: work demonstrates little aptitude, growth, or progress; poor inquiry,


critical thinking, and participation.
F Failure for the course: does not meet minimum expectations. Poor: does not meet minimum
expectations for work; growth; progress; inquiry; critical thinking; participation.
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward
peers and community.
Types of Scholastic Dishonesty:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/scholdis_whatis.php
Procedures for Reporting an Academic Integrity Violation:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint_reportingprocedures.php
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone)
Materials:
-Digital SLR with lens (should be between 35mm and 80mm)
-2 memory cards (either Compact Flash or SD cards depending on which format your camera
takes. Note: it’s better to have two 32GB cards than one 64GB card in case one is broken or
corrupted!)
-Camera Bag
-Laptop with Adobe Lightroom (or Adobe Bridge) and Adobe Photoshop (You can download a
free trial and now Adobe Creative Cloud is a monthly subscription service. There’s now an
Adobe Creative Cloud Photography Suite that costs $9.99/month)
Readings:
John Berger, Ways of Seeing
Susan Sontag, “In Plato’s Cave” from On Photography
Marvin Heiferman, Photography Changes Everything
Teju Cole, “Take Photo Here,” from The New York Times
(All readings will be scanned and placed on Canvas prior to departure)
Visual Assignments:
1. Roman Holiday: The first week in Rome will serve as our introduction to the contemporary
form of pilgrimage that we call tourism. We will be thinking critically about the intersection of


history and tradition with today’s contemporary world. Once we travel to Siena, we will use
these images to learn the ins and outs of digital editing. (10 Images due for critique)
2. Tourism and the Intersection of Old and New: This project will build upon the subject of the
first assignment, but we will be further informed by lectures and readings concerning relevant
topics. (12-15 images due for critique)
3. Everyday Drama: Based on discussions and artists that we will study in class, you will
consider how to imbue the mundanities of everyday life in Tuscany with visual drama and
significance. (12-15 images due for critique)
4. Final Portfolio: Put together a cohesive portfolio of images taken over the course of your
time in Italy united around specific themes or topics of interest to you. We will meet before the
week before the final project is due to discuss your idea.
Week of Monday, May 27
May 27 (M): Arrive Rome (Depart US Sunday, May 26)
                Check in at Hotel Navona; orientation; group dinner
5/28 (T)):      Ancient Rome
5/29 (W):       Medieval Rome
5/30 (Th):      Renaissance Rome
5/31 (F):       Baroque Rome
6/1 (Sa):       Rome: Free Day
6/2 (Su):       Siena: by rail: Get settled, brief walking tour, welcome dinner
Week of Monday, June 3
6/3 (M):        LECTURE 01: Introduction to Adobe Bridge and Photoshop
6/4 (T):        LECTURE 01 cont’d + Editing images from Rome and organizing into
6/5 (W):        Mini Crit and Review: Roman Holiday. (Select and edit 10 best
                images from week in Rome.)
6/6 (Th):       LECTURE 02: Tourism and the Intersection of Old and New
6/7 (F):        Florence: Reading Discussion: John Berger’s Ways of Seeing. (In groups of 3,
                choose a quote and come to class ready to discuss.)
                Photographing in Siena
6/8-9 (Sa, Su): free
Week of Monday, June 10
6/10 (M):       Photographing in Siena
                (We will meet as a class in a specified location)
6/11 (T):       Group Sequencing Exercise
                Editing and Sequencing your own photographs
6/12 (W):       Critique: Tourism and the Intersection of Old and New
6/13 (Th):      LECTURE 03: Everyday Dramas


6/14 (F):      Florence (Firenze) by rail.
6/15-16 :      free
Week of Monday, June 17
6/17 (M):      Reading Discussion: Susan Sontag’s “In Plato’s Cave”
               Photographing in Siena
6/18 (T):      Final Portfolio Discussion
               Found Photograph Assignment (Collect 8 examples of imagery that you connect
               into a cohesive portfolio.)
6/19 (W):      Critique: Everyday Dramas
6/20 (Th):     Florence
6/21 (F) to 6/23 (Su): free (FOUR DAY WEEKEND!!!)
Week of Monday, June 24
6/24 (M):      Free
6/25 (T):      Return from long weekend
6/26 (W):      Student Presentations: Marvin Heiferman’s Photography Changes Everything
               (With a partner, prepare a summary and discussion questions for the chapter of
               chapter Photography Changes Everything assigned to you.)
6/27 (Th):     Photographing in Siena
6/28 (F):      Pienza
6/29 (Sa) to 6/30 (Su): free
Week of Monday, July 1
7/1 (M):       Work on Final Portfolios (Due with 1-2 pg Artist Statement)
7/2 (T):       Palio Day
7/3 (W):       Final Reviews: Group 1
7/4 (Th):      Final Reviews: Group 2
7/5 (F):       Student Exhibition
7/6 (Sa):      Check out and/or depart for U.S.
