BME 245L
EXPERIMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF BME DESIGN
SUMMER 2019
INSTRUCTOR
DR. DAN PUPERI                       DANPUPERI@UTEXAS.EDU                        512-232-6847
OFFICE: BME 1.108D                   OFFICE HOURS: BY APPOINTMENT USING GOOGLE CALENDAR
TEACHING ASSISTANT S
MILES MASSIDDA                       MILESWM@UTEXAS.EDU
CHUNGMIN HAN                         CMHAN616@UTEXAS.EDU
LEARNING ASSISTANTS
ALI ABBASPOUR, JAMES KWON
COURSE DESCRIPTION
UNIVERSITY CATALOG C OURSE DESCRIPTION
Further exploration of biomedical engineering design principles through open-ended hands-on applications.
                      Conducting research as a Biomedical Engineer
This course will allow students to connect and extend the material covered in core Biomedical Engineering courses
through experimentation. Students will gain hands-on experience in Biomedical Engineering applications including
mechanical testing, cell culture, and biomaterials.
The goal of the course is to provide students for opportunity for professional growth by exposing them to
experiment design, use variety of tools to analyze experimental data, teamwork, and scientific communication
skills.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
By the end of the semester, students will have the opportunity to:
      • Analyze and statistically interpret multi-factor experimental data using R.
      • Culture mammalian cells and perform assays to evaluate cell-biomaterial interactions.
      • Test mechanical properties of biological tissue and compare to non-biological materials.
      • Create theoretical models of material properties and apply models to mechanical testing data.
      • Communicate results from lab work in scientific journal format.


MY LEARNING OBJECTIVES
     •
     •
     •
ABET STUDENT OUTCOMES
(3) an ability to communicate effectively with a range of audiences
(5) an ability to function effectively on a team whose members together provide leadership, create a collaborative
and inclusive environment, establish goals, plan tasks, and meet objectives
(6) an ability to develop and conduct appropriate experimentation, analyze and interpret data, and use
engineering judgement to draw conclusions
(7) an ability to acquire and apply new knowledge as needed, using appropriate learning strategies
COURSE REQUIREMENTS
REQUIRED MATERIALS
There is no required textbook. All required content will be posted on the Canvas webpage.
You must keep a lab/design notebook. For this class you will have the option of keeping a physical lab/design
notebook or an electronic lab/design notebook.
         Physical notebook must meet the following criteria:
               1) Permanently bound pages
               2) Pages pre-numbered, without any missing numbers or pages torn out
               3) Room for table of contents at the beginning
         You can buy acceptable lab/design notebooks from either BMES or from the Co-op.
         Electronic notebook must be Microsoft OneNote.
         OneNote can be downloaded free for almost every platform.
         The lab/design notebook must be a separate OneNote notebook from class notes, personal notes, etc.
         Guidelines for maintaining both physical and electronic lab/design notebooks are posted on Canvas.
         Lab/design notebooks will be graded in lab throughout the semester.
We will be using Kahoot for in-class participation. Kahoot is a free app that you can install on your mobile device
or you can access it from any web-browser at http://kahoot.it. You must be able to use Kahoot in lecture.
PREREQUISITES
BIO 206L, BME 314 or 214L, 333T, 335
PRE- / CO-REQUISITE
BIO 365R


COURSE FORMAT AND LEARNING ACTIVITIES
The course will consist of 2 hours of lecture per day of class (MTW 9-11am) and a 3-hour lab section per day of
class (MTW 12-3pm). All lectures will be held in GDC 1.406 and all labs will be held in BME 3.310.
Both labs and lectures are design to be hands-on.
Lectures will contain some background information necessary for lab work and connect theoretical concepts to the
experiments planned in lab. During lecture, we will also explore analysis and communication of experimental data.
Labs will consist of experiments. Some lab assignments may require work outside of lab time. Lab‐specific
background and notes will be available online and must be viewed prior to your assigned lab time. Detailed
background for all experiments, details of the work to be completed, and links to other necessary material will be
posted on Canvas https://canvas.utexas.edu/. Log in with your UT EID and password.
HOW TO BE SUCCESSFUL IN THIS COURSE
Participation: This is a hands-on course. You will learn the most by participating in the experiments and the
exercises. Participation includes preparing for and showing up on time to both lab and scheduled lectures. Lab
session attendance is mandatory and some of the in-lecture activities have grade points assigned to them.
Preparation: All lab assignments can be completed within the allotted time for the labs, but students are generally
only able to complete an assignment on time if they properly prepare prior to lab. Proper preparation includes
reading online content, attending lectures, and doing pre‐laboratory planning in your laboratory notebook.
Explore: One major goal of college is to teach you how to find answers yourself. Research has shown that you will
learn more by actively participating in learning rather than being spoon fed information from an instructor.
Teamwork: Much of the work will be accomplished in teams of 2-3. Teams are randomly assigned and you will
have to work well with your teams in order to be successful. There is no formal peer-feedback for this class.
[Translated: there is not a mechanism where you can write an angry letter to the instructor complaining about
your teammates]. Depending on the random team assignments, you might be given the opportunity to learn to
work with people who may be quite different in their approach and goals than you.
Practice safety and cleanliness: Successfully working in the lab requires adherence to all safety guidelines. You
must dress appropriately for a laboratory environment (long pants, socks, close toed shoes), follow all safety
procedures, and wear PPE (lab coat, gloves, and googles) when appropriate. You must also clean up after yourself.
A cleaner lab is a safer lab and you will be graded on your ability to keep things tidy. This is especially true for
BME245L, where there are both biological and chemical hazards.


ASSIGNMENTS
Your assignments for the course include written assignments, quizzes, an end of semester exam, and your lab work
(including lab/design notebook).
     1.  Written assignments make up the majority of your grade and are listed below
Individual papers
              a.  Pipette accuracy experiment report – a short paper describing the results and statistical analysis
                  of an experiment to test the accuracy of the pipettors (8% of final grade)
              b.  Cell culture preliminary paper – a full paper, structured like a scientific article to include an
                  Introduction, Materials and Methods, any preliminary data, and a References section with up-to-
                  date literature. Results and discussion should include all activities up to that point with data and
                  results presented as appropriate. (10% of final grade)
Group papers
              c.  Cell culture paper – a full paper (Intro, Materials and Methods, Results and Discussion, and
                  Conclusions) describing the biomaterials, cell growth, adhesion and cytotoxicity experiments
                  (10% of final grade).
              d.  Mechanical testing paper – a full paper (Intro, Materials and Methods, Results and Discussion
                  and Conclusions) describing the results of the mechanical testing of hydrogels, chicken bone,
                  chicken tendon (10% of final grade).
     2.  There are pre-lab quizzes before most labs and lecture quizzes during some lectures. The purpose of the
         pre-lab quizzes is to help ensure that you have properly prepared for lab and help you feel confident in
         the experiments that you are about to run. The purpose of the lecture quizzes is to give students a chance
         to do some problem solving and to give you some insight into what I consider are the key concepts that
         you should know. (22% of final grade)
     3.  Exam – at the end of the semester, there will be an exam that covers material discussed in lecture and
         learned from the laboratory experiments. On the 2nd to last lecture, you will take the exam individually.
         During the final lecture period, you will retake the exact same exam with your team. 60% of your exam
         score will be from the individual portion, 40% will be from the team portion. (12.5% of final grade)
     4.  Reflection essay - due at end of class discussing how this course has met learning objectives and fits into
         your goals. (5% of final grade)
     5.  Lab work – you will receive feedback each week in lab on your lab notebook and in lab work. This
         includes things such as proper preparation, safety, cleanliness, documentation of results, and teamwork.
         (20% of final grade)


COURSE SCHEDULE
       Schedule may be adjusted as semester progresses to meet learning goals more effectively
   Lab          Date                    Lecture topics                                   Lab                                  Due
     1       6/10/2019       Introduction and cell culture basics            Make media and seed cells
     2       6/11/2019            Statistical analysis with R              Pipette accuracy experiment
     3       6/12/2019            Biomaterials - hydrogels                      Hydrogel synthesis          My learning objectives
     4       6/17/2019            Writing scientific papers                    Cell attachment assay
     5       6/18/2019                   NO LECTURE                            Cell attachment assay        Pipette accuracy paper
     6       6/19/2019            Writing scientific papers               Seed cells for cytotoxicity assay
     7       6/24/2019                   NO LECTURE                              Cytotoxicity assay         Cell culture preliminary paper
     8       6/25/2019       Biomechanics / mechanical testing                   Cytotoxicity assay
     9       6/26/2019       Biomechanics / mechanical testing                  Mechanical testing
    10       7/1/2019        Biomechanics / mechanical testing                  Mechanical testing          Team cell culture paper
    11       7/2/2019        Biomechanics / mechanical testing                  Mechanical testing
    12       7/3/2019                    NO LECTURE                             Mechanical testing
             7/8/2019                    Exam Review                                  NO LABS
             7/9/2019                  Individual Exam                                NO LABS
             7/10/2019                    Team Exam                                   NO LABS               Mechanical testing paper
             7/12/2019                                                                                      Reflection essay


COURSE POLICIES
CLASS PARTICIPATION AND ATTENDANCE
Lecture and lab attendance is mandatory. Students are expected to attend all lab sessions and to show up on time.
All absences must be discussed with the Instructor prior to the session. In some cases, it may be more convenient
for a team to schedule time on a particular piece of equipment or to finish an experiment outside of normal lab
hours. These requests will be handled on a case-by-case basis. Unexcused absences/tardiness will result in losing
points on your lab work grade. No student may miss more than 3 labs for any reason and still pass the course.
In addition, the cell culture experiments will require activities outside of scheduled lab time (including feeding,
passaging, and counting cells). None of these activities will consume a lot of time, but will be required. You will be
able to sign up for cell-culture hood time on a calendar on Canvas to avoid conflict with other teams and lab times.
LAB CLEANLINESS
Before leaving lab, you must clean up after yourself. If the TA or instructor has to clean up after you, you will lose
points on your lab work grade. The instructor may decide that the whole class may lose points if the lab area is not
properly cared for.
GRADING POLICY AND PROCEDURES
Lab assignments must be submitted electronically on Canvas before the beginning of your lab session on the due
date. Lecture assignments are due before the beginning of lecture on the due date. Due dates will be made clear
when assignments are given. Any late submission will be penalized 5 points before close of business (5:00 pm) and
10 points per day after that. A student (and an assignment) will be considered “late” 20 minutes after the start of
the lab session.
REGRADE REQUESTS
Grading questions and clarifications should be discussed with the grader (either TA or instructor). If you believe an
assignment was unfairly graded by the TA, you must submit, in writing, a re-grade request to the instructor within
3 days of the assignment being returned. The instructor will re-grade the ENTIRE assignment from scratch, without
referencing the original grading.
LATE ASSIGNMENTS
No late assignments will be accepted without penalty unless approved prior to the due date of the assignment or
in exceptional cases (e.g., death in immediate family, hospitalization, etc.) Assignments will be posted via Canvas
unless otherwise specified. If there are extenuating circumstances they must be cleared in advance if possible, and
if not, supported by a doctor’s note or other official source.


GRADING
The breakdown of your final grade is as follows
                     Assignment                         Points possible           Percent of total grade
  Individual papers                                   180                    18%
           Pipette practice paper                              80                      8%
           Cell culture preliminary paper                      100                     10%
  Group papers                                        200                    20.0%
           Cell culture paper                                  100                     10%
           Mechanical testing paper                            100                     10%
  Quizzes                                             220                    22%
           Pre-lab quizzes                                     120                     12%
           Lecture quizzes                                     85                      8.5%
           Class-wide Kahoot participation                     15                      1.5%
  Exam                                                125                    12.5%
  My learning objectives                              25                     2.5%
  Reflection essay                                    50                     5%
  Lab work (20 points per week*10 weeks)              200                    20%
Note on class-wide Kahoot participation grade: We are a learning community. Each one of you is important to the
success of this learning community. If you are not in class or not participating in class, then everybody in the
learning community misses out. This is an important enough concept for me to include as a small part of your
formal feedback in your grade.
Grades will be assigned as follows. If you are within 3 points / 0.3% of the next cutoff, consideration will be given
for participation and effort to bump your grade up to the next level. I will not bump grades up automatically; you
must ask and give me the rationale why I should round your grade up.
     Grade           Cutoff         Points needed
  A               94%            940
  A-              90%            900
  B+              87%            870
  B               84%            840
  B-              80%            800
  C+              77%            770
  C               74%            740
  C-              70%            700
  D               65%            650
  F               0%             0


UNIVERSITY POLICIES
RELIGIOUS HOLY DAYS
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Q DROP POLICY
If you want to drop a class after the 12th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before the Q-drop deadline,
which typically occurs near the middle of the semester. Under Texas law, you are only allowed six Q drops while
you are in college at any public Texas institution. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
STUDENT ACCOMMODATIONS
Students with a documented disability may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of
Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-
3986 (video phone). http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/
     •   Please request a meeting as soon as possible for us to discuss any accommodations
     •   Please notify me as soon as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible
     •   Please notify me if any of the physical space is difficult for you
UNIVERSITY RESOURCES FOR STUDENTS
The university has numerous resources for students to provide assistance and support for your learning
     •   Sanger Learning and Career Center: http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
     •   University Writing Center: http://uwc.utexas.edu/
     •   Information Technology Services: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
     •   Counselling and Mental Health Center: http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
     •   Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
     •   Libraries: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/
     •   Canvas: https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/633028/pages/student-tutorials


ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
Each student in the course is expected to abide by the University of Texas Honor Code:
“As a student of The University of Texas at Austin, I shall abide by the core values of the University and uphold
academic integrity.”
Plagiarism is taken very seriously at UT. Therefore, if you use words or ideas that are not your own (or that you
have used in previous class), you must cite your sources. Otherwise you will be guilty of plagiarism and subject to
academic disciplinary action, including failure of the course. You are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic
Honesty and the University Honor Code which can be found at the following web address:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted material to an
archived database of published work to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to
determine if a paper is the student's original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn submission, the faculty
member will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized.
DO NOT MESS AROUND WITH ACADEMIC INTEGRITY. IF YOU ARE UNSURE OR CONFUSED, ASK FOR
HELP. IF YOU TURN IN AN ASSIGNMENT THAT HAS ACADEMIC INTEGRITY ISSUES, “I DIDN’T KNOW” IS
NOT AN EXCUSE.
IMPORTANT SAFETY INF ORMATION
If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students, TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior
Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be anonymous. If something doesn’t feel right – it probably
isn’t. Trust your instincts and share your concerns.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when an
alarm or alert is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside, unless told
otherwise by an official representative.
     •    Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that
          the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
     •    Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of
          class.
     •    In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do not re-enter a
          building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at
          Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
     •    Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at:
          http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
