                ALD 327/AFR 372D: Sociocultural Influences on Learning
                                              Fall 2019
                                  Unique Number: 09090/30110
                                    University of Texas at Austin
                               Dept. of Curriculum and Instruction
                                       Thursday: 1:00 – 4:00
                                              SZB 424
Instructor: Beth Link
Pronouns: she/her/hers                                       Artwork: Still I Rise by Deborah Roberts
Office Hour: Wednesday 10-11:00 or by appointment
Office: SZB 528E
Email: bethlink@utexas.edu
*This syllabus is subject to change
Required Texts
    • Gloria Ladson-Billings, The Dreamkeepers: Successful Teachers of African
        American Students
    • Te-Nehisi Coates, Between the World and Me
    • Course Packet (can be purchased from Jenn’s Copies)
Note: Please bring course packet or texts to all class meetings.
Course Goals and Objectives:
How do we learn about the world? How is our identity shaped through schooling? How do
culture, society, and politics influence schooling? In what ways does sociocultural knowledge and
ideas about what is “standard” and “normal” affect our understandings of self and others?


This course explores these questions among others through readings, critical dialogue,
service learning, creative and embodied responses, and personal reflections. We will
investigate the intersection of culture, education, and society in order to consider the
roots and effects of racial, gender, and class inequities in education and society. We will
examine sociocultural issues and inequities by interrogating curriculum, education policy,
pedagogy, schools’ relationship with communities, and teacher identity. Throughout this
course we will pay special attention to populations who have been historically and
persistently marginalized in US schools. While you may not agree with every reading or
idea we discuss, it is important that you respectfully engage with all texts/ideas with an
open and curious mind. It is expected that during this course everyone will question their
own/others’ beliefs in respectful ways grounded in a practice of listening and critical self-
reflection. We will engage in frank and critical conversations about race, gender, class,
sexual orientation, and identity throughout this course-if you are uncomfortable with
talking about these issues this course may not be a good fit for you.
Cultural Diversity Flag:
This course has a flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity
courses are intended to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the
American cultural experience. A large part of this course involves looking at issues from
many different perspectives and being open to viewpoints that may differ from your
own. Much of your grade will come from assignments covering the experiences,
beliefs, and histories of cultural groups that experience historical and persistent
marginalization.
Teaching Philosophy:
I believe that learning is a process. To truly learn we must be open to taking risks,
moving towards discomfort, and questioning what we think we know. Listening and
patiently considering the views of others moves us beyond arriving at the “right”
answer towards a more complex, nuanced, and messy understanding of the world. I
believe that to really grow we must not only take in new information, but we must also
struggle to process this information and reflect on how it fits with what we previously
knew and understood. We are all involved in a process of continual learning and
unlearning. This process is powerful, uncomfortable, and full of possibility. As learners
we may make mistakes along the way and that is part of the process too.
        I believe that teaching is a big responsibility. There is no job more important.
Therefore it is imperative that we engage with these issues in order to be ethical
practitioners confronting injustices for our students and for ourselves. As your teacher
and a fellow learner I am dedicated to listening to you, holding space for you, and
helping you engage in the process of learning/unlearning. I believe in the growth and


potential of all students and will do my best to cultivate an environment where
everyone’s voice can be heard and understood. To make this a space for important
conversations about difficult topics we should approach our work together with grace
and a grounding of respect for the humanity of your peers. I expect you to come
prepared to be reflective, discuss ideas, and ask questions.
                                COURSE POLICIES
Participation:
This course relies on your participation and effort. Your grade will reflect how engaged
and present you were in class discussions, activities, and group work. I understand that
some folks might identify as shy (I do too!) but I would challenge everyone to be present
and share their thoughts each day. Your opinions, critiques, and reflections matter. In
order to participate fully you will need to read and reflect prior to our meetings and
bring hard copies of your texts to class every day. Your daily, active, and engaged
participation is worth 15% of your final grade.
Canvas
I will be in touch with you over Canvas so be sure you have set it up to receive alerts and
notifications. You might also check to make sure it forwards correspondence to your
email. You are responsible for checking your email often during this course to receive
updates and announcements.
Attendance:
This course depends on your presence and engagement with your peers and with the
course readings. Therefore it is important that you arrive on time and prepared to
discuss the material assigned. I know we all have lives outside of class and things tend to
come up. Make sure you understand the attendance policy so you know what to expect
and can communicate with me if something comes up.
    • You may miss 1 class for any reason without penalty (as long as you are not
        scheduled to present during this class)
    • Your second unexcused absence will result in the loss of 1 point from your final
        grade.
    • A third and fourth unexcused absence will each drop your grade will drop by 1
        half letter grade (from an A to an A-, from a B- to a C+...)
    • Five or more unexcused absences will result in a failing grade.
What counts as an excused absence?
    • Illness with doctor’s note provided
    • If something else comes up that you think should count come talk to me.


Lateness
Two late arrivals equal one absence. If you know you’ll be late let me know ahead of
time. It is important that you are here and on time out of respect for our community.
Electronic Devices:
This course is fueled by your active engagement with the text and with your peers.
Therefore I will not allow laptops, cell phones, or other electronic devices to be used
during our class discussions and presentations. Out of respect for our community you
will put your laptops away and expect to show up and be present for one another in
this space. You will need access to your course texts during discussions so plan to bring
a hard copy of the readings to class each day.
Names and Personal Pronouns:
I am happy to refer to you by the name and pronoun you identify most with. Let me
know what name and pronoun you prefer (She / He / They / Ze / Etc) and I will change
it in my records.
Academic Integrity:
All the work you turn in should be your own. If you are referring to other sources or
quoting an author you must cite it both in text and in a work cited page. This course
uses APA and I recommend visiting Purdue Owl’s online citation guide to answer any
questions about specific citations. Plagerized work is unacceptable and will be
reported. Talk to me if you are unsure of how to cite something or have questions.
Late Work:
Late reading responses are not accepted. All other written assignments decrease in
value by 25% every additional day they are late.
     • Worth 75% of points if turned in later on the same due date
     • Worth 50% of points if turned in the following day
     • Worth 25% of points if turned in 2 days late
     • 3 or more days late will result in no points for that assignment
Policy on Children in Class:
I support parents and guardians attending school and want to help you succeed in this
course. While UT does not have an official policy on children in the classroom, I will
detail my personal policy below (thanks to Dr. Katie Payne and Dr. Melissa Cheyney for
creating a road map for this policy)


     •   All babies exclusively breastfeeding are welcome in class as often as you need
         to support the breastfeeding relationship.
     •   For older children and babies, I understand that illness and unforeseen
         circumstances come up that may result in lapses of childcare. I know this can put
         caregivers in a difficult position of having to miss class or arrange for alternate
         childcare. While this is not meant to be a long-term solution, you are welcome
         to bring your child to class to cover any unforeseen gaps in childcare coverage.
     •   If you do end up bringing your child to class, I request that you sit near to the
         door so that if your child needs special attention or is disrupting learning for
         others you may step outside. Non-parents should find alternate seats if
         caregivers with children need the chairs closet to the door.
     •   Please talk to me if you need accommodation with deadlines or if there are
         other ways I can support you.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
 If a fire alarm is pulled or an evacuation notice is given we are required to exit
 promptly. Here are the University’s evacuation policies:
     • Know where the exits are. Be aware that the closest exit might not be the way
         you entered.
     • If you require assistance in the event of an evacuation talk to me during our first
         week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, listen for my instructions so we can evacuate
         quickly.
Do not re-enter a building unless the Fire Department, Police Department, or Fire
Prevention Services has given you instructions to do so.
                                 STUDENT RESOURCES
Writing Center:
Writing can be challenging. The folks over at the writing center are here to support
you. The Sanger Learning Center has a writing center that can help you generate ideas,
organize your thoughts, and tell a compelling story. They also can help with editing
and citations.
Services for Students with Disabilities:
This course welcomes students of all backgrounds, identities, and abilities. If you have
circumstances that might make our learning environment or activities challenging let
me know how I can best support you. If you have accommodations or medical
information you need to share with me please let me know. I am committed to making


this an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do that if you
communicate your needs early on in the semester. I promise to keep our discussions
confidential. If you have a documented disability please contact Services for Students
with Disabilities (SSD) at (512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone).
Counseling and Mental Health Center:
We all could benefit from some extra support during tough times. You are not alone.
The University has resources that can help, and learning how to ask for help is an
important part of the college experience. If you or anyone you know is experiencing
feelings of being overwhelmed, dealing with difficult life events, or feeling anxiety or
depression please get the support you need.
http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
 If you are concerned about someone who is acting differently, you may use the
 Behavior Concerns Advice Line. Call 512-232-5050 or visit
 http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Identity Based Support and Discussion Groups:
     • Asian Voices, Tuesdays 12-2, Bellmont 220A
     • Black Voices, Wednesdays 2-3:30, Room # TBD
     • Latinx Voices, TBD
     • Queer Voices, Wednesdays 12:30-2, SAC 2.112
     • Finding Our Voices: A Women of Color Discussion Group, Mondays 12:30-2,
        SAC 2.112
     • International Student Discussion Group, Fridays 2-3:30, CMHC SSB 5th Floor
*Find more groups and additional information at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/groups.html
Other Resources:
     • ITS: http://www.utexas.edu/its/
     • Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
     • Nurse Advice Line: 512-475-6877 All day every day
     • Gender and Sexuality Center: http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/
     • Multicultural Engagement Center:
        http://diversity.utexas.edu/multiculturalengagement/
Tips on engaging with the texts:
     • Pre-read and look for the organization of main ideas first
     • Underline/highlight passages you find interesting or important


   •   Circle words you want to look up or people who seem important
   •   Write thoughts or questions in the margins (unless it’s a library book J)
   •   After reading look through again to reflect on the case the author made
           o Do you agree/disagree?
           o What questions do you still have?
           o Write down some thoughts while they are still fresh in your mind
                              COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
Self-Reflective Journals                                               5 points
You are required to have a journal for this course. Every class will begin and end with 5
minutes of personal reflection time. This is meant to be a private moment of processing,
questioning, checking in with yourself and exploring new ideas and thoughts while they
are fresh in your mind. For our purposes digital journals will not be permitted, the
process of connecting with the page and the materials is important here. I welcome
journal responses that incorporate visual imagery as well as text. This journal is meant to
be a record of a growth and dialogue with yourself over time. Journals will be graded for
completion and depth of reflection throughout the course.
Weekly Reading Responses                                                     10 points
Every week on Canvas (unless otherwise noted) you should expect to turn in a critical
response to the readings. These critical responses are due the day before class (on
Wednesday by 11:59pm). Your responses should include:
   • At least 1 paragraph (4+ sentences) with specific quotes or text references
       (with APA citations)
           o A strong response might contain…
                  § Connections to other course texts/ideas/discussions
                  § Reflections on how this pertains to your own experience with
                      teaching and schooling
                  § A well-reasoned argument using evidence to support why you
                      agree or disagree with the author’s stance.
   • 1 question you are wondering about (open-ended, juicy questions we can
       discuss in class)
           o A strong question is…
                  § Open ended (should not be answerable with yes/no)
                  § Engages in higher order thinking and may lead to more questions
This response should reflect a deep and critical engagement with the texts and ideas.


Submit a pdf, .doc or .docx file under Assignments on Canvas for the date of class. No
late assignments will be accepted.
*During weeks where other large assignments are due you will not need to do a write
up, just submit 2 questions you are pondering that connect to the ideas in the texts.
Autobiographical Essay                                                  15 points
In this personal autobiographic essay you will reflect on your own identity and past
experiences and connect those to the topics we’ve discussed in class. How has your own
identity development (racial, gendered, classed etc…) been influenced by the social and
cultural processes in education we’ve been studying? Are there formative experiences
from your education (Pre-K through college) that informed your identity development?
How were certain paths or ideas made visible or invisible in your own educational
experiences?
Service Learning
This course includes a 15-hour service-learning component, which you need to
complete in order to receive credit for class. It’s your responsibility to contact one of
the sites on the Service Learning Opportunities list (or an equivalent site with my
approval) to complete your volunteer service learning. You’ll need the supervising staff
member at your site to sign off on the form certifying that you have completed the
required hours.
Service Learning Analysis
Analysis Part 1                                                         10 points
This paper is a 3-4 page, double spaced, reflective analysis that addresses the
following prompts in essay form:
• Describe the context of your service learning. What are the assets of the community
    you work in?
• What is the mission of this organization? How does their work connect to social
    justice that aims to transform the social conditions of the community it serves?
• What is your role at the site?
• How do you see our course readings connecting to your work here? Give 2-3
    examples with citations.
Analysis Part 2                                                         15 points
This assignment gives you a chance to apply the ideas from the course.
    1. Interview
        • Arrange a minimum 20-minute interview with a parent or community
            leader/elder to learn about their family/community history and their values


          concerning education and schooling. Before the interview submit 5 interview
          questions for approval. Please select a parent or community member who is
          comfortable speaking with you (even if through an interpreter) and someone
          who gives consent to you recording or taking notes in order to complete
          your class assignment.
      • Analyze your interview recording and notes to determine the community
          member’s individual and/or community cultural wealth.
      2. Choose one creative response from the options below to apply the ideas
          from the course to your learning in the community
             • Option 1: Lesson Plan
                     o Based on the assets identified through your interview, how
                        might you create a classroom lesson that acknowledges, values,
                        and provides space for this cultural wealth in the classroom?
                        Consider how you might highlight these assets and engage
                        with ideas from the course in a k-12 classroom setting. This
                        lesson can take place in the actual classroom or in the
                        community, can involve any discipline/s, and can involve
                        imagined resources and support. Pie in the sky!
             • Option 2: Creative Response
                     o Design a visual way to illustrate the assets identified in your
                        interview and connect them to your own learning experience at
                        the site. Artistic mediums could include painting, photography,
                        zines, film/animation, sculpture, comics etc…or you may
                        choose to develop a musical, dance, or theatre-based
                        response. Creative Responses should be paired with a
                        reflection bringing in ideas from the course. The involvement of
                        photographs/filming of participants and community members
                        may require an additional consent form.
             • Option 3: Written Reflection
                     o Consider what you have learned at this site and through your
                        interview. What forms of cultural and community wealth did
                        your interview reveal? Did you see evidence of these assets in
                        your service learning? Tie in ideas from the course throughout
                        your reflection.
Opening Presentations                                                        10 Points
Working with a partner you will present at the beginning of one class session. This
presentation should not be a summary of the text, but rather analyze the text to explore an
extension or a connection you see. How might these ideas connect to education/social


issues today? How might you extend these ideas to analyze popular media/culture/trends?
Both partners should have equitable roles in the presentation. Your presentation should
have some visual component: power point, prezi, artifacts, photos, video clips (under 2
minutes) etc. Presentations should be 7-10 minutes long and end with 3-4 compelling,
open-ended questions for us to take up as a class. Be prepared with a rough idea of your
topic the week prior to your presentation.
Final Reflective Essay                                                        20 Points
In this final essay reflect on what you have learned in this course (discussions, service
learning, and readings). How has this course affected your thinking about teaching and
learning? This reflection is open-ended and should honestly describe your own intellectual
and emotional growth during this course. You may wish to look back over your journal for
evidence of this growth. Please be specific and pinpoint readings, dialogues, or
experiences that challenged you or shifted your perspective in some way.
Assignment                                        Points
Self Reflective Journals                          5
Weekly Reading Responses                          10
Autobiographical Essay                            15
Service Learning Analysis 1                       10
Service Learning Analysis 2                       15
Opening Presentation                              10
Final Reflective Essay                            20
Participation                                     15
Grade Scale
93-100 points: A
90-92.9 points: A-
87-89.9 points: B+
83-86.9 points: B
80-82.9 points: B-
77-79.9 points: C+
73-76.9 points: C
70-72.9 points: C-
60-69.9 points: D
Below 60 points: F


                              SEMESTER SCHEDULE
 Date             Topic                            Readings                 Due
Week  Introductions                  James Baldwin: A Talk to Teachers Presentation
1     What are sociocultural                                           sign-up sheet
8/29  influences?
      How do sociocultural factors                                     Office visit
      influence education?                                             sign up sheet
Week  Examining the Roots            Oakes et al: Ch. 2: History and   Introduction
2     of Education in                Culture (pp. 30 – 57)
                                                                       Letter (hand-
9/5   America                                                          written, no
      What is the history of         Adams- Foundational               length
      Education in America?          Considerations: The Deep Meaning  requirement)
      What are the purposes of
      schooling?
                                     of Native American Schooling
                                                                       RR #1
Week  Power and Ideology in Peter McLaren: Selections from Life        Vocabulary
                                                                       Sheet
3     Schooling                      in Schools (pp. 10-19 & Ch. 5)
9/12  How does ideology, culture,
                                                                       RR #2
      and class impact our work in   Paulo Freire: Chapter 2 of
      schools?
      How can educators critically
                                     Pedagogy of the Oppressed         Site selection
                                                                       due
      engage with knowledge and
      power in our classrooms and
      curriculum?
Week  Power and Ideology in Jean Anyon: Social Class and the           RR #3
4     Schooling                      Hidden Curriculum of Work
9/19  How are systems of
      dominance and control
                                     Noguera: Selections from City
      reproduced in education?
      What are the possibilities for
                                     Schools and the American Dream
      sharing power in schooling?
Week  Race, Racism, and              Ta-Nehisi Coates: Between the     RR #4
5     Cultural Capital               World and Me (part I)
9/26  What assumptions do
      educators bring into           Weiner: Challenging Deficit
      schooling?
      Whose knowledge counts,
                                     Thinking
      whose is discounted in
      schools?                       Tara Yosso: Whose Culture Has


                                   Capital?
Week  Race, Racism, and            Ta-Nehisi Coates: Between the        RR #5
6     Cultural Capital             World and Me (part II and III)
10/3  How is identity constructed
      in relation to power?
                                   Watch: I am Not Your Negro
      How does race and ethnicity
      impact perspectives on
      schooling?
Week  Race, Racism, and            Sherry Marx: Revealing the Invisible Autobio-
                                                                        graphical
7     Cultural Capital             (Intro, Ch. 1)
                                                                        Essay Due
10/10 What ideas are made
      in/visible in schools and    Peggy McIntosh, Unpacking the        2 Qs
      curriculum?
      How does power work
                                   Invisible Backpack
      through people and
      institutions in unseen ways?
      How might we disrupt it?
Week  Gender and Desire in         Barrie Thorn, Gender Play            RR #6
8     Schooling
10/17 What do we learn about       Monique Morris- Pushout -Intro and
      gender in schools?           Chapter 1
      How do these gendered
      notions impact students?
Week  Gender and Desire in         Garcia: Now why do you want to       RR #7
9     Schooling                    know about that?
10/24 How is desire shaped by
      schooling?
                                   Anzaldúa, G.: from
      How are our ideas of desire
      and “normalcy” influenced
                                   Borderlands/LaFrontera (Chapter 2)
      by schooling?
                                   Cris Mayo: The Tolerance that Dare
                                   Not Speak Its Name
Week  Culture, Curriculum          Gloria Ladson-Billings- Selections   Service
10    and Control                  from Dreamkeepers (Ch. 2 -4)         Learning
                                                                        Analysis I
10/31 What is the value in
      expanding the single story?
                                                                        2 Qs
      How can students’ culture
      inform curriculum and


      pedagogy?
      Culture, Curriculum,        Gloria Ladson-Billings- Selections
Week                                                                   RR #8
      and Control                 from Dreamkeepers (Ch. 5 -7)
11    What is culturally relevant                                      Interview
      pedagogy? What is it not?                                        Questions
11/7  How does CRP disrupt our                                         Due
      ideas about teaching and
      knowledge?
Week  Culture, Curriculum,        Valenzuela, Chapter 3 (partial): pp. RR #9
12    and Control                 75-113; Chapter 5 (partial) pp. 161-
11/14 How do notions of control   181
      and resistance affect
      students?
                                  Daniel Solórzano & Dolores
      How might we imagine a
      classroom space that moves  Delgado Bernal: “Examining
      beyond a desire to control  transformational resistance”
      and ‘manage’ students?
Week  Teaching as Possibility     Kumashiro: Towards a theory of       RR #10
13    How is teacher identity     Anti-Oppressive Pedagogy
11/21 formed?
      How does anti-oppressive
      teaching look in our
                                  Britzman: Cultural Myths and the
      classrooms and              Making of the Teacher
      communities?
                                       11/28
                                    FALL BREAK
Week  Teaching as Possibility     Maxine Greene: “Teaching as          Service
14    How can we sustain          Possibility” and Chapter 1 “Seeking  Learning
      ourselves and our                                                Analysis 2
12/5                              Contexts”                            & Comp
      communities of practice?
      What intentions/ideas will                                       Form
      guide you as you move       bell hooks: Engaged Pedagogy
      beyond this course?         from Teaching to Transgress          2 Qs
                                                                       Final
                                                                       Reflective
                                                                       Essay Due
                                                                       December
                                                                       12th.
