                                                                          1/14/20 8:18 AM
JAPANESE CONCEPTS OF SELF/BODY
RS352, ANS 372, ANT324L Spring 2020
The objective of this course is to develop a detailed understanding of how Japanese
people conceptualize and represent ideas about self, identity, and the human body by
navigating some of the extensive anthropological literature that has been written on
Japanese conceptualizations of self and body. The “self” has been one of the central
themes in ethnographic writing about Japan, ever since Ruth Benedict’s work The
Chrysanthemum and the Sword was published in the 1940’s. We will consider how
Japanese educational approaches contribute to the formation of particular forms of
behavior; how selves change over the life course; Japanese conceptualizations of the
body and person; and how Japanese ideas about self and body are expressed in medical
practices. The course has the deeper aim of providing a framework through which we
can contemplate what it is to be a human and how culture contributes to the
conceptualization of the human person.
The first 2/3 (roughly) of the semester will be devoted to intensive reading, lectures, and
discussion. The last 1/3 of the semester will be devoted to students teaching the class.
Required Texts
You are expected to read the following books. There should be easily acquired used
copies of these books available on Amazon or at other Internet sites.
    •   LONG DEFEAT
        9780190239169
        BY HASHIMOTO, AKIKO
    •   THE ANATOMY OF DEPENDENCE
        9781568365510
        BY DOI, TAKEO
    •   DEAF IN JAPAN : SIGNING AND THE POLITICS OF IDENTITY
        9780801473562
        BY NAKAMURA, KAREN
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                              1


                                                                            1/14/20 8:18 AM
COURSE ASSIGNMENTS
This class is “front loaded,” by which I mean all of the readings and exams are completed
in the first 2/3 of the class. I do this to make the end of the semester less hectic for my
students and to help you focus on our learning in this course. During the final 1/3 of the
class, the only requirements you will have are to be in class (attendance will be taken—
you will lose 10 points off your final point total for the semester for each class
missed once we have started the class teaching segment of the semester) and to teach
class for 20 minutes once during that period. There will be no readings and no other
expectations. There is no final exam in this class. The teaching requirement is explained
in detail below and will be discussed in class.
Assignment                    Total Possible          Percentage of           Due Date
                              Points                  Grade
Second week exam              300                     30                      Available 1/30,
                                                                              due 2/2 by
                                                                              23:59
Class Teaching                200                     20                      Last five weeks
                  Proposal You must turn in a         There is no grade       This is due on
                              brief proposal (1       on this assignment,     2/27.
                              page) outlining the     but if you do not
                              topic you want to       turn it in by the
                              research and teach.     required date, you
                              This is worth 15% of    cannot pass the
                              the entire grade.       class teaching
                                                      assignment.
Second exam                   500                     50                      Available 3/26,
                                                                              due 3/29 by
                                                                              23:59
Total                         1000                    100
Class Teaching: You are required to develop a project in which you present your own
research to the class. This project entails teaching the class for approximately 30 minutes
and may be done either on your own or with a partner (this is up to you). You may
develop this on any topic related to Japanese concepts of self and body, as long as your
topic does not significantly overlap with lectures in the class or with the topics of other
student teaching sessions. How you approach teaching is up to you—you may use
PowerPoint, develop group discussions, have a debate. The format is entirely of your
choosing and you are encouraged to be creative and engage the class. You will be graded
on two key criteria: 1) topic and quality of information you present (accuracy matters),
and 2) ability to engage the class.
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                               2


                                                                                        1/14/20 8:18 AM
Second week and Mid-term Examinations: You will be given two take-home
examinations. There is no final exam in this class. The exams will involve your own
critical thinking, but you should expect to be required to engage with the readings, thus it
is important to keep up with readings throughout the semester.
STANDARDS AND EXPECTATIONS
Grades are assigned as follows: 93-100 = A; 90 – 92.9 = A-, 88 – 89.9 = B+, 83 – 87.9 =
B, 80 – 82.9 = B-; 78 – 79.9 = C+, 73 – 77.9 = C, 70 – 72.9 = C-; 68 – 69.9 = D+, 63 –
67.9 = D, 60 – 62.9 = D-; below 60 = F. There is no scaling of grades. There are no extra
credit assignments in this class. In general, I do not “bump” up final grades that are
borderline. An 89 is a B+, a 79 is a C+, etc. I may make exceptions for students who
have been regular contributors to class discussion.
GRADING RUBRIC
Grade               Expectations/Standards
A, A-               The grade of A will be only given for exemplary work. The paper, presentation, or exam
                    demonstrates a detailed understanding of the topic and provides a creative and scholarly
                    analysis of the issues. There is a clear thesis and the thesis is well supported. It is clearly
                    written, without typographical errors, spelling mistakes, or grammatical errors.
B+, B, B-           This grade will be given to an exam, presentation, or paper that presents material clearly,
                    shows a basic understanding of the topic and provides a clear analysis of the issues. It is well
                    written, but may have some typographical errors, spelling mistakes, or grammatical problems
                    (there are few, however). There is room for improvement in both presentation and
                    content/structure of the argument.
C+, C, C-           This grade will be given to a product that shows some problems in terms of understanding and
                    analyzing the materials. There are problems with writing, some typographical errors, spelling
                    mistakes, or grammatical problems. These are sufficient to hinder understanding of the
                    writing and argument. There are problems in the argument and its supporting data.
D+, D, D-           This is given when there are significant problems related to understanding and analysis of
                    materials. The argument is poorly presented or is very weak. There are major problems with
                    writing, presentation style, spelling, grammar, etc.
F                   This grade is given when there are extremely serious deficiencies related to understanding and
                    analysis of the topic at hand and there are major problems with writing, presentation style,
                    spelling, grammar, etc. The grade F indicates a very serious deficiency in the paper,
                    presentation, or exam.
A-/B+, B-/C+, C-    Grades such as A/B indicate a paper, presentation, or exam that is borderline. This means that
/D+                 the paper is between the two grades. An A/B indicates the paper, presentation, exam, etc. is
                    closer to an A; a B/A indicates it is closer to a B.
Attendance
There is no formal attendance policy for the first 2/3 (roughly) of this class. Whether or
not you come is entirely up to you. I view college students as adults, thus you are
responsible for managing your time and attending to your responsibilities. At no time
will I take attendance, nor should you worry about telling me when you are going to miss
class. You do not need to send me an email when you are missing class. Once work on
presentations begins, you will be expected to be in class and attendance will be taken.
Each class missed will lead to the deduction of 10 points from your final point total for
the semester. If you do not attend class on the date that your group is presenting, you will
receive a zero for that assignment unless there is a good reason, such as a documented
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                                                3


                                                                              1/14/20 8:18 AM
emergency. While attendance is not mandatory, you should expect that if you routinely
miss class, your grade will suffer due to a lack of understanding key materials. Lectures
and discussions are an important part of the learning that takes place in this class. Also,
if you regularly miss class and you end up with a borderline grade (such as a 79.9), I
guarantee that I will not bump you up to the next grade. However, if you attend class
regularly and contribute, then it is likely that you will receive the higher grade.
Ground Rules for the Course
    1. NO LOBBYING FOR INCREASES IN YOUR GRADES. I will not under any
        conditions entertain emails or other contacts that involve attempts to lobby for a
        grade. For example, if you calculate your final grade for the semester and it is a
        79.4, do not send me an email (or any other communication) trying to explain
        why you think you deserve a B-. Your grade is based on your work, not on your
        capacity to convince me that you deserve a particular grade. If you disagree with
        your grade, you should go through the process of appeal outlined below.
    2. NO OFFERING PRESENTS TO THE PROFESSOR OR TA. Although I
        appreciate it when a student has enjoyed the class and wishes to thank me or my
        TA with a gift, the rules of the university forbid this, and I also do not wish to
        receive such presents as they represent a conflict of interest. Please do not offer
        any sort of present—including candy, baked goods, etc.—at any time prior to,
        during, of after the course has ended. Gifts brought to my office will be refused
        and gifts left in my mailbox will be discarded.
    3. YOU MUST UNDERSTAND WHAT CONSTITUTES ACADEMIC
        INTEGRITY. You should to read and understand the academic dishonesty site
        provided by Student Judicial Services. This is your responsibility. The URL is
        http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
    4. YOU ARE RESPONSIBLE FOR YOUR LEARNING. Your role as a student is
        to keep up with readings, to be engaged in class discussions and lectures, to
        evaluate your learning and progress, and to challenge other students and the
        professor to think in new ways. You should think about what we cover in class
        and discuss it with other students in the class or with friends. My primary role as
        professor is to guide you in the process of understanding the materials we cover
        and to challenge you with new ways of thinking about and seeing the world. My
        secondary role as professor is to evaluate your work on the basis of how well I
        think you have carried out your role as a student—evident through the quality of
        your written work and other assignments. If you and I carry out our roles
        responsibly and successfully, then we all will have learned to think in new ways
        by the end of the term—and that is the goal of education.
Policy on Examination and Assignment Schedule: Examinations are to be taken on
the assigned date and time and assignments are to be turned in on the assigned date.
    q   There will be no make-up exams in this class; if you miss an exam due date, you
        will receive a zero. If you turn in a paper late, it will receive the grade of zero.
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                               4


                                                                              1/14/20 8:18 AM
     q   If an examination or other due date conflicts with a religious holiday, you must
         contact the instructor prior to that date to arrange an alternative date to take the
         exam. If you have some type of important event, and can prove it, I will be happy
         to discuss an alternate date and time for you to take your exam—discussing it
         does not necessarily mean that I will approve the change in exam dates. You
         must give at least five business days prior notice in order to receive an exception
         to an exam date.
     q   Emergencies will be handled on a case-by-case basis, but will require evidence
         proving that you actually encountered a situation that prevented you from taking
         the exam or turning in the paper. Excuses such as being confused about the date
         of the exam or failing to wake-up early enough to make it to class on an exam day
         will most likely be met with laughter, will not be considered acceptable, and will
         receive a grade of zero.
     q   Have someone proofread all written materials that you submit to class both for
         typographical errors and also to help you with writing and developing your ideas.
Appealing Grades
It is important to understand that you earn your grades on assignments and exams and
that you earn your final grade for the course—I do not assign grades to your work, rather,
based upon the quality of the work you turn in, I arrive at an opinion about the grade
which you have earned. The grade you earn is based upon the quality of the work you
turn in—there are no other criteria that are used to arrive at a grade.
Should you find that you disagree with me on a grade you receive for an examination or
other assignment you turn in, you have the option of appealing your grade. If you want
to appeal your grade, you must follow the steps below within two days of my returning
the graded assignments. If you are not in class to receive the returned assignment, you
still have only two days from the date that I return it—you do not have two days from the
date that you receive your graded assignment (once I have returned the assignment to the
class, the clock is ticking). Follow these directions—if you do not follow the directions, I
may not be willing to consider your appeal:
     •   Provide the original assignment with any comments I have written on it, including
         the grade given. Keep a copy for yourself.
     •   Include a written explanation of why you believe that you have earned a grade
         different from the one I believe you have earned. I will assume that you will be
         appealing for a higher grade, but should you want to lower your grade, you are
         welcome to appeal for that as well. The written explanation should be no more
         than two paragraphs in length—it must be typed (single space is fine). Part of the
         success of your appeal will be based upon the quality of your argument as to why
         the grade I believe you earned is not appropriate. In your argument, you must
         indicate the exact grade that you believe you earned and explain why you believe
         this to be the case.
             o Keep in mind that the amount of time or effort you put into an assignment
                  is not an adequate reason for changing a grade. If you spend four years
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                                5


                                                                            1/14/20 8:18 AM
                working on something and turn in a product of poor quality, you will still
                receive a low grade. While there is no question that there is a correlation
                between the amount of work and time you put into an assignment and the
                grade you earn, as an instructor I cannot take into account how much
                time/effort you put into the assignment beyond the evident quality of the
                work you turn in. If you appeal your grade on the basis of the fact that
                you put a lot of work into the assignment, do not expect to receive a
                positive response. I may sympathize with you and will be more than
                happy to discuss how you can improve the quality of your work; but I am
                unlikely to change your grade.
            o Also keep in mind that asking me to “round up” a grade that is close to a
                higher grade is not considered an acceptable appeal. You may appeal a
                grade only when you believe that I have made an error in grading or have
                been unfair in my conclusion about the grade you have earned.
            o NOTE: In the case of a simple error in calculating your grade, you do not
                need to go through the above process. Simply see me after class and point
                out the error.
    •   You may be asked to come to my office hours to discuss your appeal. If this
        happens, come prepared to discuss/debate your appeal and to support your
        argument.
    •   Should you wish to discuss an appeal prior to actually submitting it, you are
        welcome to do so during my office hours (keep in mind that you only have two
        days in which to submit the appeal).
    •   If you want to appeal your final grade, you must provide all original graded
        materials for the semester to the instructor within five days of grades being posted
        to the online system. All of the above apply to appeals of final grades.
    •   Appealing a grade means that you are requesting that I re-evaluate your
        assignment(s) and the grade I believe you have earned. It is possible, although
        unlikely, that I will lower your grade if I feel that you have earned a grade that is
        lower than the one I original believed to be appropriate.
POLICY ON ACADEMIC INTEGRITY
You are expected to adhere to university requirements on academic honesty and integrity.
Behaviors such as plagiarism, unauthorized collaboration, copying of another student’s
work, or cheating on examinations in any form will be viewed as an offense against the
academic community and will be dealt with accordingly. If you are uncertain about what
constitutes academic integrity (for example, if you are uncertain about what constitutes
plagiarism), you can either meet with the instructor or visit the web site of Student
Judicial Services (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/academicintegrity.php). In
the event that a student is found engaging in behavior that violates university policies on
academic integrity, as stipulated by the office of Student Judicial Services, the student
will receive the grade of F for the course and will be reported to the office of Student
Judicial Services, where further disciplinary action may be taken. There will be no
exceptions.
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                                6


                                                                               1/14/20 8:18 AM
UNIVERSITY ELECTRONIC NOTIFICATION POLICY
All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail student
notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the University informed as to
changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent
and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related communications,
recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-
mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will
be responsible for checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements.
POLICY ON LAPTOPS AND OTHER TECHNOLOGY USAGE IN CLASS
    •    You are encouraged to bring your laptop computer to class to use for taking notes.
         However, I do not want you to surf the web or otherwise use your computer for
         things not related to class while I am lecturing. Aside from the fact that it is rude,
         it is distracting to other students (particularly those behind you during lectures)
         and also distracts YOU from the lecture or discussion. My lectures may be
         boring, but I still expect you to pay attention (or at least to do a good imitation of
         paying attention). Don’t think that because I cannot see your screen, I don’t have
         any idea that you are surfing the web. It is actually quite easy to tell when people
         are surfing the web simply by looking at their faces. If I find that a student is not
         adhering to this policy, I will ask the student to meet me during office hours to
         discuss an appropriate penalty. Expect a minimum of a 5% reduction in your
         final grade if you are caught using your laptop during class for purposes unrelated
         to the course. You are welcome to surf the web to look for information directly
         related to what we are discussing in class.
    •    Please turn off your cell phone before coming to class, unless you don’t mind my
         stopping class and asking you to answer a call while we all wait and listen (yes,
         I’ve done it before).
    •    Some students, particularly those for whom English is not their first language,
         may wish to record lectures. You are welcome to do so.
DOCUMENTED DISABILITY POLICY
Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter that
documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the
Office of the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf
or hard of hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor at the beginning of
the semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. We do not
have any in-class exams, however, if you need any sort of special accommodation for the
take-home exams, you need to give me at least five business days notice so that we can
work out what you need. See following website for more information:
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                                  7


                                                                            1/14/20 8:18 AM
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php.
Office Hours
My office hours for this semester are listed at the beginning of this syllabus. I will
normally be in my office during those hours; however, I am often also in my office at
other times. You are free to visit my office at any time—you are not limited to visiting
during office hours. If the door is shut, just knock. If I am busy (with meetings, etc.)
outside of office hours, I will let you know or I won’t answer the door.
Tentative Schedule
This is a tentative schedule. The course is intended as an exploration of ideas and as a
means of developing critical thinking skills. It is unlikely that we will adhere precisely to
this schedule, as I want the class to head into areas of interest that may slow things down.
Keep up with the readings and you will be all set at exam times. If we get far off of
schedule, I will revamp it and post it to Canvas. Readings that are marked with the
symbol # are available on Canvas. Readings should be completed by Monday of each
week, with the exception of week 1.
 Week 1         1/21, 23: Introduction
#Scheper-Hughes, Nancy and Margaret Lock. 1987. The Mindful Body: A
Prolegomenon to Future Work in Medical Anthropology. Medical Anthropology
Quarterly 1(1):1-36.
Week 2          1/28 – 1/30: Concepts of Self in the West
You should be reading ahead during this week.
 Week 3         2/4 – 2/6: Anthropology of Self
You should be reading ahead during this week.
 Week 4         2/11-13: Early Perspectives on Japanese Concepts of Self
#Benedict, Chapters 2, 3, 9, and 11
Week 5          2/18-20: The War and the Creation of Modern Japan
Hashimoto’s book must be read in its entirety by 2/18.
Week 6          2/25-27: Family and Self
#Traphagan, John. The Liminal Family: Return Migration and Intergenerational
                Conflict in Japan. Journal of Anthropological Research.
Week 7          3/3 - 5: Education and Self Cultivation
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                              8


                                                                  1/14/20 8:18 AM
#Hoffman, Diane. Pedagogies of Self in American and Japanese Early Childhood
              Education: A Critical Conceptual Analysis
Week 8        3/10 - 12: Education and Self Development
#Peak, Lois. Learning to Become Part of the Group: The Japanese Child's Transition to
              Preschool Life
Week 9        3/17 - 19: Presentation of Self
You should be reading The Anatomy of Dependence
Week 10       3/24 - 26: Presentation of Self
The Anatomy of Dependence, must be completed by 3/24
Week 11       3/31 – 4/2: Mental Illness
Nakamura, Chapters 1 - 3
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                      9


                                                                        1/14/20 8:18 AM
Week 12        4/7 – 4/9: Mental Illness
Nakamura, Chapters 4 – end
Week 13        4/21 – 4/23: Class teaching begins—from this point onward, you will
lose 10 points on your final point total for the class for each class missed
Week 14        4/28-30:
Class Teaching
Week 15        5/5 – 5/7:
Class Teaching
Japanese Concepts of Self/Body                                                        10
