                                       UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS at AUSTIN
                               AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY TO CIVIL WAR
                     History 357C, African American Studies 357C, American Studies 321E
                                      Fall 2019—11:00-12:30 GAR 1.126
                                            Professor Juliet E.K. Walker
Professor Juliet E.K. Walker                                                                   Office Hours
Office: Garrison 2-136                                                                          TTH, 10:00-11:00
512-471-5581                                                                                    TTH 12:30--2:00 PM
jekwalker@austin.utexas.edu                                                                    .W By appointment
"This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the university
core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal
responsibility, and social responsibility."
PURPOSE OF COURSE
This upper division course examines the history of African Americans in the United States from the West African Heritage to the
Civil War and provides a critical examination on central issues under scholarly debate in the reconstruction of the Black experience
in America. The course thus engages the debate on the evolution of African-American slavery as a social, economic and political
institution, with special focus on antebellum slavery, including plantation slavery, industrial slavery, and urban slavery in addition
to slave culture.
Also, the course assesses the institutional development of the free black community, during the age of slavery, with emphasis on
free black protest activities, organizations, and leaders. Equally important, information is provided on the business and
entrepreneurial activities of both slave and free blacks before the Civil War to underscore the long historic tradition of black
economic self-help. Invariably, those slaves who purchased their freedom were slaves involved in various business enterprises.
Also emphasized in the course are the various ways in which slave and free black women responded to slavery and racism before
the Civil War, giving consideration to gender issues within the intersection of the dynamics of race, class, and sex.
The course format is primarily lecture, with informal class discussion, utilizing in part the Socratic method of teaching/pedagogy
(especially useful for students who are pre-law), as we examine topics that broaden historical consciousness and critical thinking
skills, such as: the role Africans played in the Atlantic slave trade; the historical forces that contributed to the origin of racism in
Colonial America; the anomaly of black plantation slave owners in a race-based slave society; how white economic disparities
and hegemonic masculinities were played out in class subordination and racial oppression; why race takes precedence over class
in assessing the black historical experience; the extent to which judicial cases provide a pragmatic assessment of the realities of
slave life; the extent to which American law supported the racial subordination of slave and free blacks; whether or not the
economic and political imperatives that prompted antebellum African American settlement in West Africa can be considered
colonialist in design and intent.
These and other questions will bring to the forefront the central issue of the agency of African Americans in their attempts to
survive racism and slavery in attempts forge their own political and economic liberation. This course, consequently, emphasizes
both the deconstruction of prevailing assessments and interpretations of the African American experience as well as provides
information for a new reconstruction of the Black Experience from slavery to freedom. In each instance, emphasis will be on
exploring different historical interpretations of the Black Experience.
                                                              1


African American slaves did not lead a monolithic slave experience. They shared life-time, hereditary, involuntary servitude, racial
oppression and subordination. But many manipulated the institution and slave codes in attempts to mitigate that oppression.
Others, such as Nat Turner and Dred Scott used other means to bring about an end to their servitude, while free blacks also
fought to end slavery as well as improve their economic, societal and legal status.
The primary purposes of this course, then, are 1) to develop an understanding of the nature of historical inquiry; 2). to heighten
historical consciousness 3), encourage critical thinking and analysis of historical material; and. 4) to recognizing the difference
between what might have happened and what actually happened to blacks, both slave and free blacks during the age of slavery
to the Civil War.
REQUIRED BOOKS
Franklin, John Hope and Higginbotham, E. From Slavery to Freedom: A History of African Americans
Holt, Thomas, Barkely-Brown, E. and Patterson, T. Major Problems in African American History, Vol 1
Horton, James, Horton, L., In Hope of Liberty: Culture, Community, Protest among Northern Free Blacks, 1700-1860
Owens, Leslie, This Species of Property: Slave Life and Culture in the Old South
Walker, Juliet E. K., The History of Black Business in America: Capitalism, Race, Entrepreneurship, Vol 1
Washington, Harriet A., Medical Apartheid: The Dark History of Medical Experimentation on Black Americans from
                       Colonial Times to the Present.
COURSE REQUIREMENTS                                  DATE DUE                      PERCENT OF GRADE
EXTRA CREDIT (Museum Visit Report)                    Sept 24                             5%
EXAM I (take-home Oct 10)                             OCT 15                             30%
MOVIE/BOOK CRITICAL REVIEW                            DEC 3                                5%
RESEARCH PAPER                                        DEC 5                             30%
EXAM 2 (Take-Home Dec 12)                             DEC 12                             30%
CLASS PARTICIPATION                                                                     5-10%
EXAMS
Class lecture outlines include “consider” questions, some of which will be on the exams. Students are strongly encouraged to
prepare for the exams by answering the “consider” questions at the end of each week’s lectures. Students are also
encouraged, but not required, to discuss their answers with me for information on whether answers are correct. Also, each exam
will include questions on the video documentaries shown in class.
                                                           2


     Your research papers, due BY DEC 5. NO LATE PAPERS ACCEPTED –
     The Second Exam is a take-home exam, distributed Thursday, Dec 5; due Thursday, Dec. 12; 11:00AM-2:00 PM.
      NO LATE EXAMS ACCEPTED!
     MOVIE/BOOK CRITICAL HISTORICAL REVIEW Up to ten (10) points on the following assignment.
     Assignment—From your perspective, based on the assigned readings on slaves and free blacks, write a three-four page
     comparative critical review assessment of the extent to which the movie did or did not expand your knowledge of the historical
     conditions of both slave and free blacks in the three decades before the Civil War including: one page summarizing the movie;
     the second page and third page critiquing it from the perspective of: a) how the movie broadened your knowledge of the topic;
     and, b) how, from your assigned readings, class lectures and the movie, the combination of historical information from these
     various sources strengthened your intellectual assessment of historical information on the historical reality of African Americans,
     both slave and free before the Civil War. Or, using the above criteria, you can read and review the following novel by Colson
     Whitehead, The Underground Railroad (Oprah's Book Club): A Novel “In Whitehead’s ingenious conception, the Underground
     Railroad is no mere metaphor—engineers and conductors operate a secret network of tracks and tunnels beneath the Southern soil.”
     RESEARCH PAPERS
     The research paper (TOPICS TO BE DISCUSSED IN CLASS AND DURING OFFICE
     HOURS) will be based on both primary and secondary source materials. .
      A Research Paper Guide will be provided with specified dates that must be met in researching and writing term paper.
     You will have ten weeks to research and write your paper. Research topics can be on issues regarding slavery as well
     as topics regarding comparative slavery. Also, antebellum newspapers, both black and white can be used as primary
     sources, comparing the difference in information on particular historic events. Research papers can include topics on
     free blacks, including information on the goals of black leaders, both men and women, organizations to which they
     belonged, if any, their various kinds of protest activities, supporters, opposition, including a discussion of their
     successes and/or failures. Also, the paper will assess the realities of their protest within the historic conditions of the
     times and whether or not their protest made a difference. Other research paper topics that can be considered are:
     Causes of Civil War; White or/and Black Attitudes Towards Slavery; Blacks and International Issues,
     Emigration/Colonization; Abolitionism; Dred Scott Decision; John Brown's Raid; Lincoln's Election; Black/Native
     American relationships, Free Blacks in the South/West/North/Texas. Or, students can compare the economic
     conditions of blacks before the Civil War with those of Mexicans in Texas and California and Chinese in California.
     Also, students can compare 19th century conditions of slaves and free blacks, both men and women, in USA with those
     in Latin America. Another comparison can be that of the conditions of fugitive slaves to those of undocumented
     immigrants as well as a comparison of fugitive slave laws with today’s immigrant laws. Also, students can make
     comparisons or show parallel conditions of blacks during age of slavery with blacks in 21st century, such as in kinds of
     business participation...
    Students are encouraged to use the resources of the Undergraduate Writing Center (UWC).
 The research paper will include endnotes. Additional information will be provided. Also, students are required to discuss their paper
with me for approval of the student’s topic. Also, students are encouraged to provide a finished draft of the paper for comments.
Successful research papers will include both primary and secondary sources. The research paper must be a minimum of
seven double-spaced pages in addition to the endnotes page/s, at the end of the paper, rather than placing footnotes in
the main body of the paper. For appropriate documentation, quotations, footnote/endnote and bibliographic forms, see, Kate L.
Turabian, A MANUAL FOR WRITERS OF TERM PAPERS, THESES AND DISSERTATIONS
                                                                3


As Frederick Douglass said:
“If there is no struggle, there is no progress. Those who profess to favor freedom
and deprecate agitation, are men who want crops without plowing up the ground,
they want rain without thunder and lightning. ….
 People might not get all they work for in this world, but they must certainly work
for all they get."
                             COURSE OUTLINE
DATE                 LECTURE TOPICS AND ASSIGNED READINGS
Aug 29                INTRODUCTION TO COURSE: SOME PERSPECTIVES ON
                AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY, CHRONOLOGY, HIISTORIOGRAPHY
Sept 3                   INTERPRETING AFRICAN AMERICAN HISTORY
                          Holt/ Barkley-Brown, E. MAJOR PROBLEMS, 1-35
Sept 5                          “ANCESTRAL AFRICA”
                                   Franklin, chap. 1
Sept 10, 12              West and West Central African Political Economy and Culture
                                Franklin, chap. 2
                                 Walker, pp. 1-20
Sept 17, 19           Transatlantic Slave Trade/Africans and Atlantic World
                                 Franklin, chaps. 3,
                                 Holt/ Barkley-Brown, E. MAJOR PROBLEMS, 36-81
                                 “Ship of Slaves : The Middle Passage”
Sept 24, 26     African Survivalisms, Slaves and Free Blacks in Colonial America
                                   Franklin, chap. 4
                        Holt/ Barkley-Brown, E. MAJOR PROBLEMS, 83-155
                                   Walker, Chap. 2
Oct 1, 3                  Revolutionary War America, Blacks and Slavery
                                         Franklin/, chap.5
                       Holt/ Barkley-Brown, E. MAJOR PROBLEMS, 158-193
Horton, In Hope of Liberty: Culture, Community, Protest among Northern Free Blacks, chaps 1,2,3
                                                       4


Oct 8, 10               The USA Constitution, Slavery, Masters and Property
                          Freehling, “Founding Fathers and Slavery, on reserve/Canvas
                    “Slavery and the making of America. 1740s-1830s” Videorecording
Oct 10                 Take-Home Midterm Distributed
Oct 15 MIDTERM EXAM DUE (exam distributed Oct 10) NO LATE EXAMS ACCEPTED
             Only 90 minute - in class exam make-up, no books, notes, computers, cells
Oct 15, 17               African Americans, the New Nation, and Westward Movement
                                      Franklin/ chap. 6,
                  Owens, THIS SPECIES OF PROPERTY: SLAVE LIFE AND CULTURE
Oct 22, 24                   Antebellum Slavery and, Plantation Life
                                          Franklin, chap. 7
                            Holt/ Barkley-Brown, E. MAJOR PROBLEMS 195-244
                 Owens, THIS SPECIES OF PROPERTY: SLAVE LIFE AND CULTURE
Oct 29, Oct 31               Slave Medical Experiments: Who What, Why?
               Washington, Medical Apartheid: Dark History Medical Experimentation on Blacks, chaps. 1-6
Nov 5, 7,                  Slave Realities/Economic Resistance/Activism
                          Holt/ Barkley-Brown, E. MAJOR PROBLEMS, 246-291
                                    Walker, History of Blk Bus. Chap. 3
                “Slavery and the making of America. Volume 3, Seeds of destruction”
Nov 12, 14,               Antebellum Free Blacks and Protest Activism
                                        Franklin, chap. 9
                         Holt/ Barkley-Brown, E. MAJOR PROBLEMS , chap 8
             Horton, In Hope of Liberty, Culture, Community, Protest, Northern Free Blacks, chaps 4-10
Nov 19, 21       Antebellum Free Blacks Economic Self-Help Enterprise and Entrepreneurship
                                  Walker, History of Blk Bus. Chap. 4
Nov 26    Antebellum Free Blacks Economic Self-Help Enterprise and Women Entrepreneurship
                                  Walker, History of Blk Bus. Chaps. 4 and 5
Nov 28                             THANKSGIVING HOLIDAY
                                                      5


MOVIE/BOOK CRITICAL REVIEW                     DUE BY Dec 3                                 5%
Dec 3                     Blacks, The Decade of Crisis and Civil War
                                       Franklin, chap. 10
                                       Walker, chap. 6
Dec 5                         Blacks Business and Civil War
                                         Walker, chap. 6
Dec 5                     Final Take-Home EXAMINATION Distributed
Dec 11                          Take Home DUE Dec 12-- 11:00 AM-2:00 PM (no late exams accepted; if exigencies
                                       prevent completion, arrangements can be made to take the
                                       three-hour in-class final exam—no books, computers, class notes, cells
The course is designed so that each student will get an A grade, but only if one attends all classes and studies diligently
and consistently.
Most helpful will be to answer the “consider” questions each week provided on the class handout lecture outline and
have your answers reviewed by me.
University regulations state a student who is absent more than three times must fail the course,
SPECIAL NEEDS
The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, academic accommodations for
qualified students with disabilities. To determine if you qualify, please contact the Dean of
Students at 471-6259; 471-4641 TTY to certify your needs, which will allow me to make
appropriate arrangements
Co-op CFO textbook rental program Book can either be returned at the Co-op buy back counter
or purchased at a discount of the rental price. ...Also, Kindle books
 The New Grading System:
 A                            4.0 92-100
 A-                           3.67 89-91
 B+                           3.33 88-90
 B                            3.0 82-87
 B-                           2.67 79-81
 C+                           2.33 77-78
 C                            2.0 72-76
 C-                           1.67—69-71
                                                         6


 Flagged Course Cultural Diversity in the United States
 This course carries the flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States. Cultural Diversity
 courses are designed to increase your familiarity with the variety and richness of the American
 cultural experience. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come
 from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one U.S. cultural group
 that has experienced persistent marginalization.
 US Core List Course
 This course may be used to fulfill three hours of the U.S. history component of the university
 core curriculum and addresses the following four core objectives established by the Texas
 Higher Education Coordinating Board: communication skills, critical thinking skills, personal
 responsibility, and social responsibility.
Title IX makes it clear that violence and harassment based on sex and gender are Civil Rights offenses
subject to the same kinds of accountability and the same kinds of support applied to offenses against other protected
categories such as race, national origin, etc. If you or someone you know has been harassed or assaulted, you can
find the appropriate resources here: http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-h/
 Emergency Evacuation Policy
 Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found at
 <http://www.utexas.edu/emergency>www.utexas.edu/emergency.
 Classroom Instruction and Recommended Syllabus Information To implement this policy and reinforce building
 evacuation procedures, each faculty member shall provide the following information and instructions to students:
 Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is
 activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and assembling outside.
 Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door
 may not be the one you used when entering the building.
 Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first week of class.
 In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
 Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The University of Texas at Austin
                                                                    7


 Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Background on Campus Carry Laws in Texas
In 2015, the Texas Legislature approved the "campus carry" law, Senate Bill 11. The law provides that License to
Carry (LTC) permit holders may carry a concealed handgun throughout university campuses, starting Aug. 1, 2016.
The law gives public universities some discretion to regulate campus carry.
The University of Texas at Austin and President Gregory L. Fenves take issues surrounding guns on campus very
seriously and have worked to create policies that conform to the new law, protect the rights of citizens and ensure
the safety and security of the entire campus.
S.B. 11 provides that, after consulting with students, staffers and faculty members about "the nature of the student
population, specific safety considerations and the uniqueness of the campus environment," the university may enact
reasonable rules and regulations regarding the carrying of concealed handguns by license holders on campus.
The law stipulates, however, that these rules and regulations may not either "generally prohibit" or "have the effect
of generally prohibiting" license holders from carrying concealed handguns on campus.
Classroom
          Can I ban the carry of concealed handguns in my classroom?
          No. Faculty members cannot ban the concealed carry of handguns in their classrooms. Excluding handguns
          from classrooms would have had the effect of generally prohibiting student license holders from carrying
          their handguns, and thus would violate S.B. 11. Language in the law specifically forbids any policies that
          would generally prohibit campus carry or have the effect of generally prohibiting campus carry. That is
          why the concealed carry of handguns in classrooms is allowed.
General Information
          What do I do if I see a handgun in my classroom or on campus?
          If you see a gun, call 911.
          Campus carry requires that handguns remain concealed at all times with no exceptions, and if a handgun is
          visible, however briefly, it may be a violation of university policy and law. Notify law enforcement via 911
          and UTPD will arrive and assess the situation. Persons who violate these laws and policies are subject to
          penalties and fines in addition to disciplinary action imposed by the university.
          f your class is in a location where you cell phone does not get reception, identify the nearest location you
          can make a call at the beginning of the semester so you know where to go, if needed. If you have a TA or
          AI, have them leave and find the best place to call 911.
          Do faculty have a right to know if students are carrying a gun in class? No. Even if a faculty member were
          to ask, the LTC holder is not required to respond. Under Texas law, only law enforcement can verify
          whether a LTC holder is carrying and has s a license to carry.
                                                             8


 See below for information on Undergraduate Research
https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/history/undergraduate/research.php
Research is at the core of our discipline and a key skill for History majors. Our undergraduates
engage in research in many forms from lower division courses through to graduation. Students
are able to gather evidence from a wide range of online databases, materials in campus libraries
and the extraordinary collection of original materials from all time periods and regions held in
our campus research centers like the Harry Ransom Center, the Briscoe Center for American
History, the Benson Latin American Collection and the LBJ Presidential Library. Read about
some of the many ways in which our undergraduates engage in research as a fundamental
element of the training in our major.
As part of their work in Prof. Juliet E. K. Walker’s HIS350 seminar, "History of Black
Entrepreneurship in the United States,” students develop content for the Undergraduate Journal
of Black Business History. The journal is an interdisciplinary forum for undergraduate students to
share work on black entrepreneurship, published under the auspices of the UT Austin Center for
Black Business History, Entrepreneurship and Technology, founded and directed by Prof.
Walker, who notes it is a form of entrepreneurship in its own right, offering students a rare
opportunity to produce and publish their own work while expanding the literature on black
business history. POSSIBLY YOUR A PAPER WITH ADDITONAL EDITING CAN BE
PUBLISHED IN THE BELOW JOURNAL
                                                  9
