                                    The Rhetoric Of Beauty
                                     Summer 2020 Course Syllabus
RHE 309K - 82114
Instructor: Sam Allan
Contact: samallan@utexas.edu
Office Hours: Wednesdays via Zoom, 12:00 PM to 3:00 PM CST, and by appointment
Asynchronous Canvas Webinar – https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1280961
Technology
To take this course, please make sure that you have access to:
     •   Canvas, UT’s course interface
     •   Zoom, the digital conference service
     •   A word processor that saves or converts files to .doc or .docx
     •   Stable internet to view images, stream videos, and join conferences
If you know that you will not have access to any of these resources, or if you are worried that your
access is unreliable, please let me know.
About
“Beauty was not simply something to behold; it was something one could do.” - Toni Morrison, The
Bluest Eye
Many people begin thinking about their relationship to beauty at a startlingly young age. From
magazines, to billboards, to the hyper-aestheticized annals of Instagram, the beauty industry
dazzles and accosts us, conditioning the way we see, value, and interact with each other and with
ourselves. At times, the criteria for determining what it means to be beautiful can feel so absolute—
in part, because it is so pervasive—that we forget the role we play in building, challenging, and
reshaping that criteria to address the term’s abuses. Negotiating the rhetoric of beauty can mean
fighting injustice in the work place, raising our expectations for interpersonal relationships, and
divorcing ourselves from the idea that how we look determines what we’re worth. It can also open
new pathways for creativity and fulfillment.
This course will explore the way our society constructs, upholds, resists, and markets beauty
standards. In particular, it will focus on the complicated role of beauty in feminist discourse.
Questions of interest might include: how does the pursuit of beauty empower and inspire us, and in
what ways does it exert unwelcome pressure upon our lives? Does the beauty industry succeed in
creating inclusive community spaces, and what happens when the rhetoric of self-care becomes
commodified into a skin-care routine? In what ways might beauty assist in gendering our
experiences with age, youth, and the passing of time? How are definitions of beauty conditioned by
racism, classism, and gender essentialism, and what is being done to challenge these definitions?
What should be?


Textbook
Glenn, Cheryl. The New Harbrace Guide: Genres for Composing. Cengage Learning, 2018 (available
either in print or eBook form.)
All other materials will be provided on Canvas.
Goals
This is a rhetoric course with an emphasis on research, reading, and writing. We will discuss
representations of beauty across a variety of mediums in order to:
    1.   Analyze a text’s relationship to historical, political, and social contexts
    2.   Conduct original, credible research using UT library resources and online search engines
    3.   Develop a thoughtful writing practice through peer review and revision
    4.   Identify rhetorical strategies across a range of multimedia beauty-related texts
    5.   Form, present, and respond to well-researched opinions about a chosen topic that
         contribute to larger conversations about beauty
    6. Write compelling analytical papers
Because there are so many topics related to beauty—and only five weeks of class—your research
will play a crucial role in determining where we focus our efforts. It is my teaching philosophy that
you have as much to teach me and each other as I (hope to) teach you. To build a dynamic
environment, this class will use a curated selection of materials as a foundation for a collaborative
research community, through which your own thoughts, discussions, and projects will direct many
of the questions we tackle in our (online) classroom.
Assignments
We will proceed according to the following general timeline:
         I. Exploring Beauty: In this unit, you will conduct provisional, independent research and
         produce the following:
              •   4 Canvas discussion posts that respond to recorded course lectures and prompts
              •   2 (1-2 page) journal entries that use textual and contextual analysis to think and
                  pose questions about two sources of your choosing
         II. Analyzing Beauty: In this unit, you will study rhetorical strategies and develop a personal
         writing practice to create a polished analysis of one source. You will produce:
              •   4 Canvas discussion posts that respond to recorded course lectures and prompts
              •   1 4-6 page rhetorical analysis about a source of your choosing
              •   1 revision of that same analysis using peer review and instructor feedback
         III. Changing Beauty: In our last unit, you will develop a research question about a concrete
         subtopic related to beauty and/or the beauty industry, and submit a final project that is
         well-researched, thought-provoking, and argumentative. You will produce:


             •    2 Canvas discussion posts that respond to recorded course lectures and prompts
             •    1 Annotated bibliography containing 4 sources, a relevant research question, and a
                  project plan
             •    1 Final project or paper that synthesizes your sources in the service of a unique
                  thesis (can be a recorded presentation, written paper, or creative piece, upon
                  approval)
Grading
The assignments listed above will figure into your overall grade according to the following
percentages:
         Discussion Posts – 10 (15%)
         Journal Entries – 2 (15%)
         Rhetorical Analysis Draft – 1 (10%)
         Peer Review – 1 (5%)
         Rhetorical Analysis Final – 1 (20%)
         Project Plan – 1 (15%)
         Final Project – 1 (20%)
Final grades will be determined on the following scale. Please note: To ensure fairness, all numbers
are absolute, and will not be rounded up or down at any stage. For example, a B- will be inclusive of
all scores of 80.0000 through 83.9999. The University does not recognize the grade of A+.
       A=94-100                   B=84-86                  C=74-76                   D=64-66
       A-=90-93                   B-=80-83                 C-=70-73                  D-=60-63
       B+=87-89                   C+=77-79                 D+=67-69                  F=0-59
If you would like to discuss a graded assignment, please wait twenty-four hours before visiting
me during office hours, and make sure you read all feedback before that meeting. Know that I take
grading very seriously and review scores very carefully before releasing them. I will always do my
best to help you feel confident moving forward, but I will not change a grade unless I have made an
uncontestable mistake. University policy prevents me from sharing information about your grade
through email or email-linked canvas messages.
Late Work
Our five week semester leaves very little room for extensions. While I strongly recommend that you
complete all major assignments on time to the best of your ability, I understand that following one’s
schedule doesn’t always go according to plan. Students may submit late work with the
understanding that a late assignment will be marked down by half a letter grade for each calendar
day that it is late; for example, an A would become an A-. Assignments that are graded for
completion (including online discussion posts) are not eligible for late submission.
Respect
“Difference must be not merely tolerated, but seen as a fund of necessary polarities between which our
creativity can spark like a dialectic.”—Audre Lorde


Your ability to treat your fellow classmates with respect and investment in their thoughts is an
important part of your collaborative learning grades (discussion posts and peer review.) Be
respectful of your colleagues, and please feel free to speak with me if anything makes you feel
uncomfortable, threatened, or ill-at-ease during the course term. There is zero tolerance for
derogatory language or hateful conduct. In this class, we will not only practice persuasive
argumentation, but also how to:
    • Make a commitment to understand unfamiliar positions from the context or point of view of
        others
    • Speak for yourself rather than for a group
    • Practice tactful honesty; even if your opinion may differ from others, you never know who is
        thinking the same thing you are, or if your perspective is a learning opportunity for the
        class.
Furthermore, I am committed to respecting your personal identity. Please let me know if you
prefer a name or gender pronouns that are not listed on the university roster, and I will be
happy to use them.
Accessibility
I am committed to making all course materials as accessible as possible, and to working with you if
there are aspects of this course that can be made more conducive to your learning. Students for
whom accommodations will enable them to succeed in the course should schedule a Zoom
meeting with me or send me an email as soon as possible to discuss. I recognize that not all
disabilities are documented with SSD and remain committed to accommodating all disabilities and
learning styles as best I can. Please note that I cannot offer accommodations retroactively, and
students are required to give me substantial notice if they need accommodations for assignments
(particularly if requesting an extension.)
Writing Flag Statement
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience
with writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the
semester, complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help
you improve your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments,
and you may be asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a
substantial portion of your grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the
Core Communications objectives of Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal
Responsibility, established by the Texas High Education Coordinating Board.


                                          CALENDAR
* HG is short for Harbrace Guide
I. EXPLORING BEAUTY
June 4 – June 5
        Th 6/4 Introduction
                View: Syllabus Overview
                Post: Introduction videos
        F 6/5 Contouring (Contextual Analysis)
                Read: “La Grand Odalisque” (image) by Jean August Dominique Ingres, “Pretty”
                (spoken word) by Katie Makkai, and “Flawless” (music video) by Beyoncé
                Post: Analyze a text
June 8 – June 12
        M 6/8 Defining Rhetoric, Defining Beauty
                View: Key Terms and Concepts Lecture
                Post: Lecture exit question
        T 6/9 Mapping a Controversy, Determining Credibility
                View: Research Primer Lecture
                Read: HG pg. 282 – 284, assorted optional articles (see lecture.)
                Post: Lecture exit question
        W 6/10 Optional Workshop: Library Search Tools, Scholarly Sources
                Reference: HG pg. 294 – 302
        Th&F 6/11-12 Required Zoom Conferences: Research Interests, Scheduling
        Due 6/12: 2 Journal Entries
II. ANALYZING BEAUTY
June 15 – June 19
        M 6/15 Buying Beauty: Beauty and Capitalism – Motivation
                View: Buying Beauty Lecture
                Read: Housework and Housewives in American Advertising: Married to the Mop
                (excerpt) by Jessamyn Neuhaus, and “The Age of Instagram Face” (article) by Jia
                Tolentino


              Post: Lecture exit question
       T 6/16 Beauty for Who? – Audience
              View: Beauty and Audience Lecture
              Read: HG pg. 10 – 12 and “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema” (essay) by
              Laura Mulvey
              Post: Lecture exit question
       W 6/17 Optional Workshop: Writing Strategies
               Reference: HG pg. 238 – 249
       Th 6/18 Decolonizing Beauty: Beauty and Race – Genre and Medium
              View: Beauty and Race Lecture
              Read: HG pg. 12-14, “The Oppositional Gaze” (essay) by bell hooks, and “The
              Racial Bias Built into Photography” (article) by Sarah Lewis
              Post: Lecture exit question
       F 6/19 Optional Zoom Conferences: Writing Process
       Due 6/19: Analysis Into & Outline
June 22 – June 26
       Choose from any topic this week (T through Th) in order to post. You must post once.
       M 6/22 Peer Review and Revision Workshop (viewing required, attendance optional)
               Read: HG pg. 250 – 253
       T 6/23 Beauty and Age
              Read: Sunset Boulevard (film) and “The Double Standard of Aging” (article) by
              Susan Sontag
              Optional Response Post
       W 6/24 Queering Beauty: Beauty and Gender Presentation
              Read: Beauty (documentary) and (article) TBD
              Optional Response Post
       Due 6/24: Peer Review
       Th 6/25 Is Beauty Talent? Pageants and Other Problems
              Read: Painted Babies, 12 Years Later (documentary) “Dethroning Ms. America”
              (essay) by Roxane Gay, and “Homegrown Royalty: White Beauty Contests in the
              Rural South” (excerpt) by Blain Roberts
              Optional Response Post


        F 6/26 View: Optional Discussion Debrief
        Due 6/27: Analysis Final Draft
III. Changing Beauty
June 29 – July 3
        M 6/29 Making Beauty Inclusive and Other Calls to Action – Positions
                View: Proposals Lecture
                Read: HG pg. 132 –133; 137 – 138 and “Try” by Colbie Caillat (music
                video)
                Post: Project 3 Progress
        T 6/30 What is a Real Body? Beauty and Weight – Proposals
                View: Real Body Lecture
                Read: HG pg. 156 – 162, “Is The Body Positivity Movement Working?” (article) by
                Jes Baker, and “Adele’s Weight Loss is a Double-Bind” (article) by Scaachi Koul
        W 7/1 Looking Well: Beauty and Wellness
                View: Wellness Lecture
                Read: “The Unhealthy Truth Behind ‘Wellness’ and ‘Clean Eating’” (article) by
                Ruby Tandoh
        Th&F 7/2- 3 Required Zoom Conferences: Final Project Check-Ins
        Due 7/3: Project Proposal
July 6 – July 9
        M&T 7/6-7 Required Zoom Conferences: Planning Feedback
        W 7/8 The Future of Beauty – Conclusion
                View: Conclusions & Futures Lecture
                Post: Looking back
        Th 7/9 Showcase: Presentations
        7/11 Due: Final Project


Department of Rhetoric & Writing
RHE Course Policies Statement, 2018-19
ATTENDANCE POLICY
Rhetoric & Writing has established this attendance policy for all RHE courses. Any questions or
appeals concerning this policy must be made directly to the department Associate Chair. You are
expected to have prepared assigned reading and writing, and to participate in all in-class editing,
revising, discussion, and conference sessions. If you find that an unavoidable problem prevents you
from attending class, you should contact your instructor as soon as possible, preferably ahead of
time, to let him or her know.
You will not be penalized for missing class on religious holy days. A student who misses classes or
other required activities, including examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should
inform the instructor, in writing, at least one week before the absence, so that alternative
arrangements can be made to complete work. If you know you will have to miss class(es) for this
reason, provide your instructor with the date(s) as early as possible. Please note that the University
specifies very few other excused absences (e.g., jury duty).
If you must miss a class, you are responsible for getting notes and assignments from a classmate.
SCHOLASTIC HONESTY
Turning in work that is not your own, or any other form of scholastic dishonesty, will result in a
major course penalty, possibly failure of the course. This standard applies to all drafts and
assignments, and a report of the incident will be submitted to the Office of the Dean of Students
and filed in your permanent UT record. Under certain circumstances, the Dean of Students will
initiate proceedings to expel you from the University.
So, take care to read and understand the Statement on Scholastic Responsibility, which can be found
online at http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/rhetoric/firstyearwriting/plagiarismcollusion.php If
you have any doubts about your use of sources, ask your instructor for help before handing in the
assignment.
STUDENTS WITH DISABILITIES
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact
Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at 512-471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video
phone) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. More
information is available on the Services for Students with Disabilities website at
http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/
TITLE IX AND SENATE BILL 212
Beginning January 1, 2020, Texas Senate Bill 212 requires all employees of Texas universities,
including faculty, report any information to the Title IX Office regarding sexual harassment, sexual
assault, dating violence and stalking that is disclosed to them. Texas law requires that all employees
who witness or receive any information of this type (including, but not limited to, writing
assignments, class discussions, or one-on-one conversations) must be reported. If you would like to


speak with someone who can provide support or remedies without making an official report to the
university, please email advocate@austin.utexas.edu. For
more information about reporting options and resources, visit http://www.titleix.utexas.edu/,
contact the Title IX Office via email at titleix@austin.utexas.edu, or call 512-471-0419. Although
graduate teaching and research assistants are not subject to Texas Senate Bill 212, they are still
mandatory reporters under Federal Title IX laws and are required to report a wide range of
behaviors we refer to as sexual misconduct, including the types of sexual misconduct covered under
Texas Senate Bill 212. The Title IX office has developed supportive ways to respond to a survivor
and compiled campus resources to support survivors.
DEPARTMENT CLIMATE
At the Department of Rhetoric and Writing, we are unambiguous in our commitment to fostering a
diverse, inclusive, and respectful professional and educational climate. For more information on our
climate commitments, see the complete climate statement
at https://liberalarts.utexas.edu/rhetoric/about/mission.php. If you have any questions or climate-
related concerns, please contact the chair of the climate advisory committee: Professor Scott
Graham (ssg@utexas.edu).
EMAIL ACCOUNTS
Email is an official means of communication at UT-Austin, and your instructor will use this medium
to communicate class information. You are therefore required to obtain a UT email account and to
check it daily. All students may claim an email address at no cost by going to the IT Services website
at https://get.utmail.utexas.edu/.
EMERGENCY INFORMATION
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy. Remember
that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
week of class.
In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: The University of Texas at
Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
Information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be found on the
UT emergency page at http://www.utexas.edu/emergency
Other important Emergency Information
You can find more information about planning for emergencies on the Emergency Preparedness site
at http://www.utexas.edu/safety/preparedness/


Behavior Concerns Advice Line: 512-232-5050
Use this resource to help fellow UT members about whom you have concerns. You can learn more
about the Behavior Concerns Advice Line on their site at
https://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php
Questions about these policies
Questions about these policies should be addressed to:
                                   Department of Rhetoric & Writing
                                   The University of Texas at Austin
                                         Parlin Hall, Room 3
                                      rhetoric@uts.cc.utexas.edu
                                            (512) 471-6109
