                                            Teaching Composition:
                            Heart of Texas Writing Project Summer 2020 Institute
                                     EDC F380W – Unique number 73450
                                          Deb Kelt Office: SZB 436
                                                512-232-5300
                                   Office hours M 12-1 and by appointment
Land Acknowledgement: We begin this syllabus by recognizing that we stand on the shared lands and
waters of the Comanche and Tonkawa. We express our respect for the three federally-recognized nations:
Alabama-Coushatta, the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, and the Ysleta del Sur Pueblo within the
state, as well as other Indigenous peoples and nations such as the Karankawa, Caddo, Lipan Apache,
Comanche, Wichita, Coahuiltecan, Neches, Comecrudo, and Mission Indians that have historic ties to
these homelands. We also acknowledge the multiple ways the State of Texas and the residents of this
Land have benefitted from the forced and systematic removal of Native peoples from Texas. Land
acknowledgements are a small step toward correcting the stories and practices that erase Indigenous
histories and the ongoing presence of Indigenous peoples today. As teacher educators and researchers,
many of us are complicit in this erasure, and it is imperative that we recognize, support, and advocate for
the sovereignty of Native nations in our work.
 Overview: This course serves in-service literacy educators of many diverse job descriptions who have
applied and been accepted to the Heart of Texas Writing Project Summer Institute. This course also
serves graduate students (both master’s and doctoral) in the College of Education who have also applied
and been accepted. In this course, we will explore following topics: Research on the teaching of writing;
established practices used in the teaching of writing; components of authors’ creative processes;
perspectives on students and their languages; teacher learning and leadership for more equitable
classrooms and schools. Further, teachers will engage with their own complex processes as writers.
Grading: This is a unique course, where students are asked to “live” the intricacies and complexities of a
writing workshop classroom. All work is required, and scholarly attention to conversations, readings,
activities and writing assignments is critical and expected. Our course is an opportunity for the
community to think together and build meaning as our learning evolves and changes, so students are also
asked to pay close attention to the thinking/learning of everyone in the room. Further, students are
expected to prepare and engage not only for their own learning, but for the learning of the community we
are building together. It is an intense experience – a longer summer course than most – and deep
engagement with the content we are studying is expected.
This summer course will require reading and writing at home. In order to get the most out of this course --
and to contribute to the work we are building together -- it’s important that you carve out time outside of
class to read, write, and research.
I will use professional judgment to make holistic assessments of the student’s daily effort, engagement
and performance. I welcome conversation regarding any grading concerns, particularly as the summer
unfolds!


Important note for everyone: We are living in the thick of COVID, and we are bearing witness to the
brutal police murders of George Floyd, Breonna Taylor and Ahmaud Aubrey. (As we have before with
many many other African American citizens.) I firmly believe our work together this summer will play a
critical role as we work toward anti-racist stances in our classrooms. However, I also know that these
times can make it difficult to manage a graduate class. If you are struggling at any point and time, and for
any reason at all, please reach out to me as soon as you can, and we can find a solution together.
Required assignments: You will be completing two projects this summer. One is a piece of writing you
will take through the writing process, on any topic you choose, in any genre you choose. You will share
this piece at the end of the summer, along with a short reflection about what you learned from this
process.
It is expected that students engage in the process of writing with fidelity and effort, so they can deeply
understand each part: working in a notebook daily, choosing a topic, developing that topic, drafting the
piece, revising the piece, editing the piece and sharing the piece with an audience. There is great
flexibility and creativity in this process, but engaging with good faith effort is mandatory. To teach
writing well, we must write, and attention to the process is most important. A lack of deep engagement
with process can cause a reduction in your grade for this course.
The second assignment is an inquiry project/presentation. For this project, you will dig into an area of
your teaching that feels unfinished – an area where you feel there is more learning and growing to do. It is
expected that these inquiry projects engage with the teaching of writing, and we will discuss your inquiry
further as the summer unfolds. Everyone will present their questions and findings to the class during a 30-
minute presentation. (We will have two people present each morning, starting on Thursday, June 18.) If
you are taking this course for graduate credit, you will write a final paper on your inquiry topic. If you are
taking the course for six hours, you will complete two inquiry papers on distinct topics. Generally these
papers are about ten pages long, drawing from research as well as teacher practitioner texts.
Important dates:
*Inquiry presentations will start on June 18. Traditionally, two people present each day until the last week
of our work.
*Choice writing piece and reflection will be due on July 2.
*Final inquiry paper(s) will be due on Thursday, July 9, at 9:00 am


Grading
60%: Participation in class as outlined in this syllabus. Please note that your notebook work, writing
process and final publication piece will be evaluated as participation.
40% Inquiry presentation and paper
Required texts: (Provided by HTWP)
*K. Bomer: Hidden Gems
*R. Bomer: Building Adolescent Literacy in Today’s English Classrooms
*T. Laman: From Ideas to Words
*K.W. Ray: In Pictures and in Words
*Articles as assigned in the HTWP Electronic Binder.
Other materials:
Writer’s notebook
Samples of student writing for inquiry work
Grading Scale:
A       93-100
A-      90-92
B+      87-89
B       83-86
B-      80-82
C+      77-79
C       73-76
C-      70-72
D       60-69
F       59-0
Attendance: For those of you taking the class for credit, please note attendance is mandatory and arriving
on time and staying the full length of the class is required.
              • There are no unexcused absences.
              • You are allowed one excused absence.
              • Subsequent excused absences will be at the discretion of the instructor
              • Each unexcused absence will mean a deduction of ¾ letter grade in your final grade.


              • More than 3 absences (including excused and unexcused) will result in a failing grade for
              the class.
              • A pattern of tardiness or early departures will affect your grade.
              • Excessive tardies or early departures (3 or more) also constitutes an unexcused absence.
              Students will not be penalized for absences due to the observance of religious holidays that
              fall on our scheduled class day; please give me advance notice of these absences.
For those of you not taking the course for credit, please remember the MOU we signed earlier in the year
and the commitments we made to each other.
                 ***********************************************
Notes on our community work: We are thrilled you have decided to join us this summer, and we are
honored you have committed so much time to growing and learning as a literacy leader. We are excited
to get to know each of you better, and we look forward to a long path together within our vibrant HTWP
community.
Our time together will go quickly this summer. To make sure we can capture every moment, we thought it
important to share some expectations.
*Please remember we are meeting June 8 through July 2, Monday through Thursday, 10-12 pm, and then
1:30 – 3:30 pm. Each day is critical. Please arrive on time in the morning, and please come back from
lunch promptly.
*During this course, we will be constructing meaning together. We will build ideas from the
conversations, readings, and lectures. Because we are going to be creating this intricate quilt of ideas,
your attention and focus is very important. Please be mindful of distractions like cell phones, Internet,
email, etc.
*In order to stitch together this beautiful quilt, we also ask that you think about your class participation.
We ask that you talk generously when you have something to say, while monitoring your participation in
light of everyone else’s. If you often talk first, it may be important to sometimes lay back and wait. If you
are a member of a group whose voice is usually privileged, that’s another reason to consider waiting a bit
before jumping in. If you are often quiet, it may be important to challenge yourself to speak out and let
others learn from you. When we are working in small groups, participation means engaging in an open
and generous way, sharing your thinking with an expectation to have your mind changed by others’ ideas.
Please remember that none of us are “finished,” and that we are all struggling with important and
complicated topics in order to learn and grow as teachers of writing.
*And finally, we hope you consider this summer a starting point. Though our time together will go
quickly, our work together as a community can and should stretch on for a long, long time. Some of us
have worked together for over a decade, and we look forward to even more time as colleagues and
friends. Our community exists only because so many people keep showing up – on Saturdays, in study
groups, advanced institutes, etc. We encourage you to be one of those people who keeps showing up -- an
active member of our HTWP community.


Policy on Children in Class/Working from Home: I fully support parents and guardians attending
school. As the university does not have a formal policy on children in the classroom, the policy described
here is a reflection of my own beliefs and commitments (and with all due credit to Dr. Melissa Cheyney at
Oregon State University who circulated her own policy through social media).
All exclusively breastfeeding babies are welcome in class as often as is necessary to support the
breastfeeding relationship. You and your nursing baby are welcome in class anytime.
For older children and babies, I understand that minor illnesses and unforeseen disruptions in childcare
often put parents in the position of having to choose between missing class to stay home with a child or
finding childcare, which can be a burden in many ways. While this is not meant to be a long-term
childcare solution, occasionally bringing a child to class in order to cover gaps in care is perfectly
acceptable.
For students learning at home with children or others you care for at home, your children are welcome on
the screen and I understand you may need to take breaks from class when you are attending to those in
your care. Finally, I am open to talking about needed accommodations with deadlines as the semester
progresses.
Personal Pronoun Use (She / He / They / Ze / Etc): Professional courtesy and sensitivity are
especially important with respect to individuals and topics dealing with differences of race, culture,
religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender variance, and nationalities. Class rosters are
provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name, unless they have added a “preferred name” with
the Gender and Sexuality Center. (http://diversity.utexas.edu/genderandsexuality/publications-and-
resources/). I will gladly honor your request to address you by a name that is different from what
appears on the official roster, and by the gender pronouns you use (she/he/they/ze, etc). Please advise
me of any changes early in the semester so that I may make appropriate updates to my records.
Student Support Services
Services for Students with Disabilities; This class respects and welcomes students of all backgrounds,
identities, and abilities. If there are circumstances that make our learning environment and activities
difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with me, or if you need specific
arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let me know. I am committed to creating
an effective learning environment for all students, but I can only do so if you discuss your needs with me
as early as possible. I promise to maintain the confidentiality of these discussions. Any student with a
documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services for Students with
Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 512-410-6644 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to request an official
letter outlining authorized accommodations. For more information,
visit http://ddce.utexas.edu/disability/about/.
Basic Needs Security: Any student who faces challenges securing their food or housing and believes this
may affect their performance in the course is urged to contact the Dean of Students for support.


Furthermore, please notify the professors if you are comfortable in doing so. This will enable them to
provide any resources that they may possess. (Thanks to Dr. Sara Goldrick-Rab [@saragoldrickrab] for
this language.)
Counseling and Mental Health: Counselors in Academic Residence Program (CARE)
CARE is the university's Counseling and Mental Health Center program that was created in collaboration
with the Office of the Provost. CARE’s primary mission is to provide access to mental health support for
students who are struggling emotionally and/or academically. The College of Education CARE counselor,
Danie White, has regular office hours 1-2p.m. T/F in SZB 212E, 512.232.6862 or
dlwhite@austin.utexas.edu.
All of us benefit from support during times of struggle. You are not alone. There are many helpful
resources available on campus and an important part of the college experience is learning how to ask for
help. Asking for support sooner rather than later is often helpful.
If you or anyone you know experiences any academic stress, difficult life events, or feelings like anxiety
or depression, we strongly encourage you to seek support.
 http://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/individualcounseling.html
BeVocal: BeVocal is a university-wide initiative to promote the idea that individual Longhorns have the
power to prevent high-risk behavior and harm. At UT Austin all Longhorns have the power to intervene
and reduce harm. To learn more about BeVocal and how you can help to build a culture of care on
campus, go to: wellnessnetwork.utexas.edu/BeVocal.
Important Safety Information: If you have concerns about the safety or behavior of fellow students,
TAs or Professors, call BCAL (the Behavior Concerns Advice Line): 512-232-5050. Your call can be
anonymous.
The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety
and Security, 512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/
Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
assembling outside.
            • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
                 occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when
                 entering the building.
            • Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing
                 during the first week of class.
            • In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors. Do
                 not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
                 Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
                 Services office.
            • Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency
                 procedures can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency


Title IX Reporting: Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination,
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally
funded educational institutions. UT Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment
free from discrimination in all its forms. When sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the
university can:
               1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
               2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm
                    or have become involved in a Title IX investigation.
               3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or “Mandatory
Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX Coordinator.
I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are disclosed in
writing, discussion, or one-on-one. Before talking with me, or with any faculty or staff member about a
Title IX related incident, be sure to ask whether they are a responsible employee. If you want to speak
with someone for support or remedies without making an official report to the university, email
advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more information about reporting options and resources, visit
titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at titleix@austin.utexas.edu.
University Policies
Academic Integrity: All students are responsible for understanding UT’s Academic Honesty and the
University Honor Code available at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Q Drop Policy: If you want to drop a class after the 4th class day, you’ll need to execute a Q drop before
the Q-drop deadline. For more information, see:
http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/csacc/academic/adddrop/qdrop
Cross-Cutting Themes and Creed: The teacher preparation program at The University of Texas at
Austin is committed to creating a society that is more just, caring, inclusive, and democratic through
transformation of educational practices. Too often, universities and schools have engaged in racist and
other oppressive practices that replicate and perpetuate the status quo in our society, rather than working
against inequities. We believe there is a more powerful path. Following The University of Texas motto,
“What starts here changes the world,” we teach to change the world.
Schools, districts and universities are located within oppressive social, economic and political systems.
Teachers must recognize the oppressive conditions that many families and communities experience
related to their identities—racial, ethnic, linguistic, social class, religious, gender, sexual orientation,
immigrant status, abilities, and other positions in society. At the same time, teachers must recognize the
cultural and linguistic wealth that exists in these communities, along with their histories of resilience and
resistance in the pursuit of justice. Understanding these critical perspectives on society, culture and
schooling is critical for teachers’ development and enactment of curricular and pedagogical knowledge
across school subjects, such as reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics.
We practice vision, courage, and determination because these stances and practices require a lifelong
commitment and ongoing, critical inquiries in our personal and professional lives. As teachers, we serve
our students well by cultivating in them these same commitments and capacities.


As educators we are committed to educational change that allows us to enact our vision for teacher
preparation. Identities, Values, and Practices serve as our guide, as we are always in process. While listed
separately the themes are deeply connected, so to work on one is to work on many.
                 Theme Statement                                       Creed Statement
 Who are         We are continuously examining how our                 I am self-aware. I recognize who I
 we?             identities1 sometimes afford us privileges and        am and who I am becoming in
 Identities      other times, result in oppression. We recognize       terms of my multiple identities.
                 that our personal identities are deeply connected to
                 our professional identities, and contribute to how
                 we work with our students, communities and
                 colleagues.
                 We research and inquire to better understand our      I am a learner. I will grow my
                 students, curriculum and teaching across school       teaching into more powerful
                 subjects2, and our own dispositions and practices     practices and share them with
                 as teachers. We continue to grow our professional     others.
                 identities to support our work of building inclusive
                 and anti-oppressive classrooms, schools, and local
                 and global communities.
 What do         We value educational justice, inclusiveness and       I value courage and
 we value?       continuous learning, and we are committed to          determination. I will view all
 Values          being teachers who take on the challenges and         challenges that confront me as
                 risks associated with teaching in service of these    opportunities to grow and change.
                 values.
                 We value the multiple cultures, languages,            I value learners’ differences as
                 knowledges, and experiences of our students and       strengths. I will respect and
                 the communities we work alongside, and we see         engage with differences and will
                 these as essential to a healthy and productive        craft my teaching to build upon and
                 society.                                              sustain the abilities, cultures and
                                                                       languages my students bring to
                                                                       school.


                   We value shared responsibility over individual           I value shared responsibility. I
                   accountability within educational systems. As            will hold myself responsible for all
                   teachers, we are committed to working                    my teaching and will share in this
                   collaboratively with our students, teacher               responsibility with others to build a
                   colleagues, families, and communities in the             community that contributes to the
                   pursuit of our collective growth and well-being.         growth and well-being of students.
   What do         We continuously reflect on how our diverse               I practice reflection on action. I
   we              perspectives and identities1 matter when working         will build humanizing practices and
   practice?       with others, including students, families and            trusting relationships through my
   Practice        colleagues. This continual reflection allows us to       ongoing critical reflection.
                   build trusting relationships and engage in
                   humanizing practices.
                   We recognize students’ identities1 and strengths         I practice imaginative change. I
                   and honor the resources they bring. We question          will imagine the possibilities of a
                   the materials, curriculum, and instructional             student-centered curriculum that is
                   methods that are in place. We continually adapt          transformative for students and our
                   and redesign our teaching practices in response to       collective communities.
                   changing opportunities and demands in our
                   transnational society. We dream of possibilities
                   for students’ educational futures.
We will be the teachers who, working with families, communities and our colleagues, teach to change the
world.
1
  racial, ethnic, linguistic, religious, gender, sexual orientation, social class, immigrant status, abilities, and
other positions in society.
2
  reading, language arts, social studies, science and mathematics anchored in critical perspectives on
society, culture and schooling
