                                           E 376M      l   Harlem Renaissance
         Instructor: Wilks, J.                                      Areas: 3
         Unique #: 35865/30760                                      Flags: Cultural Diversity in the U.S., Writing
         Semester: Fall 2018                                        Restrictions: N/A
         Cross-lists: AFR 374F                                      Computer Instruction: N/A
Prerequisites: Nine semester hours of coursework in English or rhetoric and writing
Description: Long before the late-20th and early-21st century real estate and retail revival, there was another Harlem
Renaissance, a time during the 1920s and 1930s when African American artistic and cultural life flourished with Harlem
as its epicenter. In this course we will draw upon nonfiction, fiction, and poetry not only to remember the Renaissance
as traditionally portrayed in literary history, but also to re-member the movement, to piece together our own
impressions of its people, places, and passions. Who were the leading figures of the Renaissance? What are the
forgotten but no less important names? How did the movement’s influence extend beyond the confines of upper
Manhattan? In addition to these questions, we will also address how literary production complemented and contrasted
with the politics, music, and fine art of the period. Our ultimate goal is not only to emerge with a broader picture of the
Harlem Renaissance, but also to understand the period’s significance as a pivotal transition in African American literary
expression, one bridging the gap between Reconstruction literature of the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries
and realist and naturalist literature of the mid-twentieth century.
Texts:
Books
Jean Toomer, Cane (1923)
Nella Larsen, Passing (1929)
George Samuel Schuyler, Black No More (1931)
Canvas & Course Packet
Alain Locke, “The New Negro” (1925)
Marita Bonner, “On Being Young—a Woman—and Colored” (1925)
Zora Neale Hurston, “How It Feels to Be Colored Me” (1928)
George Samuel Schuyler, “The Negro-Art Hokum” (1926)
Langston Hughes, “The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain” (1926)
W. E. B. DuBois, “Criteria of Negro Art” (1926)
Richard Wright, “Blueprint for Negro Writing” (1937)
Countee Cullen, “Heritage” (1925)
Langston Hughes, “The Weary Blues” (1926), “I, Too” (1926)
Gwendolyn Bennett, “To a Dark Girl” (1923), “Hatred” (1926)
Claude McKay, “If We Must Die” (1919), “The White House” (1922)
Alice Dunbar-Nelson, “I Sit and Sew” (1927)
Helene Johnson, “Bottled” (1927)
Film
Joanne Burke, Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Light (2016)
Assignments
* Papers: Two short papers, the first of which will be turned in as a complete, 4-page rough draft, revised substantially,
and resubmitted for a final grade; a research paper proposal, and a final research paper. All papers must be formatted
according to the guidelines of the MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers, guides to which are available on the
course Canvas site.
* Reading responses: Informal writing on assigned readings. The responses should be used to explore the designated
prompt and may also be used, beginning with the second page, to note any remaining questions you may have about


                                                                                                                            2
the text. You will be asked to share one of your reading responses with the class. I will collect them at the end of class,
and they will be graded with a check-plus (you’re really thinking and asking questions), a check (you did it), or check-
minus (did you read the assignment?). Responses should be typed (2 double-spaced pages), and they will not be
accepted late.
All assignments are due on the days indicated in the syllabus. If you cannot attend class on the day an assignment is due
on paper, you must make arrangements with me to turn it in early or ask a classmate or a friend to drop it off at the
beginning of class. If you email the assignment, it must be formatted properly, and I must receive the message and be
able to open the attachment (.doc, .docx, or .rtf) before class begins.
Requirements & Grading:
Two short papers (4 pages each)                    40%
Final critical essay (6-7 pages)                   35%
Reading responses/class participation              15%
Rough draft of first short paper (4 pages)         10%
Late Work
Students who turn in late papers will lose one grade “level” for every 24 hours the assignment is late (that is, a paper
that would have merited an A- will receive a B+ if submitted within 24 hours after the due date, a B if submitted within
48 hours after the due date, and so on). Extensions are obtainable only for personal illness or emergency, and then only
if requested in advance from the instructor. Please note that outside commitments are not an excuse for lateness.
Incompletes
Incompletes will not be given except under extenuating circumstances that are discussed with the instructor prior to
posting final grades. In the event that an incomplete is granted, all outstanding work must be completed no later than
the last week of classes of the following semester. No extensions of incompletes will be granted.
Attendance
You are allowed 3 unexcused absences, after which your grade will be lowered one level (for example, from A to A-,
from A- to B+, and so on) for each subsequent unexcused absence. Plus/minus grading will be used.
Schedule:
Week One
August 29                  Introduction and course description
August 31                  Locke, “The New Negro”
Week Two
September 3                Labor Day
September 5                Bonner, “On Being Young—a Woman—and Colored”; Hurston, “How It Feels to Be Colored Me”
September 7                Schuyler, “The Negro-Art Hokum”; Hughes, “The Negro Artist and the Racial Mountain”
Week Three
September 10               DuBois, “Criteria of Negro Art”; Wright, “Blueprint for Negro Writing”
                           Response 1
September 12               Nonfiction recap
September 14               Tour of campus museum
Week Four
September 17               Peer Review


                                                                             3
             Paper 1 (draft)
September 19 Paper conferences
September 21 Documentary: Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Light
Week Five
September 24 Documentary: Paris Noir: African Americans in the City of Light
             Paper 1 (final)
September 26 Cane, “Karintha”-“Georgia Dusk”
September 28 Cane, “Fern”-“Blood Burning Moon”
Week Six
October 1    Cane, “Seventh Street”-“Theater”
October 3    Cane, “Her Lips Are Copper Wire”-“Harvest Song”
October 5    Cane, “Bona and Paul”
Week Seven
October 8    Cane, “Kabnis”
October 10   Cane recap
October 12   Response 2
Week Eight
October 15   Cullen, “Heritage”
October 17   Passing, Part One: Encounter
October 19   Passing, Part Two: Re-encounter, Ch. 1-2
Week Nine
October 22   Passing, Part Two: Re-encounter, Ch. 3-4
October 24   Passing, Part Three: Finale
             Response 3
October 26   Passing recap
Week Ten
October 29   Black No More, Preface, Ch. 1-3
October 31   Black No More, Ch. 4-6
November 2   Black No More, Ch. 7-9
Week Eleven
November 5   Black No More, Ch. 10-13
November 7   Black No More recap
             Response 4
November 9   Tour of campus gallery
Week Twelve
November 12  Visit to campus archive
November 14  Peer Review
             Paper 2 (draft)
November 16  Hughes, “The Weary Blues,” “I, Too”


                                                                                                                             4
Week Thirteen
November 19                Paper 2 (final)
November 21-23             Thanksgiving Break
Week Fourteen
November 26                Bennett, “To a Dark Girl,” “Hatred” (CP)
November 28                McKay, “If We Must Die,” “The White House” (CP)
November 30                Dunbar-Nelson, “I Sit and Sew”; Johnson, “Bottled” (CP)
                           Response 5
Week Fifteen
December 3                 Poetry recap
December 5                 Writing workshop: brainstorming/formulating a thesis statement
December 7                 Writing workshop: finding secondary sources
Week Sixteen
December 10                Final reflections, evaluations
                                ***Final essay due via Canvas Friday, December 14, at 5PM***
Policies:
* Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic accommodations for qualified students
with disabilities. For more information, contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937
(video phone) or visit http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd.
* Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity,
and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
* Academic Integrity
Any work submitted by a student in this course for academic credit must be the student's own work.
“The University of Texas traces its genesis to the state Constitution of 1876, which called for the establishment of ‘a
university of the first class.’ This ideal has shaped the University’s mission since its founding and continues to guide the
policies of the University today. As a university of the first class, The University of Texas also participates in a larger
mission: the advancement of knowledge. The sharing of knowledge forms the heart of university life. Scholars, teachers,
and students all participate in a community of learning, where the ideas and information that have been developed over
centuries are disseminated, elaborated upon, and added to in a continual process of intellectual advancement. High
standards of academic integrity help ensure that this process functions smoothly.
At its core, academic integrity requires honesty. This involves giving credit where it is due and acknowledging the
contributions of others to one’s own intellectual efforts. It also includes assuring that one’s own work has been
completed in accordance with the standards of one’s course or discipline. Without academic integrity, neither the
genuine innovations of the individual nor the progress of a given field of study can adequately be assessed, and the very
foundation of scholarship itself is undermined. Academic integrity, for all these reasons, is an essential link in the
process of intellectual advancement.”


                                                                                                                             5
This passage quoted from and additional information available at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acadint.php.
* Religious holidays
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of a pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a
religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a
religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
*Email
I am happy to answer your questions about the course via email, which I check daily during business hours, Monday
through Friday. As a result, you should not rely on me to answer questions about an assignment (for instance) the night
before it is due. It is your responsibility to seek help ahead of time. If you have substantive questions about the course, it
is best to visit me during office hours so that we can talk about your concerns in person.
Web Site: The class will use the Canvas course management software provided by the university.
