Su19 - INTRODUCTION TO LGBTQ STUDIES
(84325)
FWGS 303: Introduction to LGBTQ Studies
FIRST SUMMER SESSION 2019
June 6-July 12
MTWTF 11:30AM-1PM
Room RLP 0.120
Instructor:Dr. Grayson Hunt
Email:graysonhunt@austin.utexas.edu
Office:BUR 552 (Burdine Hall)
Office Hours:MTWTrF 1-1:30pm or by appointment
Course Description:
This 6-week course will introduce students to LGBTQ Studies, including theories and
practices of resistance. We will explore concepts of gender and sexuality, race, class,
and nation. The course will also survey the making of modern understandings of sexual
and LGBTQ identities in the last one hundred years and the implications of this history
for broader understandings of gender and sexuality. This course carries the Writing
Flag and a flag for Cultural Diversity in the United States.
All texts will be available as pdfs on Canvas or distributed in class in paper form. If you
are auditing this course, you must connect with your classmates to obtain the
readings.
Requirements and Grading:
•    In class participation 30%
•    Reflection Essay 10%: 500-word reflection essay on Maria Lugones’ “Playfulness,
     ‘World’-Travelling, and Loving Perception” Due Monday, June 10 at the beginning
     of class.
•    1st Argument Essay 10%: 1000-word essay based on 2 readings from week 2 or 3.


•   2nd Argument Essay 10%: 1000-word based on two essays from week 3 or 4.
•   Group Presentations 20%: 30-minute presentations in the final week of class.
•   Final Research Project 20% due during finals week.
Academic Integrity & Student Conduct:
Academic dishonesty is defined by the university as "cheating, plagiarism, collusion,
falsifying academic records, misrepresenting facts, and any act designed to give unfair
academic advantage to the student (such as, but not limited to, submission of
essentially the same written assignment for two classes without the prior permission of
the instructor), or the attempt to commit such an act." (See Section 11•402d of the
Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for the University's official
definition of plagiarism.http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sa/instrules.php) (Links to an
external site.)Links to an external site.For more on plagiarism and how to avoid it, visit
the UT Library’s website at:
https://legacy.lib.utexas.edu/services/instruction/avoidplagiarism.html
As a student at the university, you are also bound to the student honor code and
institutional rules regarding student conduct, including abiding by "all city, state, and
federal laws and statutes and all regulations of the University and The University of
Texas System .... to promote a safe environment that is conducive to academic
success and to ensure that each University student graduates ready to contribute to
society as an ethical citizen." You can review the entire university policy
at:http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ (Links to an external site.)Links to an
external site.and keep these policies in mind when carrying out your class projects.
Accessibility:
Please connect with Services for Students with Disabilities Office for accommodations,
advice, and support (http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability). (Links to an external
site.)Links to an external site.Please also read over the accessibility and inclusion
document as a guide, and feel free to speak to me as needed. Gender segregated
restrooms are available on all floors of RLP. There is one gender-inclusive single use
restroom on the 4th floor of RLP, accessible via stairs or elevator. Please acquaint
yourself with the restrooms in this building and use the restrooms that best suit your
needs. Restrooms should provide safety, privacy, and dignity for everyone. If you
notice a restroom that is not accessible and/or does not provide safety, privacy, and
dignity, please let the class know. We might be able to do something about it!
