Draw Blood
Advanced Architectural Drawing
ARC 328D (00770) / ARC 392D (01185)
The University of Texas at Austin
School of Architecture
Spring 2019
Class meeting time, location: Monday 6:30-9:30,
Goldsmith Hall 2.110
Professor:          John Blood
                    Office: GOL 3.106
                    Hours: Mon 12:00-1:00 PM
                    Phone: 512-773-5207
                    Email: john@danzeblood.com
Course Description and Content
This course asks you to develop a critical stance on the relationship between your design values, process and
aspirations through examining their relationship with the graphic language you employ.
In our current post-digital world, the role of drawings, whether they be analog, digital or synthesized in the
creative architectural process has entered a period ripe for questioning, exploration and invention. The
increased employment and reliance of computer tools for modeling, simulation, technical construction
documents, and rendering is reshaping how we design, think abstractly and communicate. At the very least the
use of these tools is ubiquitous and commonplace to a degree that our fundamental understanding of the
language of architectural representation and its role in the creative process itself is questioned.
In examining the creating process of design we might say that it can be thought of as having two primary modes.
The first is production - the actual work of generating ideas and producing drawings, models and documents
that test the ideas. The second is assessment - evaluating the success of the ideas through desk crits, informal
pinups and formal presentations. This course will examine the relationship between these two modes with the
intention of increasing and enhancing each individual's understanding of their personal design methodology.
With this in mind, the class will operate in two modes. The first will focus on multiple drawing methods, skills
and approaches including manual, digital and hybrid techniques. Fundamental drawing methods will be
refreshed and advanced methods will be introduced and applied to short design projects and to projects
students have previously or are currently working on with the intention of expanding each student’s design
répertoire and priorities.
The second will develop and refine design communication skills through pairing clear articulation of design
intent with compelling drawings with effective verbal presentation. Effectively managed presentations are a
natural extension of the design process and are one of the most important settings in which a healthy
conversation can occur - to openly discuss and test ideas. The course will actively embrace the curation,
scripting, and all elements surrounding the presentation and discussion of your design projects. The


presentation itself will be seen as a design project/opportunity. The course is open to both graduate and
undergraduate students.
Course Meeting Time and Attendance
Exercises will be given weekly. Class meets Monday from 6:30 PM to 9:30 PM. You should be pinned up and
ready to present by 6:30. Attendance is mandatory. Participation is expected. Students with two (2) unexcused
absences may be dropped from the course without further notice. The minimum penalty for more than two
unexcused absences is a full letter drop in your final grade for the course. Please contact the instructor prior to
class if you expect to be late or miss class. A student who misses classes or other required activities for the
observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in advance of the absence as possible, so
that arrangements can be made to complete an assignment within a reasonable time after the absence. A
student who fails to complete missed work within the time allowed will be subject to the normal academic
penalties.
Grading
Establishing grades for projects of a creative nature is a more complex matter than grading in other academic
areas. While each project contains certain quantifiable elements by which it may be evaluated, a significant
portion of each grade is derived from a broader set of issues. One particular note to make - since much of the
emphasis in these assignments will be placed on clarity of idea, physical and verbal presentation will factor in
significantly to the grade you receive. It should be considered and designed, not thrown together haphazardly.
Grading for the course is broken into three general components:
     1/3 grasp:              Understanding of the ideas investigated in the project at hand, combined with an
                             appropriate process of inquiry
     1/3 effort:             Verbal contribution made during class reviews and meeting times as well as risk and
                             development shown in the projects, also attendance
     1/3 resolution:         The demonstration of competence, completeness, and finesse through representation
Rubric
A/A- : excellent work
Project surpasses expectations in terms of inventiveness, appropriateness, verbal and visual ability, conceptual
rigor, craft, and personal development. Student pursues concepts and techniques above and beyond what is
discussed in class.
B+/B/B- : good work
Project is thorough, well researched, diligently pursued, and successfully executed. Student pursues ideas and
suggestions presented in class and puts in effort to resolve required projects. Demonstrates potential for
excellence.
C+/C/C- : required work
Project meets the minimum requirements. Suggestions made in class are not pursued with dedication or rigor.
(Note: C- does not meet the minimum grade to be counted toward the student’s degree.)
D+/D/D- : poor work
Basic skills including graphic skills, model-making skills, verbal clarity or logic of presentation are not level-
appropriate. Student does not demonstrate the required design skill and knowledge base.


F : unacceptable work
Minimum objectives are not met. Performance is not acceptable. Note that this grade will be assigned with
excessive unexcused absences.
X : excused incomplete
Given only for legitimate reasons of illness or family emergency. Incomplete assignments are not a cause for
assigning this grade. An incomplete is assigned after consultation with the Associate Deans’ offices. Incomplete
coursework must be completed prior to the beginning of the following semester.
(ALL GRADES ARE SUBJECT TO DEDUCTIONS FOR ABSENCES, LATE WORK AND LATE ARRIVALS.)
Academic Integrity
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty: Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to
disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since
such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced.
Refer to the Student Judicial Services website for official University policies and procedures on scholastic
dishonesty.
Please refer to The Role of Faculty in Confronting Scholastic Dishonesty brochure published by Student Judicial
Services for information on confronting students who violate scholastic dishonesty policies. For further
information, visit the SJS website at http://www.utexas.edu/depts/dos/sjs/ or call 471-2841.
Disabilities
Please notify your instructor of any adaptation you may require to accommodate a specific physical need. You
will be requested to provide documentation to the Dean of Students' Office, in order that the most appropriate
accommodations can be determined. Specialized services are available on campus through the Services for
Students with Disabilities, also found via the web at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/.
