                                                                                                 1
                       AFR 301: Introduction to African American Culture
Instructor: Dr. Patrick F. Walter
         This course surveys African American Culture from 1600 to the present. Through critical
encounters with historical records, literature, music, dance and film/video, we will study
blackness as key site of antagonism in American history. Some of the periods and movements
we look at include the Middle Passage, Reconstruction, The Harlem Renaissance, New Orleans
jazz culture, The Black Arts and Black Power Movements, Hip Hop Culture, and
#BlackLivesMatter. How do race, politics, economics and art all converge at these moments?
What possibilities for future emancipation might these events promise? What sorts of openings
might be offered for imagining new modes of gender and sexuality? These will be our guiding
questions. The primary goals of the course, which covers an enormous timespan, is to approach
African American Culture as field of historical resonances where a voice or gesture, taking place
for instance in 1835, might harmonize with an image pulsing on a computer screen in 2020. We
will approach African American Culture as a dynamic force that might reinvent the world.
                                       Course Policies
Attendance: Attendance is mandatory and will be taken at each of these meetings. Success in this
course also depends upon your active participation in discussions. You are allowed two
absences for the semester without penalty. Your third absence will result in a 1/3 grade
reduction. A fourth absence will result in another 1/3 grade reduction. A fifth absence will
result in the failing of the course.
Technology: There will be no use of laptops or phones in lectures, discussions, or screenings.
Anyone on a phone or laptop will be asked to leave and will not receive attendance credit for the
day.
Code of Academic Conduct: University policy requires that students cite sources they use in
their work. THIS INCLUDES PARAPHRASING of materials. Any inclusion of ideas that are
not your own will be considered plagiarism. Students who do not properly cite ideas, quotes or
paraphrasing of other published or unpublished material will automatically face disciplinary
action, which will also reflect in their grade.
Language and Comportment: This course necessitates the discussion of complex and delicate
ideas about race and power. Throughout the semester, in papers and discussions, attempt to use
precise and up-to-date language. For example, rather than “freedom” perhaps “emancipation” or
“manumission” is more appropriate. The use of the terms lesbian, gay, trans, or queer, are more
specific and accurate than homosexual. Either “Black women” or “black men” is preferable to
“the Black Man” or “the Black woman.” Never use the n-word unless quoting in an essay, and
even then, try to avoid it. Use African American rather than “negro” or “colored” and black
where appropriate (e.g. Jimmy Cliff, a Jamaican musician, is black but not African American).
Most importantly, be respectful to your fellow classmates. If you do not feel that what you are
about to say is inappropriate, maybe give yourself some time to work through your thought or
share it with your TA or myself in an office hour before articulating said thought in class.


                                                                                                   2
Religious Holidays: If you observe a recognized religious holiday that is in conflict with the
university schedule, you can speak with me to make accommodations.
Students with Disabilities: Any student with a documented disability (physical or cognitive)
who requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with
Disabilities area of the Office of the Dean of Students at 471-6259 (voice) or 471-4641 (TTY for
users who are deaf or hard of hearing) as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining
authorized accommodations.
TRIGGER WARNING: This course is about race. We will be dealing with subject matter at
times involving racist language and sexual violence. I will try to provide specific warnings for
certain classes or screenings, but I am also providing this general warning for the entire course.
Readings
All readings will be available on Canvas or Library EBook.
Assignments and Grade Breakdown
Attendance/Participation: 10%
Quizzes: 40%
Essays: 50%
                                           Schedule
Middle Passages
Week 1: Course Introduction
Wednesday 8/28: Personal Introductions; Course Introduction
Friday 8/30: Course introduction continued; Syllabus
Week 2: Slavery the Meaning of Blackness
Monday 9/2: Labor Day
Wednesday 9/4: Intro lecture continued: the concept of social death; the ontology of blackness
Friday 9/6: Discuss Alexander Falconbridge’s “Account of the Transatlantic Slave Trade”;
Dred Scott vs. Sandford.
Week 3: Slavery, Literature and Blackness
Monday 9/9: Discuss Harriet Jacobs “Childhood”; “The New Master and Mistress”; “The Trials
of Girlhood”; “The Jealous Mistress”; “The Lover” EBOOK!
Wednesday 9/11: Discussion of Jacobs’ “What Slaves are Taught to Think of the North”;
“Sketches of Neighboring Slaveholders”; “Fear of Insurrection” EBOOK!
Friday 9/13: Finish Jacobs; the problem of “slave culture”
Week 4: Minstrelsy and the Invention of Blackness
Monday 9/16: Discuss Saidiya Hartman’s Scenes of Subjection selection
Wednesday 9/18: Continue to discuss Saidiya Hartman’s Scenes of Subjection selection; Blacks
and Vaudeville; Cake Walk.


                                                                                           3
Friday: 9/20: Introduction to W.E.B Du Bois; Discuss Du Bois “The Forethought” “Of Our
Spiritual Strivings” Quiz 1
Migratory Movements
Week 5: The Emergence of African Americans
Monday 9/23: Discuss Du Bois’ “The Black Belt”; “The Sorrow Songs”
Wednesday 9/25: Afro-American Worksongs in a Texas Prison; Vintage Gospel Sermon; Rev
C.L. Franklin.
Friday 9/27: Discuss LeRoi Jones’ Blues People (60-80)
Week 6: The Movements of the Blues
Monday 9/30: Discussion of Angela Davis Blues Legacies (3-41); Robert Johnson; Mississippi
Fred McDowell; Skip James; Ma Rainey; Bessie Smith
Wednesday 10/2: Discuss Ida B. Wells’ Southern Horrors; The Great Migration
Friday 10/4: Discussion of Langston Hughes poems.
Week 7: Harlem Sounds
Monday 10/7: Discuss Duke Ellington, Louis Armstrong, Josephine Baker
Wednesday 10/9: Race Movies the Popular Art of the 1920s and Oscar Micheaux
Friday 10/11: Discuss Within Our Gates.
Week 8: From Harlem to Birmingham
Monday 10/14: Introduction to the Civil Rights Movement; Discuss Martin Luther King’s Letter
from a Birmingham Jail
Wednesday 10/16: OPEN
Friday 10/18: Quiz 2
The Changing Same
Week 9: To Be So Black and Blue
Monday 10/21: Finish discussing King; Discuss Bebop – Charlie Parker and Dizzy Gillespie
Wednesday 10/23: Discuss Max Roach’s We Insist; Freedom Riders documentary
Friday 10/25: Discussion of James Baldwin’s “Sonny’s Blues”
Week 10: A Coming Change
Monday 10/28: Finish discussing Baldwin; The Emergence of Soul.
Wednesday 10/30: Discuss Sam Cooke’s “A Change is Gonna Come”; From SNCC to Black
Power
Friday 11/1: Introduction to Black Power and Discussion of Black Power Mixtape. Essay 1
Due; Quiz 3
Black Arts and Black Power
Week 11: Black Arts and the Question of Freedom
Monday 11/4: Discussion of Malcolm X; James Brown; Gil Scott Heron.
Wednesday 11/6: Panthers “Ten Point Program” and BLA “Message to the Black Movement”
Friday 11/8: Discussion of Ornette Coleman, John Coltrane; Albert Ayler; Parliament.


                                                                                    4
Week 12: Black Feminism
Monday 11/11: Discussion of the Combahee River Collective Statement
Wednesday 11/13: Discuss Audrey Lorde “Afterimages”; Sonia Sanchez “A Poem for Ella
Fitzgerld”
Friday 11/15: Discuss Bush Mama; LA Rebellion Filmmakers. Quiz 4
Hip Hop and Black Postmodernism
Week 13: Hip Hop and Afro-Pessimissm
Monday 11/18: Introduction to Hip Hop; Historical Contexts. Discuss Style Wars.
Wednesday 11/20: Imani Perry “My Mic Sound Nice.” Discuss Arrested Development and
N.W.A. The question of authenticity.
Friday 11/22: Open
Week 14: Fall Break
Fall Break
Week 15: Hip Hop and Global Blackness
Monday 12/2 Discuss Billy Woods’ Hiding Places
Wednesday 12/4: Discuss Billy Woods’ Hiding Places
Friday 12/6: ESSAY 2 DUE! Final thoughts
