                                                                    SPRING 2020
Course:                   MKT 382
                          Also: ADV 391K
                          Analytical Tools for Marketing Decisions
                          RRH 5.402 TTH 11:00AM-12:30PM
Instructor:               Vijay Mahajan
                          Office: CBA 3.228          Tel. 512-471-1128
                          Office Hours: TTH 12:30PM-1:30PM in the faculty lounge (RRH
                          5.416) and by appointment in my office (CBA 3.228)
Teaching Assistant:       Mike Lan
                          Office: CBA 5.334X
                          Office Hours: TTH 3:00PM-4PM
                          Email: mikelan@utexas.edu
COURSE OBJECTIVES
This course deals with concepts, methods, and applications of analytical tools to address such
marketing issues as segmentation, targeting and positioning, new product design and
development, advertising, and sales force management and promotion planning. The course
is designed for MBA students who have some background in or understanding of marketing
principles and exposure to spreadsheet programs such as EXCEL.
Unlike conventional capstone marketing courses that focus on conceptual material, this
course will attempt to provide skills to translate conceptual understanding into specific
operational plans -- a skill in increasing demand in organizations today. Using market
simulations and related exercises tied to PC-based computer software tools, students will
develop marketing plans in various decision contexts.
Specifically, the course objectives are to:
        * Provide students with an understanding of the role that analytical techniques and
          computer models can play in enhancing marketing decision making in modern
          enterprises.
        * Improve students’ skill in viewing marketing processes and relationships
          systematically and analytically.
        * Expose students to numerous examples demonstrating the value of the analytical
          tools to marketing decision-making.
                                             -1-


        * Provide students with the software tools that enable them to apply the models and
          methods taught in the course to real marketing problems.
The course will be of particular value to students planning careers in marketing and
management consulting, brand management, and marketing/business analytics.
REQUIRED COURSE MATERIAL
    1. Gary L. Lilien, Arvind Rangaswamy and Arnand DBruyn (2017), Principles of
        Marketing Engineering and Analytics, Decision Pro Inc. 3rd edition
    2. Software: Enginius is an online platform, which includes cases for each of the
        analytical modules covered in tise course. To access the platform, please register on
        Enginius.biz as a student following the instructions provided on Page 4. The website
        will require the Student Access Code to qualify you for the academically priced
        software, available directly through the website. You can access the following cases
        using the Enginius.biz platform: Conglomerate Inc.’s new PDA, Infiniti G20, Forte
        Executive Inns, HOPE Foundation, Syntex Labs. Three additional cases (Blue
        Mountain Coffee, OfficerStar Ink Cartridge, and Braincell) will be available through
        a different medium, and the details of these cases will be disclosed as they become
        available.
GRADING
                 Group homework (8)                            40%
                 Presentation of assigned homework (1)         10 %
                 Peer evaluation                               10%
                 Term Project
                   * Presentation                              15%
                   * Report                                    25%
CLASS PARTICIPATION / ATTENDANCE
Class sessions will be devoted to probing, extending and applying the material in the text and
the cases. It is your responsibility to be prepared for each session according to the class
outline. Each one of you will benefit from belonging to a ‘study group’ that meets and
prepares for each session before coming to class.
Each of you is expected to contribute to class discussions. To do well, you must actively
participate in presentations and class discussions. Any student who has two unexcused class
absences will have his or her end of semester grade reduced by one-half grade. Each
additional unexcused absence will result in the student’s grade being reduced by an
additional one-half grade. Excused absences do not include obligations to other classes or
otherwise worthy university or professional activities. Excused absences are for personal
events and if you are unable to attend a particular session, please inform us as soon as
possible. Out of respect for your fellow classmates, all students must arrive on time for class
                                              -2-


and not leave until the class is formally dismissed. YOU MUST PLACE YOUR NAME
CARD IN FRONT OF YOU IN EVERY CLASS TO RECEIVE CREDIT FOR YOUR
ATTENDANCE AND CLASS PARTICIPATION.
                                             -3-


-4-

GROUP HOMEWORK
The class will form preferably eight groups during the first week of class. These groups will
complete both the weekly homework and the semester project. Group members must prepare
jointly for class discussions.
The write-up for each group homework should not exceed five double-spaced typed pages.
The format of the write-up should include (but not restricted to) the following parts: (1)
executive summary with a brief description of the case in hand and objectives of the analysis,
and some highlights of your recommendations, (2) the analysis that supports your
recommendations, (3) justification of any assumptions that you use in the analysis as well as
limitations of your analysis, and (4) a brief conclusion. Appendices may be attached as
necessary. Each group will be assigned the responsibility for presenting one homework for
the class. The presentation assignments are listed in the class schedule. The presentation
should not exceed half an hour. Class discussion should reinforce common ideas, critique
potential problems, and offer additional insights to the presentation by the presentation
group.
Groups should try to form such that at least one member of the group has personal access to a
computer with the characteristics as described in the section on Required Course Material –
Software.
Please note that for Case 7, Syntex Labs, you will need to buy the case directly from Harvard
Business Review. Below is a link to buy the case for $7.45. This link is also available on the
Enginius platform.
https://hbsp.harvard.edu/product/584033-PDF-ENG
TERM PROJECT
The objective of the term project is to provide you with an opportunity to apply what you
learn in class to a real marketing issue of interest to you. As a first step, you have to select a
project of interest to your group.
Then you must select or develop a model to address a specific marketing problem
(segmentation, forecasting, etc.) facing a specific company. It is your responsibility to
identify a suitable company for this assignment. One place to start is with your former
employer. Other possibilities include contacting Texas alumni, or executives in companies
sufficiently close by. You are only limited by your imagination!
You must discuss your projects with the course instructor prior to working on the report and
presentation, and you must turn in a two-page description of your project plan by the
deadline on the class schedule. Some examples of projects in the past two years include:
        * Salesforce compensation model for a global computer manufacturer
                                              -5-


        * Pricing model for a non-profit entertainment company
        * Market share simulator for a detergent market
        * Positioning for a local restaurant
        * Customer segmentation for a local coffee shop
        * Customer segmentation for a healthcare app
        * Conjoint analysis for the Texas MBA Global Trip program
        * Conjoint analysis for the loyalty program of a convenience store
        * A model for identifying customers most likely to upgrade to the next version of a
        software package.
        * Positioning model for an Internet information service
For the term project, you can either build a model of your own, or adapt one (or a few) of the
models in the course suite to an actual problem. You may choose to work on a project that
involves one of the software tools not covered in class. In either case, your presentation must
make clear how the model works and how you have used it to arrive at a marketing decision.
In terms of obtaining data, you can collect data on your own or find a relevant secondary
source of data. In the past, students have found Kaggle.com (a publicly available database)
and Mintel (a private database available through your UT library subscription) useful. If you
need help finding the right secondary source, consult with the UT business librarian in the
PCL library.
The projects will be turned in as follows: During the final sessions of the semester, each
group will make a presentation to the entire class on their assigned date, lasting about 30
minutes. During the last class session, you will turn in a copy of all of your slides and two
copies of a short report not exceeding 15 pages, double-spaced excluding exhibits.
PEER EVALUATION
To ensure that each group member performs responsibly, 10% of the total grade will be
based on a peer evaluation conducted at the end of the semester. Group members will rate
each group member, including themselves, on a 10-point scale. The average of these ratings
will be the peer evaluation score. For example, if you rate yourself 8, and other members rate
you 9, 8 and 9, your peer evaluation will be 8.5. You should be honest and impartial in your
evaluations. The instructor reserves the right to correct and/or discard evaluations if they
appear to be questionable. Two peer evaluation forms, one each for the project and the
homework assignments, are included in your course package. They should be filled out and
returned to the instructor after the project presentation.
ABOUT THE INSTRUCTOR
Vijay Mahajan holds the John P. Harbin Centennial Chair in Business at Mccombs School of
Business, University of Texas at Austin. He has received numerous lifetime achievement
awards including the American Marketing Association (AMA) Charles Coolidge Parlin
Award for visionary leadership in scientific marketing. The AMA also instituted the Vijay
                                              -6-


Mahajan Award in 2000 for career contributions to marketing strategy. In 2006, he received
the Distinguished Alumnus Award from the Indian Institute of Technology (Kanpur) for his
contributions to management research. He served as the dean of the Indian School of
Business, Hyderabad, from 2002-2004. He served as the Associate Dean for Research for the
McCombs School of Business, University of Texas at Austin, from 1991-1994. He served on
the World Economic Forum Global Agenda Council for The Arab World from 2012-2014.
Professor Mahajan is author or editor of thirteen books including his recent 2016 book, The
Rise of Rural Consumers in Developing Countries: Harvesting 3 Billion Aspirations. These
books have been translated into twelve languages. His book, The 86% Solution, received the
Book-of-the-Year award (Berry-American Marketing Association) in 2007 and Convergence
Marketing and Africa Rising were among the finalists for the same award in 2003 and 2010
respectively. Professor Mahajan has been invited by The World Bank, several think tanks
and more than 120 universities and research institutions worldwide for research
presentations. He has also been the editor of the Journal of Marketing Research. Professor
Mahajan's research has been reported and reviewed in dozens of media outlets in many
countries including CBS, BBC, NPR, Wall Street Journal, NY Times, Washington Post, LA
Times, Financial Times UK, Economist, Harvard Business Review, Time magazine,
Knowledge@Wharton, Fast Company, Shanghai Daily, Ode, Inc., Economic Times India,
Indian Management magazine, IndiaNow (India Brand Equity Foundation/Ministry of
Commerce and Industry), Livemint ( India), Austin-American Statesman, Hindu Business
Line, Jeune Afrique France, African Business UK, Gulf News, Asharq Alawsat UK,
Chosunilbo South Korea, Absatzwirtschaft Germany, LaPresse Canada, Lactualite Canada,
The Island Sri Lanka, Lider Crotia, MS Marketing Srbija Serbia, Management Today UK,
Domus Italy, Business Day South Africa, Politiken Denmark, The Nation UAE, and Kitaab
Singapore. Professor Mahajan has consulted with various Fortune 500 companies and has
delivered executive development programs worldwide. Mahajan received B.Tech in
Chemical Engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology at Kanpur, his M.S. in
Chemical Engineering and Ph.D in Management from the University of Texas at Austin.
ABOUT THE TEACHING ASSISTANT
Mike Lan is a doctoral student in quantitative marketing at the McCombs School of
Business. Before becoming a PhD student, Mike acquired a bachelor’s degree in mathematics
and economics from the University of Virginia, and a master’s degree in economics from the
University of Texas at Austin. Mike’s research lies at the intersection of digital marketing
and mobile/online targeting. Mike has a cat and likes to play poker in his spare time.
                                            -7-


Group #_______
                                           Confidential
                        Peer Evaluation Form for Term Project
                                             MKT 382
The purpose of this evaluation is to measure the contribution of each member of the group
effort in successfully completing the project. Each member will rate the relative contribution
of all members in the group on a 10-point scale. The average of these ratings will be the peer
evaluation score. For example, if you rate your contribution 8, and other members rate you a
9, 8 and 9, then your peer evaluation will be 8.5. You should be honest and impartial in your
evaluations. The instructor reserves the right to correct and/or discard evaluations that are
questionable. Please use the scale shown below:
   Enter the name of each  Rate the member’s
  group member, yourself   contribution on the   Please provide some justification for your score below:
         first, below          0-10 scale:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
Please return this form to Prof. Mahajan’s mailbox in the Marketing Department, CBA 7.202
                                               -8-


                                                                                        Group #_______
                                            Confidential
                      Peer Evaluation Form for Group Homework
                                              MKT 382
The purpose of this evaluation is to measure the contribution of each member of the group
effort in successfully completing the homeworks. Each member will rate the relative
contribution of all members in the group on a 10-point scale. The average of these ratings
will be the peer evaluation score. For example, if you rate your contribution 8, and other
members rate you a 9, 8 and 9, then your peer evaluation will be 8.5. You should be honest
and impartial in your evaluations. The instructor reserves the right to correct and/or discard
evaluations that are questionable. Please use the scale shown below:
   Enter the name of each   Rate the member’s
  group member, yourself    contribution on the   Please provide some justification for your score below:
         first, below           0-10 scale:
 1.
 2.
 3.
 4.
Please return this form to Prof. Mahajan’s mailbox in the Marketing Department, CBA 7.202
                                                -9-


                                            Class Schedule
                              Analytical Tools for Marketing Decisions
 = To turn in Homework
 = Indicated group to present same homework
* = SOFTWARE IS AVAILABLE ON ENGINIUS.COM
SESSION       DATE        TOPICS & TOOLS                         CASES / READINGS PRESENTATIONS
                                                                 DUE
                          • Intro to Marketing Models            • Chapter 1,9
                T 1/21
     1                    • Syllabus Review
                          • Software Overview                    • Chapter 1,9
               TH 1/23    • Response Models
     2                      •  How does non-linear response
                               affect allocation of resources?
                          • Startup Tutorial for Marketing       •  Chapter 1
                            Engineering Software                 •  Braincell
                                                                    Internet
                T 1/28
                          • Response Models Contd.                  Advertising
     3                    • Braincell Software                      Case
                          • Group Formation
                          • Braincell Software Contd.            •  Chapter 1,9
                                                                 •  Braincell
               TH 1/30                                              Internet
     4                                                              Advertising
                                                                    Case
                          •    Budgeting for Advertising         •  Chapter 7
                                                                    (pp.211-214)
                            •  How does the market respond to
                T 2/4
                               advertising?                      •  Blue Mountain
     5                                                              Coffee Case
                            •  How should advertising dollars be
                               allocated over time?
                                                    - 10 -


           •   Budgeting for Advertising           • Chapter 7     •  Braincell
               Contd.                                (pp.211-214)    Internet
   TH 2/6
6                                                  • Blue Mountain   Advertising Case
           • ADBUDG Software                         Coffee Case    Group 1
           • ADBUDG Software Contd.                • Chapter 3
                                                   • Conglomerate
           • Segmenting & Targeting                  Inc.’s new
    T 2/11                                           PDA Case*
             • How can market segments be
7              identified and distinguished?
             • Which segments offer the highest
               potential?
           •   Segmenting & Targeting              • Chapter 3
   TH 2/13
               Contd.                              • Conglomerate
8                                                    Inc.’s new
           •   Cluster Analysis Software             PDA Case*
           •   Cluster Analysis Software           • Conglomerate   Blue Mountain
    T 2/18     Contd.                                Inc.’s new      Coffee Case
9                                                    PDA Case*      Group 2
           •   Product Positioning                 • Chapter 4
               • How do   consumers perceive the   • Infiniti G20
   TH 2/20     brands in a market?                   Case*
10             • How can   a product differentiate
               itself on a key perceptual
               dimension?
           •   Product Positioning Contd.          • Chapter 4
    T 2/25
                                                   • Infiniti G20
11         •   Perceptual Mapping                    Case*
               Software
                                    - 11 -


           • Perceptual Mapping              • Chapter 6       PDA Case
             Software Contd.                 • Forte           Group 3
                                               Executive Inns
   TH 2/27 • Product Development/              Case*
12           Conjoint Analysis
           • Which of the available features
             should a new product include?
           • Product Development/            • Chapter 6
             Conjoint Analysis Contd.        • Forte
13  T 3/3                                      Executive Inns
           • Conjoint Software                 Case*
                                             • Forte
   TH 3/5
14         • Conjoint Software Contd.          Executive Inns
                                               Case*
    T 3/10 • Project Plan Preparation
15
   TH 3/12 • Project Plan Preparation
16
           • Customer Value Assessment       • Chapter 2
             and Valuing Customers           • Hope
    T 3/24 • Customer Value Assessment         Foundation
17           Software                          Case*
           • Customer Value Assessment       • Chapter 2       Infiniti G20 Case
   TH 3/26   Software Contd.                 • Hope            Group 4
18                                             Foudnation
                                               Case*
                                - 12 -


           • Salesforce Management              • Chapter 7       Forte Executive
                                                  (pp.214-220)      Inns Case
           • How should salesforce size be      • Syntex Labs     Group 5
    T 3/31  determined?                           Case*
19
           • How should the salesforce be
             allocated to multiple products and
             distribution channels?
           • Salesforce Management              • Chapter 7       Project Plan
              Contd.                              (pp.214-220)      Due
   TH 4/2                                       • Syntex Labs
20         • Sales Resource Allocation            Case*
              (Syngen Software)
             • Syngen Software Contd.           • Chapter 5       Hope Foundation
    T 4/7                                       • OfficeStar Ink Case
21           • New Product Forecasting            Cartridge Case  Group 6
           • New Product Forecasting            • Chapter 5
   TH 4/9    Contd.                             • OfficeStar Ink
22         • Trial-Repeat Software                Cartridge Case
                                                                  Syntex Labs
23  T 4/14 • Trial-Repeat Software Contd                            Case
                                                                  Group 7
   TH 4/16
24         • Group Project Preparation
                                                                  Office Star Case
    T 4/21 • Trial-Repeat Case                                    Group 8
25
   TH 4/23
           • Presentations
26            (Groups 1 and 2)
           • Presentations
    T 4/28
27            (Groups 3 and 4)
                                    - 13 -


                         • Presentations
      28      TH 4/30
                           (Groups 5 and 6)
                         • Presentations
    29          T 5/5
                           (Groups 7 and 8)
                         •   Wrap up
    30         TH 5/7    •   Project report, submission
                             and discussion
Students with Disabilities
Upon request, the University of Texas at Austin provides appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. Services for Students with
Disabilities (SSD) is housed in the Office of the Dean of Students, located on the fourth floor
of the Student Services Building. Information on how to register, downloadable forms,
including guidelines for documentation, accommodation request letters, and releases of
information are available online at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/index.php. Please do
not hesitate to contact SSD at (512) 471-6259, VP: (512) 232-2937 or via e-mail if you have
any questions.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days
prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, you
will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence.
Academic Dishonesty
I have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts damage the reputation of the
school and the degree and demean the honest efforts of the majority of students. The
minimum penalty for an act of academic dishonesty will be a zero for that assignment or
exam.
The responsibilities for both students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are
described on http://mba.mccombs.utexas.edu/students/academics/honor/index.asp and on the
final pages of this syllabus. As the instructor for this course, I agree to observe all the faculty
responsibilities described therein. During Orientation, you signed the Honor Code Pledge. In
doing so, you agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities of the Honor Code. If the
application of the Honor System to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is
your responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Honor Code Purpose
Academic honor, trust and integrity are fundamental to The University of Texas at Austin
McCombs School of Business community. They contribute directly to the quality of your
                                              - 14 -


education and reach far beyond the campus to your overall standing within the business
community. The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business Honor System
promotes academic honor, trust and integrity throughout the Graduate School of Business.
The Honor System relies upon The University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct
(Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Service and Activities) for enforcement, but
promotes ideals that are higher than merely enforceable standards. Every student is
responsible for understanding and abiding by the provisions of the Honor System and the
University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct. The University expects all students to
obey the law, show respect for other members of the university community, perform
contractual obligations, maintain absolute integrity and the highest standard of individual
honor in scholastic work, and observe the highest standards of conduct. Ignorance of the
Honor System or The University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct is not an acceptable
excuse for violations under any circumstances.
The effectiveness of the Honor System results solely from the wholehearted and
uncompromising support of each member of the Graduate School of Business community.
Each member must abide by the Honor System and must be intolerant of any violations. The
system is only as effective as you make it.
Faculty Involvement in the Honor System
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business Faculty's commitment to
the Honor System is critical to its success. It is imperative that faculty make their
expectations clear to all students. They must also respond to accusations of cheating or other
misconduct by students in a timely, discrete and fair manner. We urge faculty members to
promote awareness of the importance of integrity through in-class discussions and
assignments throughout the semester.
Expectations Under the Honor System
Standards
If a student is uncertain about the standards of conduct in a particular setting, he or she
should ask the relevant faculty member for clarification to ensure his or her conduct falls
within the expected scope of honor, trust and integrity as promoted by the Honor System.
This applies to all tests, papers and group and individual work. Questions about appropriate
behavior during the job search should be addressed to a professional member of the Career
Services Office. Below are some of the specific examples of violations of the Honor System.
Lying
Lying is any deliberate attempt to deceive another by stating an untruth, or by any direct
form of communication to include the telling of a partial truth. Lying includes the use or
omission of any information with the intent to deceive or mislead. Examples of lying include,
but are not limited to, providing a false excuse for why a test was missed or presenting false
information to a recruiter.
Stealing
Stealing is wrongfully taking, obtaining, withholding, defacing or destroying any person's
money, personal property, article or service, under any circumstances. Examples of stealing
include, but are not limited to, removing course material from the library or hiding it from
                                             - 15 -


others, removing material from another person's mail folder, securing for one's self
unattended items such as calculators, books, book bags or other personal property. Another
form of stealing is the duplication of copyrighted material beyond the reasonable bounds of
"fair use." Defacing (e.g., "marking up" or highlighting) library books is also considered
stealing, because, through a willful act, the value of another's property is decreased. (See the
appendix for a detailed explanation of "fair use.")
Cheating
Cheating is wrongfully and unfairly acting out of self-interest for personal gain by seeking or
accepting an unauthorized advantage over one's peers. Examples include, but are not limited
to, obtaining questions or answers to tests or quizzes, and getting assistance on case write-ups
or other projects beyond what is authorized by the assigning instructor. It is also cheating to
accept the benefit(s) of another person's theft(s) even if not actively sought. For instance, if
one continues to be attentive to an overhead conversation about a test or case write-up even if
initial exposure to such information was accidental and beyond the control of the student in
question, one is also cheating. If a student overhears a conversation or any information that
any faculty member might reasonably wish to withhold from the student, the student should
inform the faculty member(s) of the information and circumstance under which it was
overheard.
Actions Required for Responding to Suspected and Known Violations
As stated, everyone must abide by the Honor System and be intolerant of violations. If you
suspect a violation has occurred, you should first speak to the suspected violator in an
attempt to determine if an infraction has taken place. If, after doing so, you still believe that a
violation has occurred, you must tell the suspected violator that he or she must report himself
or herself to the course professor or Associate Dean of the Graduate School of Business. If
the individual fails to report himself or herself within 48 hours, it then becomes your
obligation to report the infraction to the course professor or the Associate Dean of the
Graduate School of Business. Remember that although you are not required by regulation to
take any action, our Honor System is only as effective as you make it. If you remain silent
when you suspect or know of a violation, you are approving of such dishonorable conduct as
the community standard. You are thereby precipitating a repetition of such violations.
The Honor Pledge
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business requires each enrolled
student to adopt the Honor System. The Honor Pledge best describes the conduct promoted
by the Honor System. It is as follows:
"I affirm that I belong to the honorable community of The University of Texas at Austin
Graduate School of Business. I will not lie, cheat or steal, nor will I tolerate those who do."
"I pledge my full support to the Honor System. I agree to be bound at all times by the Honor
System and understand that any violation may result in my dismissal from the Graduate
School of Business."
The following pages provide specific guidance about the Standard of Academic
Integrity at the University of Texas at Austin. Please read it carefully and feel free to
ask me any questions you might have.
                                             - 16 -


The Standard of Academic Integrity
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is highly valued
and seriously regarded at The University of Texas at Austin, as emphasized in the standards
of conduct. More specifically, you and other students are expected to "maintain absolute
integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work" undertaken at the
University (Sec. 11-801, Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities). This is a very
basic expectation that is further reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum,
you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic endeavors with the utmost
honesty, which requires you to:
    •    acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
    •    complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or
         obtain assistance in preparing them;
    •    follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
         academic discipline; and
    •    avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another
         student.
For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to
Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities.
What is Scholastic Dishonesty?
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines scholastic
dishonesty—basically, all conduct that violates this standard, including any act designed to
give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
    •    Cheating
    •    Plagiarism
    •    Unauthorized Collaboration
    •    Collusion
    •    Falsifying Academic Records
    •    Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain
         an extended deadline for an assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
    •    Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity
         (e.g., multiple submissions—submitting essentially the same written assignment for
         two courses without authorization to do so)
Several types of scholastic dishonesty—unauthorized collaboration, plagiarism, and multiple
submissions—are discussed in more detail on this Web site to correct common
misperceptions about these particular offenses and suggest ways to avoid committing them.
For the University's official definition of scholastic dishonesty, see Section 11-802,
Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities.
Unauthorized Collaboration
                                             - 17 -


If you work with another person on an assignment for credit without the instructor's
permission to do so, you are engaging in unauthorized collaboration.
    •   This common form of academic dishonesty can occur with all types of scholastic
        work—papers, homework, tests (take-home or in-class), lab reports, computer
        programming projects, or any other assignments to be submitted for credit.
    •   For the University's official definitions of unauthorized collaboration and the related
        offense of collusion, see Sections 11-802(c)(6) & 11-802(e), Institutional Rules on
        Student Services and Activities.
Some students mistakenly assume that they can work together on an assignment as long
as the instructor has not expressly prohibited collaborative efforts.
    •   Actually, students are expected to complete assignments independently unless the
        course instructor indicates otherwise. So working together on assignments is not
        permitted unless the instructor specifically approves of any such collaboration.
Unfortunately, students who engage in unauthorized collaboration tend to justify doing
so through various rationalizations. For example, some argue that they contributed to
the work, and others maintain that working together on an assignment "helped them
learn better."
    •   The instructor—not the student—determines the purpose of a particular assignment
        and the acceptable method for completing it. Unless working together on an
        assignment has been specifically authorized, always assume it is not allowed.
    •   Many educators do value group assignments and other collaborative efforts,
        recognizing their potential for developing and enhancing specific learning skills. And
        course requirements in some classes do consist primarily of group assignments. But
        the expectation of individual work is the prevailing norm in many classes, consistent
        with the presumption of original work that remains a fundamental tenet of scholarship
        in the American educational system.
Some students incorrectly assume that the degree of any permissible collaboration is
basically the same for all classes.
    •   The extent of any permissible collaboration can vary widely from one class to the
        next, even from one project to the next within the same class.
    •   Be sure to distinguish between collaboration that is authorized for a particular
        assignment and unauthorized collaboration that is undertaken for the sake of
        expedience or convenience to benefit you and/or another student. By failing to make
        this key distinction, you are much more likely to engage in unauthorized
        collaboration. To avoid any such outcome, always seek clarification from the
        instructor.
Unauthorized collaboration can also occur in conjunction with group projects.
    •   How so? If the degree or type of collaboration exceeds the parameters expressly
        approved by the instructor. An instructor may allow (or even expect) students to work
        together on one stage of a group project but require independent work on other
        phases. Any such distinctions should be strictly observed.
                                              - 18 -


Providing another student unauthorized assistance on an assignment is also a violation,
even without the prospect of benefiting yourself.
    •    If an instructor did not authorize students to work together on a particular assignment
         and you help a student complete that assignment, you are providing unauthorized
         assistance and, in effect, facilitating an act of academic dishonesty. Equally
         important, you can be held accountable for doing so.
    •    For similar reasons, you should not allow another student access to your drafted or
         completed assignments unless the instructor has permitted those materials to be
         shared in that manner.
Plagiarism
Plagiarism is another serious violation of academic integrity. In simplest terms, this
occurs if you represent as your own work any material that was obtained from another
source, regardless how or where you acquired it.
    •    Plagiarism can occur with all types of media—scholarly or non-academic, published
         or unpublished—written publications, Internet sources, oral presentations,
         illustrations, computer code, scientific data or analyses, music, art, and other forms of
         expression. (See Section 11-802(d) of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and
         Activities for the University's official definition of plagiarism.)
    •    Borrowed material from written works can include entire papers, one or more
         paragraphs, single phrases, or any other excerpts from a variety of sources such as
         books, journal articles, magazines, downloaded Internet documents, purchased papers
         from commercial writing services, papers obtained from other students (including
         homework assignments), etc.
    •    As a general rule, the use of any borrowed material results in plagiarism if the
         original source is not properly acknowledged. So you can be held accountable for
         plagiarizing material in either a final submission of an assignment or a draft that is
         being submitted to an instructor for review, comments, and/or approval.
Using verbatim material (e.g., exact words) without proper attribution (or credit)
constitutes the most blatant form of plagiarism. However, other types of material can
be plagiarized as well, such as ideas drawn from an original source or even its structure
(e.g., sentence construction or line of argument).
    •    Improper or insufficient paraphrasing often accounts for this type of plagiarism. (See
         additional information on paraphrasing.)
Plagiarism can be committed intentionally or unintentionally.
    •    Strictly speaking, any use of material from another source without proper attribution
         constitutes plagiarism, regardless why that occurred, and any such conduct violates
         accepted standards of academic integrity.
    •    Some students deliberately plagiarize, often rationalizing this misconduct with a
         variety of excuses: falling behind and succumbing to the pressures of meeting
                                                - 19 -


        deadlines; feeling overworked and wishing to reduce their workloads; compensating
        for actual (or perceived) academic or language deficiencies; and/or justifying
        plagiarism on other grounds.
    •   But some students commit plagiarism without intending to do so, often stumbling into
        negligent plagiarism as a result of sloppy notetaking, insufficient paraphrasing, and/or
        ineffective proofreading. Those problems, however, neither justify nor excuse this
        breach of academic standards. By misunderstanding the meaning of plagiarism and/or
        failing to cite sources accurately, you are much more likely to commit this violation.
        Avoiding that outcome requires, at a minimum, a clear understanding of plagiarism
        and the appropriate techniques for scholarly attribution. (See related information on
        paraphrasing; notetaking and proofreading; and acknowledging and citing sources.)
By merely changing a few words or rearranging several words or sentences, you are not
paraphrasing. Making minor revisions to borrowed text amounts to plagiarism.
    •   Even if properly cited, a "paraphrase" that is too similar to the original source's
        wording and/or structure is, in fact, plagiarized. (See additional information on
        paraphrasing.)
Remember, your instructors should be able to clearly identify which materials (e.g.,
words and ideas) are your own and which originated with other sources.
    •   That cannot be accomplished without proper attribution. You must give credit where
        it is due, acknowledging the sources of any borrowed passages, ideas, or other types
        of materials, and enclosing any verbatim excerpts with quotation marks (using block
        indentation for longer passages).
Plagiarism & Unauthorized Collaboration
Plagiarism and unauthorized collaboration are often committed jointly.
By submitting as your own work any unattributed material that you obtained from other
sources (including the contributions of another student who assisted you in preparing a
homework assignment), you have committed plagiarism. And if the instructor did not
authorize students to work together on the assignment, you have also engaged in
unauthorized collaboration. Both violations contribute to the same fundamental deception—
representing material obtained from another source as your own work.
Group efforts that extend beyond the limits approved by an instructor frequently involve
plagiarism in addition to unauthorized collaboration. For example, an instructor may allow
students to work together while researching a subject, but require each student to write a
separate report. If the students collaborate while writing their reports and then submit the
products of those joint efforts as individual works, they are guilty of unauthorized
collaboration as well as plagiarism. In other words, the students collaborated on the written
assignment without authorization to do so, and also failed to acknowledge the other students'
contributions to their own individual reports.
Multiple Submissions
Submitting the same paper (or other type of assignment) for two courses without prior
approval represents another form of academic dishonesty.
                                             - 20 -


You may not submit a substantially similar paper or project for credit in two (or more)
courses unless expressly authorized to do so by your instructor(s). (See Section 11-802(b) of
the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for the University's official
definition of scholastic dishonesty.)
You may, however, re-work or supplement previous work on a topic with the instructor's
approval.
Some students mistakenly assume that they are entitled to submit the same paper (or
other assignment) for two (or more) classes simply because they authored the original
work.
Unfortunately, students with this viewpoint tend to overlook the relevant ethical and
academic issues, focusing instead on their own "authorship" of the original material and
personal interest in receiving essentially double credit for a single effort.
Unauthorized multiple submissions are inherently deceptive. After all, an instructor
reasonably assumes that any completed assignments being submitted for credit were actually
prepared for that course. Mindful of that assumption, students who "recycle" their own
papers from one course to another make an effort to convey that impression. For instance, a
student may revise the original title page or imply through some other means that he or she
wrote the paper for that particular course, sometimes to the extent of discussing a "proposed"
paper topic with the instructor or presenting a "draft" of the paper before submitting the
"recycled" work for credit.
The issue of plagiarism is also relevant. If, for example, you previously prepared a paper for
one course and then submit it for credit in another course without citing the initial work, you
are committing plagiarism—essentially "self-plagiarism"—the term used by some
institutions. Recall the broad scope of plagiarism: all types of materials can be plagiarized,
including unpublished works, even papers you previously wrote.
Another problem concerns the resulting "unfair academic advantage" that is specifically
referenced in the University's definition of scholastic dishonesty. If you submit a paper for
one course that you prepared and submitted for another class, you are simply better situated
to devote more time and energy toward fulfilling other requirements for the subsequent
course than would be available to classmates who are completing all course requirements
during that semester. In effect, you would be gaining an unfair academic advantage, which
constitutes academic dishonesty as it is defined on this campus.
Some students, of course, do recognize one or more of these ethical issues, but still refrain
from citing their authorship of prior papers to avoid earning reduced (or zero) credit for the
same works in other classes. That underlying motivation further illustrates the deceptive
nature of unauthorized multiple submissions.
An additional issue concerns the problematic minimal efforts involved in "recycling" papers
(or other prepared assignments). Exerting minimal effort basically undercuts the curricular
objectives associated with a particular assignment and the course itself. Likewise, the
practice of "recycling" papers subverts important learning goals for individual degree
programs and higher education in general, such as the mastery of specific skills that students
should acquire and develop in preparing written assignments. This demanding but necessary
process is somewhat analogous to the required regimen of athletes, like the numerous laps
                                             - 21 -


and other repetitive training exercises that runners must successfully complete to prepare
adequately for a marathon.
                                             - 22 -
