                                                        Syllabus
                        Accounting 312: Fundamentals of Managerial Accounting
                                                        Fall 2018
Class Hours:       MW 11:00-12:30 (Unique #: 02375)                 Location:       UTC 4.102
                   MW 12:30-2:00 (Unique #: 02380)                                  UTC 4.102
                   TTh 11:00-12:30 (Unique #: 02385)                                UTC 4.102
                   TTh 12:30-2:00 (Unique #: 02390)                                 UTC 4.102
Instructor:        Brian Lendecky                                   Office:         CBA 4M.210
   E-mail:         brian.lendecky@mccombs.utexas.edu                Phone: (512) 232-9343 (but e-mail is best)
   Office Hrs:     Monday and Tuesday 2:45-3:45, and by appointment
TA:                Anastasia Graves                                 Office:         See “Announcements” in Canvas
   E-mail:         anastasia.graves@utexas.edu                      Office Hours: See “Announcements” in Canvas
TA:                Madison Ford                                     Office:         See “Announcements” in Canvas
   E-mail:         mhf134@gmail.com                                 Office Hours: See “Announcements” in Canvas
Required Materials
         1. MANAGERIAL ACCOUNTING, by Ronald W. Hilton & David E. Platt (11th edition, McGraw-Hill
              Education, ©2017)
         2. McGRAW-HILL CONNECT and COURSESMART, on-line study and homework managers
         3. ACC 312 CASE PACK, from UT Copy Center (GSB 3.136). Available in after Midterm Exam 1.
    CANVAS will be used for course management and any additional readings or study materials will be
    posted there. I also will use Canvas for communicating with the class.
    During the first week of class, you must ensure that:
          you can access the class site on Canvas and have set up your communication preferences;
          your Connect access (including LearnSmart) is functioning properly.
    This course is supported by UT’s Peer-Led Undergraduate Studying (PLUS) program. PLUS study
    groups provide an opportunity to collaboratively practice skills and knowledge you need for success in this
    course. Attending study groups regularly is a great way to ensure that you are keeping up with the material
    so you don’t fall behind; feel free to attend any study group at any point in the semester. Groups will start
    in early September; more information on times and locations will be available through Canvas and e-mail.
    Additional information on PLUS, including an introductory video, may be found at
    http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc/support/plus. PLUS facilitator applications are due 9/4/18.
 Learning Objectives
    If you stay engaged with the course by participating in class, reading the assigned text, completing the
    assigned work, and preparing well for cases and exams, you should obtain the results listed below:
                Expected Result                        What We’ll Do                 How We’ll Measure the Results
       Understand how accounting         ..Discuss chapter readings, cases, and   Interesting and lively class
       systems provide data useful for   current topics together in class.        discussions about cases and
       management decisions in all       ..Relate Managerial Accounting to what   application of materials, including
       business areas.                   is going on in the business world.       current business news.
       Gain experience structuring       ..Work practice problems together in     Homework, cases, and exam
       business problems and             class and discuss them.                  performance (grades).
       analyzing management              ..Prepare business cases for class
       decisions.                        discussion and develop
         Fall 2018                                 Syllabus – ACC 312                                      Page 1


                                       recommendations.
 This course carries the Quantitative Reasoning Flag. QR courses are designed to equip you with skills that
 are necessary for understanding the types of quantitative arguments you will regularly encounter in your
 adult and professional life. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your grade to come from
 your use of quantitative skills to analyze real-world problems.
 E-mail and Canvas
 The use of email and Canvas is required for this course. I will frequently communicate with the class with
 announcements and guidance via email. I will use the email addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas.
 If you need to update your email address with the University go to your UT Direct page and, under personal
 info/all my addresses, change your email address. Before each class, I will post on Canvas our lecture
 outline notes. I will send out a class-wide e-mail notifying you when I post the lecture outline notes so you
 can print them out and bring them to class.
 Any outside-of-class announcements that I make (e.g., corrections or clarifications of items discussed in
 class, syllabus changes, assignment changes, etc.) will be sent to you via e-mail through Canvas. It is
 possible that substantial content will be posted on Canvas or sent via e-mail. It is your responsibility to
 regularly check your e-mail and the class Canvas site.
Class Preparation and Success
 You are encouraged to ask questions in class, both to seek technical clarification of points discussed and
 to understand how a particular topic relates to your personal interest in business.
 Class attendance and doing the study questions and homework are the two biggest keys to success in this
 class. Students who do well are generally those who attend class regularly and can participate in class
 discussions because they have prepared. Although problems may seem fairly intuitive when we do them in
 class, you will be surprised how hard it is to set them up and solve them on your own. Practice is key.
Classroom Standards
 A 2017 study by McCombs marketing professor Adrian Ward showed that having your phone present
 (even when it’s turned off!) takes up some of your brain power. Other recent studies, see the New York
 Times article later in this syllabus, have shown that using computers in class leads to worse performance.
 So, although you will use your computer extensively for class-related work (LearnSmart pre-study and
 Connect homework), during class there will be no computer use, and your phone should be turned off and
 in your bag.
 This classroom is subject to “business meeting” etiquette:
       Silence your phones and no texting or other phone activity during class.
       Be prepared to do calculations in class. Your phone calculator is fine in class, but it will not be
           allowed on the exam so you might do better to practice with a financial calculator. We recommend
           the HP 10bII+ financial calculator because it is (1) also useful for ACC 311 and FIN 357, (2)
           relatively inexpensive (about $35), (3) non-programmable and therefore acceptable for exam use.
       No extraneous conversation or disruptive behavior.
       You should arrive on time. On the rare occasion when you don’t, please enter and set up quietly.
       If you must leave early, please notify me in advance.
 You MUST come to the class section in which you are officially registered, unless you’ve made
 arrangements with me beforehand. Class limits are set to ensure a quality experience for everyone. Also,
 to receive credit for any quizzes you must come to the class section in which you are officially registered
      Fall 2018                                Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 2


 for.
 Notification Regarding BBA Recruiting Conflicts
 Conflicts occasionally arise between classes and the search for employment. We understand how
 important the job search process is to you, and McCombs provides many resources in support of career
 exploration and search. However, UT is first and foremost an educational institution and your BBA degree
 will be the credential that certifies your education. As such, education will take precedent whenever such a
 conflict arises.
 All companies that recruit at McCombs are informed of this fact. Should a conflict arise, we recommend
 the following steps:
  Note that a job-related conflict, whether a current job or a potential one, is usually not an acceptable
      reason for missing an exam or taking a make-up, and may not be acceptable in other circumstances
      either. If any doubt exists, check with your professor.
  If no exception is provided, inform the company that an academic conflict exists and request an
      accommodation.
  If no accommodation is provided, contact BBA Career Services and request their assistance in
      resolving the situation.
 Note that while we do have influence with the companies that recruit at McCombs, not all conflicts can be
 resolved and we have little or no influence with companies that do not recruit through the Recruit McCombs
 system.
 Finally, be aware that it is not unreasonable for an employer to expect you to go to some lengths to show
 your interest in them. In a recent example, several students completed an exam at 9 pm and were
 expected to attend an on-site interview in Houston the next morning at 8 am. A 5:30 am flight from Austin
 was available and the students were expected to be on it. This is reasonable, and if you think it is unfair,
 you probably need to reconsider what you believe are the reasonable expectations of a good job and
 career in business.
Assessment
 Course grades will be determined using the following assignments and weights:
              Two (non-cumulative) Midterm Exams
                  Lower midterm grade                   15%
                  Higher midterm grade                  25%
              Final Exam (cumulative)                   30%
              Two Case Quizzes                           7%
              Four Unannounced Quizzes                    8%
              Homework (Connect):
                  LearnSmart                             5%
                  Review Problems                       10%
                                                      100%
 The BBA Program recommends a mean GPA of 3.0-3.2 for this course, but the actual grades assigned will
 be based on what you earn. All sections of ACC 312 follow the same grading policy, and you may assess
 your performance based on the traditional grade cutoffs of 90% = A-, 80% = B-, 70% = C-, 60% = D-, and
 below 60% = F. There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing "extra credit" work either
 before or after the end of the semester. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances and
 according to university policy.
 Grade Appeals: If you believe a grading error has occurred, you must appeal within one week after the item
      Fall 2018                                Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 3


   is returned to the class or the grade is posted on Canvas or Connect, whichever is earlier. I only handle
   grade appeals in my office and in person. After one week has passed, no appeals will be considered.
Exams
   Exams are individual work; no collaboration of any kind is allowed. There will be two non-cumulative
   midterm exams. Midterm exams will be closed book/notes and will be held on the dates and times
   indicated in the Class Schedule. All students in all sections of ACC 312 will take the exams at the same
   time. We will try to return the graded exams one week after the exam date. Calculators that are
   programmable or can store text are NOT allowed for exams and will be confiscated.
   There will be a common, cumulative final exam given for all sections of ACC 312 at the end of the term.
   The final exam will be closed book/notes and we will advise you of the date for the final exam as soon as
   we receive it. Do not make travel arrangements until you are certain of your exam schedule! Anyone with a
   non-standard exam schedule (SSD or other approved exception) MUST make exam arrangements with me
   at least one week in advance, and before making any travel arrangements. No early exams will be given
   FOR ANY REASON, including to accommodate travel schedules.
   Alternate exams: If you have another UT class or UT exam at the same time as one of the midterm exams,
   an alternate exam will be given, generally on the day after the scheduled exam. Similarly, if you have
   another UT final exam that directly conflicts with our scheduled final exam, there is a provision for an
   alternate exam. However, in all cases permission to take an alternate exam is at my discretion and the
   request must be made at least one week in advance. Note that conflicts such as classes at other
   educational institutions and work schedules will not constitute an acceptable reason to take an alternate
   exam. If you also have a class or exam conflict with the alternate midterm exam, we can, with my prior
   approval, make arrangements for you to make up the exam. Individual makeup midterm exams must be
   taken within 72 hours of the original exam date. These exams will be given at the Testing Center located
   on the fifth floor of the McCombs School, and I will work with you to schedule it. If you do not take the
   makeup exam as scheduled, you will receive a 0 on the exam.
   If you miss an exam due to a severe illness or other emergency, you should notify me before the exam, if
   possible, and you must provide prompt notification and proof of emergency to Student Emergency Services
   (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of emergency and will provide me
   official acknowledgement of the emergency. However, I have final authority to determine if your absence is
   excused. If so, and if it is feasible for you to take the scheduled alternate exam or an individual makeup
   midterm exam (see prior paragraph), you may do so. Otherwise, students with an excused absence from a
   midterm exam will be required to add the weight of that exam (“lowest midterm” weight) to the weight of the
   final exam. Unexcused absences will result in an exam grade of 0.
Case Quizzes/Assignments
   We will discuss two cases during the course to provide context and additional dimensions to the concepts
   we are studying. We will spend the class addressing the case on the day indicated in the Course
   Schedule, so coming to class well prepared is critical. Read the case carefully and think about the answers
   to the questions in the case. These answers will not be handed in. Each case class will begin with a 5-10
   minute closed-packet quiz on the case. Students who leave class after the quiz and therefore don’t
   participate in the case discussion, will receive a zero for that case quiz grade.
   No make-up case quizzes will be given, however in the event of a pre-excused absence, you may avoid a
   0 by submitting a five-page paper (double spaced, 12-pt Times Roman font, 1” margins, due within one
   week) addressing a topic of my choosing.
Unannounced Quizzes:
   There will be four unannounced quizzes covering previous material discussed in class and/or new material
   included in that class day’s LearnSmart reading assignment and/or simply an attendance quiz. Students
   must take the quiz in the class section they are officially registered in, unless prior arrangements have
        Fall 2018                                 Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 4


   been made with me. Students who are absent from class (including late arrivals) the day of the
   unannounced quiz will receive a zero grade. The only exception will be if you miss an unannounced quiz
   due to a severe illness or other emergency, and provide prompt notification and proof of emergency to
   Student Emergency Services (http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of
   emergency and will provide me official acknowledgement of the emergency. However, I have final
   authority to determine if your absence is excused. Once Student Emergency Services and I agree that your
   absence is excused, you will have an opportunity to take an alternative quiz during my office hours.
   Students who leave class early after the unannounced quiz will receive a zero for that unannounced quiz
   grade.
Homework (two types, both done in Connect)
   Homework must be completed individually in Connect, however you are permitted to collaborate
   with classmates on figuring out how to structure the solution to assigned questions. Two types of
   homework are due in this class, both administered via Connect:
       During your preparation before class, you must complete the LearnSmart module for that class,
        denoted by the LS icon in the Connect assignments list. This will guide you through the textbook, and to
        earn credit you will answer comprehension questions. When you miss a question, you are presented
        additional questions, and your LearnSmart grade will be based upon the percentage of each module
        that you finish. Questions must be answered in Connect by 8:00 a.m. on the day of class.
       Each week, Review Problems covering that week’s class material will be due to be submitted in
        Connect. The Course Schedule lists these problems. The Review Problems grade is the percent of all
        points on Review Problems that are correct as submitted. Your answers to these problems must be
        submitted in Connect by 5:00 p.m. on Saturday of that week. A solution will be provided in Connect
        after the submission window ends.
   Late homework will not be accepted. Also, note that for most questions, Connect will change the numbers
   in the problem for each student, so your data will differ from the textbook and your solution will not be
   identical to your classmates’ solutions. Connect will grade these questions, provide solutions to Review
   Problems (after all sections of ACC 312 have submitted their homework), and indicate areas where you
   need to do additional study.
   If you have difficulty using Connect or LearnSmart, or encounter a problem with the technology, please
   email your question to the course TAs, listed on the first page of this syllabus. Depending on the problem,
   the TAs may be able to help or you might need to contact the Connect Help Desk (click Help from within
   Connect).
   If you have questions about how to solve the exercises or problems, please see the TAs during their office
   hours or come see me during my office hours.
   Please note that no homework assignments will be dropped. However, LearnSmart will offer multiple
   opportunities to demonstrate your mastery of the material, and we have configured Connect to allow you
   multiple opportunities to check your work on Review Problems prior to submission. So you have ample
   opportunity to do well on homework assignments.
Other Assignments
   Other graded work may also be assigned, depending on my assessment of class progress and
   preparation. Examples would include (but are not limited to) quizzes in Canvas, extra problem
   assignments, extra case work, in-class check questions, and chapter outlines. If I choose to make such
   assignments, their scores will be treated as part of the case and/or unannounced quiz grades.
        Fall 2018                              Syllabus – ACC 312                                   Page 5


                                               Important Notifications
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity
and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/accommodations-and-services/.
Religious Holy Days
Per the UT Austin General Information Catalog, you must notify me “as far in advance as possible” (I expect at
least 14 days advance written notice) of your pending absence due to the observance of a religious holy day. If
you must miss an examination or other assignment in order to observe a religious holy day, and you notify me
appropriately, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the
absence. http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/academic-policies-and-procedures/attendance/.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
In the Assignments section above, you can find specific guidance regarding individual and group work for each
of the evaluation elements in this course.
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described in that document. By remaining in this
class, you agree to observe all student responsibilities described in that document. If the application of the
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear to you in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, which could include failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University.
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: copying work on tests or assignments, representing
(copying) the work of another person as one’s own or allowing another person to represent your work as their
own, collaborating without authorization with another student during an exam or in preparing academic work,
using or having on your desk unauthorized material or aids to complete a quiz, group exercise, or exam (e.g.,
cheat sheets, solutions, programmable calculators, cell phones, etc.). You should refer to the Student Judicial
Services website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct to access the official University policies and
procedures on scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Dishonesty harms other students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, so
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. All acts of academic dishonesty receive significant
penalties and are reported to Student Judicial Services and attach to your record. This record is consulted as
part of application processes at UT (e.g., study abroad applications) and after (e.g., law school and MBA
applications, which generally require you to provide access to this record). IT’S NOT WORTH IT!
Campus Safety
BE SAFE. See campus safety information at http://besafe.utexas.edu/safety-tips-apps. Also note the
following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,
512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety:
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
         Fall 2018                                Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 6


        buildings when an official announcement is made. Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each
        classroom and building you may occupy. Remember, the nearest exit door may not be the one you
        used when entering the building.
     Students requiring assistance in evacuation should inform the instructor in writing during the first week
        of class.
     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Department, The
        University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention Services office.
For concerns about individual behavior, call the Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050. Up-
to-date information regarding emergencies and emergency procedures can be found at:
http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
Privacy in Canvas
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that if I teach multiple sections of this
course I will use a merged Canvas site for all sections. This will allow students in other sections to see that you
are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your
email address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please
contact the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 for help removing your name from the view of other students.
        Fall 2018                               Syllabus – ACC 312                                    Page 7


                   Using Your Calculator for ACC 312 Homework Assignments in Connect
                           Carefully observe the rounding instructions in Connect.
             If no specific guidance is provided, do not round to less than four decimal places.
Please make sure your calculator does not round to less than four decimal places (e.g., 0.2078 does not round
to 0.208 or shorter). Four decimal places will be adequate for any homework or exam problems.
Here are the instructions for the recommended HP 10bII+ calculator (if you have a different calculator, check
your manual or search on-line). The default on this calculator is two decimal places, which is too short for
many problems.
Instructions for HP 10bII+:
        Fall 2018                              Syllabus – ACC 312                                  Page 8


The New York Times
BUSINESS DAY
Laptops Are Great. But Not During a Lecture or a Meeting.
By SUSAN DYNARSKI NOV. 22, 2017
Step into any college lecture hall and you are likely to find a sea of students typing away at open, glowing laptops
as the professor speaks. But you won’t see that when I’m teaching. Though I make a few exceptions, I generally ban
electronics, including laptops, in my classes and research seminars.
That may seem extreme. After all, with laptops, students can, in some ways, absorb more from lectures than they
can with just paper and pen. They can download course readings, look up unfamiliar concepts on the fly and create
an accurate, well-organized record of the lecture material. All of that is good.
But a growing body of evidence shows that over all, college students learn less when they use computers or tablets
during lectures. They also tend to earn worse grades. The research is unequivocal: Laptops distract from learning,
both for users and for those around them. It’s not much of a leap to expect that electronics also undermine
learning in high school classrooms or that they hurt productivity in meetings in all kinds of workplaces.
Measuring the effect of laptops on learning is tough. One problem is that students don’t all use laptops the same
way. It might be that dedicated students, who tend to earn high grades, use them more frequently in classes. It
might be that the most distracted students turn to their laptops whenever they are bored. In any case, a simple
comparison of performance may confuse the effect of laptops with the characteristics of the students who choose
to use them. Researchers call this “selection bias.”
Researchers can solve that problem by randomly assigning some students to use laptops. With that approach, the
students who use laptops are comparable in all other ways to those who don’t. In a series of experiments at
Princeton University and the University of California, Los Angeles, students were randomly assigned either laptops
or pen and paper for note-taking at a lecture. Those who had used laptops had substantially worse understanding
of the lecture, as measured by a standardized test, than those who did not.
The researchers hypothesized that, because students can type faster than they can write, the lecturer’s words
flowed right to the students’ typing fingers without stopping in their brains for substantive processing. Students
writing by hand had to process and condense the spoken material simply to enable their pens to keep up with the
lecture. Indeed, the notes of the laptop users more closely resembled transcripts than lecture summaries. The
handwritten versions were more succinct but included the salient issues discussed in the lecture.
         Fall 2018                                Syllabus – ACC 312                                    Page 9


Even so, it may seem heavy-handed to ban electronics in the classroom. Most college students are legal adults who
can serve in the armed forces, vote and own property. Why shouldn’t they decide themselves whether to use a
laptop? The strongest argument against allowing that choice is that one student’s use of a laptop harms the
learning of students around them. In a series of lab experiments, researchers at York University
and McMaster University in Canada tested the effect of laptops on students who weren’t using them. Some
students were told to perform small tasks on their laptops unrelated to the lecture, like looking up movie times. As
expected, these students retained less of the lecture material. But what is really interesting is that the learning of
students seated near the laptop users was also negatively affected.
The economic term for such a spillover is a “negative externality,” which occurs when one person’s consumption
harms the well-being of others. The classic negative externality is pollution: A factory burning coal or a car using
gasoline can harm the air and environment for those around it. A laptop can sometimes be a form of visual
pollution: Those nearby see its screen, and their attention is pulled toward its enticements, which often include not
just note-taking but Facebook, Twitter, email and news.
These experiments go only so far. They may not capture positive effects of laptops in real classrooms over the
course of a semester, when students use their typed notes for review and grades are at stake. But another study
did just that. At the United States Military Academy, a team of professors studied laptop use in an introductory
economics class. The course was taught in small sections, which the researchers randomly assigned to one of three
conditions: electronics allowed, electronics banned and tablets allowed but only if laid flat on desks, where
professors could monitor their use. By the end of the semester, students in the classrooms with laptops or tablets
had performed substantially worse than those in the sections where electronics were banned.
You might question whether the experience of military cadets learning economics is relevant to students in other
settings — say, community college students learning Shakespeare. But we’d expect the negative effects of laptops
to be, if anything, less at West Point, where all courses are taught in small sections, than it is at institutions with
many large lectures. Further, cadets have very strong incentives to perform well and avoid distractions, since class
rank has a major impact on their job status after graduation.
The best way to settle this question is probably to study laptop use in more colleges. But until then, I find the
evidence sufficiently compelling that I’ve made my decision: I ban electronics in my own classes. I do make one
major exception. Students with learning disabilities may use electronics in order to participate in class. This does
reveal that any student using electronics has a learning disability. That is a loss of privacy for those students, which
also occurs when they are given more time to complete a test. Those negatives must be weighed against the
learning losses of other students when laptops are used in class.
Students may object that a laptop ban prevents them from storing notes on their computers. But smartphones can
snap pictures of handwritten pages and convert them to an electronic format. Even better, outside class, students
can read their own handwritten notes and type them, if they like, a process that enhances learning.
The best evidence available now suggests that students should avoid laptops during lectures and just pick up their
pens. It’s not a leap to think that the same holds for middle and high school classrooms, as well as for workplace
meetings.
Susan Dynarski is a professor of education, public policy and economics at the University of Michigan. Follow her
on Twitter: @dynarski. A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2017, on Page BU4 of the New
York edition with the headline: Take Notes With Pen and Paper? It Can Be Done.
         Fall 2018                                 Syllabus – ACC 312                                      Page 10


Instructor Bio
Brian Lendecky, CPA, MPA                                        Senior Lecturer, Department of Accounting
Brian Lendecky is a Senior Lecturer in the Department of Accounting at The University of Texas at Austin. He
joined the department in 2006 and teaches Financial Accounting, Cost and Managerial Accounting, and the
Tax Practicum course, the latter winning a 2008 Governor’s Volunteer Award from Governor Perry and a 2011
Tower Award. Brian also teaches Financial Methods for Lawyers in the School of Law, Financial and
Managerial Accounting courses in the McCombs Executive Education program, the Mexico City, Houston,
Dallas / Ft. Worth, and Full-Time MBA programs, the ESCP-EAP European School of Management in Paris, the
VSE School of Economics in Prague, and the Chinese University of Hong Kong. He has also led MBA Global
Trips to Panama and Colombia. Brian Lendecky started his career at PriceWaterhouseCoopers and has
subsequently managed accounting departments in the food manufacturing, energy, & medical supplies
manufacturing industries.
Brian has received numerous teaching awards including the 2014 Texas Society of Certified Public Accountants
Outstanding Accounting Educator Award, Mexico City Executive MBA Outstanding Faculty Award (2018, 2017,
2016, 2015, & 2014), Fall 2016 Evening MBA Faculty Honor Roll, Spring 2015 Texas MBA at Houston Faculty
Honor Roll, 2013 Hank and Mary Harkins Foundation Award for Effective Teaching in Undergraduate Classes,
2011 Master in Professional Accounting (MPA) Council’s Outstanding Accounting Faculty Award, Spring 2011
Best Faculty Award from the Alpha Kappa Psi business fraternity, and the 2010 CBA Foundation Advisory
Council Award for Teaching Innovation. He was nominated by the Faculty Affairs Committee of the Senate of
College Councils and the Undergraduate Business Council for the Professor of the Year Award for 2009. He
has served on the MPA Program Committee since 2010. Brian is a licensed CPA in the State of Texas and is a
proud alumnus of the McCombs School’s #1 ranked MPA program.
Brian and his wife Stephanie have five kids. Stephanie is a Managing Client Director for Gartner Inc. In order,
their kids are an auditor for the state of Texas (24), a freshman offensive lineman at Rice (20), a junior
offensive lineman for 2017 state semi-finalist Cedar Ridge High School (16), a 1st grader who told his teacher
he wants to “teach kids the numbers” like his dad when he grows up (7), and a daughter whose future
boyfriends’ fifth biggest concern is meeting her dad (4). In his spare time Brian loves to travel with his family
and is an avid sports fan and poker player.
        Fall 2018                                Syllabus – ACC 312                                 Page 11
