                                THE TWELFTH-CENTURY RENAISSANCE
               History 344G (39150) RS 357(43292) AHC 330 (33475) EUS 346 (36195)
                                               SPRING 2018
                           MONDAY, WEDNESDAY 10-11:30 CBA. 4.344
Instructor:
         Dr. M Newman newman@utexas.edu
                 Pronouns: she/her/hers
         Office Hours: Monday 1:30-3. Burdine 530 and by appointment
I. WHAT IS THIS CLASS ABOUT?
Course Description
European society changed so rapidly and extensively between 1050 and 1200 that medievalists
sometimes call it a "renaissance" (a period of rebirth not to be confused with the later Italian
Renaissance.) During this period, we see changes in agricultural technologies, the development
of new forms of religious life, the emergence of schools and universities, the construction of
cathedrals, the formation of self-governing towns, and new forms of royal administration and
law. Though the reading of primary documents - including love letters, memoirs, accounts of
religious visions, chronicles of urban revolts, court poetry, theological treatises, and artistic
creations – this course explores these intellectual, religious, social, economic, and political
developments.
Course Goals
In this course, you will learn: 1) to identify the important events and figures in this period of change; 2)
to understand the interconnections between economic, social, religious, and cultural developments; 3) to
do historical research and analysis. In doing research, you will learn a)to analyze historical documents
and understand their perspectives and biases; b)to understand how historical arguments and accounts are
constructed from the analysis of primary documents; and c) to construct and write your own historical
analyses.
Writing Flag Objectives
This course carries the Writing Flag. Writing Flag courses are designed to give students experience with
writing in an academic discipline. In this class, you can expect to write regularly during the semester,
complete substantial writing projects, and receive feedback from your instructor to help you improve
your writing. You will also have the opportunity to revise one or more assignments, and you may be
asked to read and discuss your peers’ work. You should therefore expect a substantial portion of your
grade to come from your written work. Writing Flag classes meet the Core Communications objectives of


                                                                                                   2
Critical Thinking, Communication, Teamwork, and Personal Responsibility, established by the Texas
Higher Education Coordinating Board
II. WHAT DO I NEED TO DO FOR THIS CLASS?
Required Books (available in paperback):
Galbert of Bruges. The Murder, Betrayal, and Slaughter of the Glorious Charles, Count of Flanders,
         trans. Jeff Rider. New Haven; Yale University Press, 2013. 978-0300152302.
Paul Archambault, ed. A Monk’s Confession: The Memoirs of Guibert of Nogent. State College:
         Pennsylvania State University Press, 1995. 978-0271014821.
Peter Abelard and Heloise. Letters and Other Writings, ed. William Levitan. Indianapolis: Hackett
         Publishing Company, 2007. 978-0872208759
Georges Duby, William Marshal: Flower of Chivalry. (New York: Pantheon, 1987. 978-0394751542
If you feel you need a text book:
Barbara Rosenwein, A Short History of the Middle Ages, Fourth Edition. Toronto: University of
         Toronto Press, 2014. 9781442606111
In addition, selected primary documents are available on Canvas
Assignments, Due Dates, and Grading
 This class will use plus/minus grading. For information about the numerical criteria used for each grade,
         please see the "Grading Scale" document on Canvas
• Class Preparation Exercises                              26%
         13 Total at 2% each (complete/incomplete)
• 2 short (3-page) papers                                  30% (15% each, re-writes average grade)
         Due October 1/October 15
         November 5/ November 19
•Map Exercise (on line)                                      4%
•Final Paper (8 pages)                                     30%
         Due December 17
•Class Participation and Attendance                        10%
         Your attendance grade is the number of classes you attended divided by the number of classes
you should have attended.
Schedule of Classes and Assignments
         Readings are due the day of class; reading exercises are due by 9am; that is before class.
         Please note that this schedule is subject to modifications. Students who miss classes are
responsible for learning about changes to the syllabus.
PART I. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CHANGE
         8/29:        Introduction and Background
         9/5:         Social Structure and the Family
         9/10:        Rural Economy and Commercial Growth


                                                                                 3
                     Read: Documents I, Agriculture and Peasant Tenure (Canvas)
                     Due: Exercise 1
       9/12:     Feudal relations
                     Read: Document II, Duties of Vassals and Lords (Canvas)
                              Galbert of Bruges, pp. 1-47
                     Due: Exercise 2
PART II. POLITICAL POWER
       9/17:     Royal power in Francia
                     Read: Galbert of Bruges, pp. 47-85
       9/19:     Royal Power in Britain
                     Read: Galbert of Bruges, pp. 85- 137
                     Due: Exercise 3
       9/24      Royal Power in Germany, Italy, and Iberia ASSIGN PAPER 1
                     Read: Galbert of Bruges, pp.137-167
       9/26:     Towns and Self Government
                 DISCUSSION OF GALBERT OF BRUGES
                     Read: Galbert of Bruges, pp. 167- 190
                     Due: Exercise 4
PART III. THE SECOND CONVERSION OF EUROPE
       10/1      Disorientation and Change
                     Read: A Monk’s Confession pp.1-34
                     Due: PAPER 1
       10/3:     Centralization of the Church I
                     Read: A Monk’s Confession, pp. 34-74
                     Due: Exercise 5
       10/8      Centralization of the Church II
                     Read: A Monk’s Confession, pp. 74-91
       10/10:    Empathy, Compassion and a new image of Christ
                     Read: Document III (Canvas)
                     Due: Exercise 6
       10/ 15    Pilgrimage and Holy War
                     Read: Document IV, Chronicle of the first crusade (Canvas)
                     Due: PAPER 1 RE-WRITE
PART IV. AN AGE OF DOUBT
       10/17:    Crusades and Contact with non-Christians
                     Read: Document IV: Bar Simson on the first crusade (Canvas)
                     Due: Exercise 7
       10/22:    Doubts and anti-Semitism
                     Read: A Monk’s Confession, pp. 74-91
       10/24     Heresy and Religious Persecution
                     Read: Document V, Henry of Lausanne (Canvas)
                     Due: Exercise 8
       10/29:    DISCUSSION OF GUIBERT OF NOGENT ASSIGN PAPER 2
PART V. NEW PATTERNS OF THOUGHT


                                                                                                          4
         10/31:         Classics and a Revival of Learning
                            Read: Abelard and Heloise, pp. 1-20.
                            Due: Exercise 9
         11/5:          Abelard and the Schools
                           Read: Abelard and Heloise, 20-46.
                           Due: PAPER 2
         11/7:          Development of the University
                            Read: Abelard and Heloise, pp 49-70
                            Due: Exercise 10
         11/12:         Hildegard of Bingen
                            Read: Abelard and Heloise, pp. 71-105.
         11/14:         DISCUSSION OF ABELARD AND HELOISE
                            Read: Abelard and Heloise, pp.265-275, 282-301
                            Due: Exercise 11
PART VI. ARTISTIC AND LITERARY DEVELOPMENTS
         11/19          Individual Conferences PAPER 2 RE-WRITE DUE
         11/26:         Epics and Romances
                            Read: Document VI, Guigemar (Canvas)
                            Due: Exercise 12
         11/28:         Satire and Courtly Love
                            Read: William Marshal, pp. 1-53
         12/3:          Romanesque and Gothic Architecture ASSIGN FINAL PAPER
                            Read: William Marshal, pp. 53-124,
PART VII. POLITICAL IDENTITY
         12/5:          Law and Community
                            Read: Document VI, Magna Carta. (Canvas)
                            Due: Exercise 13
         12/10          Conclusion
                            Read: William Marshal, pp. 124-153.
III. What else is useful to know?
Attendance policy: I take attendance and expect you to attend class. Excuses will be granted only for a
documented medical problem, a religious holiday, or an absence due to official university business; expect a
request for written documentation although this may be waived in the case of a flu outbreak.
Use of Canvas in Class. In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with
password-protected access at http://canvas.utexas.edu—to distribute course materials, to communicate
and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to give you online quizzes and surveys.
You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through Friday, 8 a.m.
to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly. Two bits of advice:
a) You must use Chrome or Firefox as your browser.
b) You must use your @utexas.edu email. All messages/announcements from Canvas will go to your
@utexas.edu inbox.
Statement on academic integrity: Don’t cheat. I report all cases of scholastic dishonesty to the Dean of
Students. My recommended penalty for cheating on tests, plagiarism on papers, or unauthorized use of
i>clickers is an F for the course. We will discuss research techniques, citation forms, and issues of
academic dishonesty in class. If you remain unsure about the exact definition of scholastic dishonesty or


                                                                                                            5
what constitutes plagiarism, you should consult the information about academic integrity produced by the
Dean of Students Office: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php
Make-up Assignments: I will only give make up accommodations because of a documented medical
problem, a religious holiday, or official university business. In all cases, I should receive valid written
documentation for the absence. If the absence is due to university business, I should receive this
documentation at least one class prior to the exam.
Students with Disabilities: I am committed to helping students learn. If you have If there are
circumstances that make learning difficult, if you have medical information that you need to share with
me, or if you need specific arrangements in case the building needs to be evacuated, please let
me know. I will keep this information confidential. Any student with a documented disability who
requires academic accommodations should contact the Services for Students with Disabilities (471-6259)
as soon as possible to request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations.
Religious Holidays: Students can make up work missed because of a religious holiday as long as they
provide the instructor with documentation before the holiday occurs.
Academic Assistance:
      The Sanger Learning Center offers both group and individualized programs to help increase
efficiency in college-level writing, reading, and learning strategies. All SCL programs, except
appointment tutoring, are free to all currently enrolled students. The SCL is located in the Jester Center,
Room A332A. http://www.utexas.edu/ugs/slc
      The Undergraduate Writing Center offers free assistance to UT undergraduates who wish to work
on their writing; students work with trained consultants to define their goals and become more confident
writers. The Center is located in the FAC 211, and is highly recommended. http://uwc.utexas.edu/
Other Resources:
      Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about
another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the
Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal
      Counseling & Mental Health Center: http://cmhc.utexas.edu/
      Career Exploration Center: http://www.utexas.edu/student/careercenter/
      Student Emergency Services: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students. E-mail is recognized as an official mode of
university correspondence; therefore, you are responsible for reading your e-mail for university and
course-related information and announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed
about changes to your e-mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently to stay
current with university-related communications, some of which may be time-critical. You can find UT
Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail address at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment,
sexual assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational
institutions. Faculty members and certain staff members are considered “Responsible Employees” or
“Mandatory Reporters,” which means that they are required to report violations of Title IX to the Title IX
Coordinator. I am available to offer resources for dealing with Title IX-related incidents, but do
recognize that I am a Responsible Employee and must report any Title IX related incidents that are
disclosed in writing, discussion, or one-on-one. If you want to speak with someone for support or
remedies without making an official report to the university, email advocate@austin.utexas.edu For more
information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.


                                                                                                             6
Classroom Safety and Emergency Evacuation Policy. Pursuant to SB11
(http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/84R/billtext/pdf/SB00011F.pdf) and UT- Austin Campus Carry
Policy (https://campuscarry.utexas.edu/ and https://www.policies.utexas.edu/ policies/campus-concealed-
carry), persons with a current legally valid Concealed Carry License may carry a concealed legal
handgun on or about their person in this class. Please take special note of the holstering requirements and
the requirements that handguns be concealed and stay on or about your person.
If any legal requirement is violated at any moment, the person who witnesses the violation should
leave the classroom and call 911 immediately without waiting to ask me for permission. The police
will respond. This will disrupt the class and may create a dangerous situation for all of us.
Violations may result in criminal penalties and sanction by the university, up to and including
expulsion.
I will inform the class orally that my policy regarding concealed carry is that I do not allow the concealed
carry of weapons in my personal office. If you wish, I can arrange to meet you at a public location.
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble outside when a
fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the following policies regarding
evacuation: Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that the
nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building. If you require assistance to
evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class. In the event of an evacuation, follow my
instructions or those of class instructors. Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the
Austin Fire Department, the UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
