                                  ARE 362L – Structural Design in Wood
                                                  Fall 2019
Instructor:      Patricia Clayton       (pronouns: she/her/hers)
                 Offices:               Campus: ECJ 4.708
                                        Ferguson Laboratory, Pickle Research Campus
                 Email:                 clayton@ utexas.edu
Meeting Times:           T Th   9:30-11am              RLM 7.104
Campus Office Hours:            T Th 3:30-4:30pm
        Or by appointment, or whenever you see me in my office with the door open.
        If you would like to discuss questions via Skype on days when I am not at my ECJ office, just e-
        mail me, and I will do my best to arrange a time to video chat.
Prerequisites:           CE 329 (Structural Analysis)
Required Texts:
        Design of Wood Structures: ASD/LRFD, Breyer, Cobeen, Fridley, and Pollock, 7th Edition,
        McGraw-Hill, 2015, ISBN 978-0071745604, $104 new.
        2018 Wood Design Package, American Wood Council (AWC), contains the following booklets:
        (1) NDS for Wood Construction, 2018 Edition; (2) NDS Supplement: Design Values for Wood
        Construction, 2018 Edition; and (3) Special Design Provisions for Wind and Seismic, 2015
        Edition. PDFs are available, but you must purchase the hardcopy for use on in-class exams. $75
        (50% off) for students.
We will be referring to the Wood Design Package almost every day in class. If you want to do well in
the course, it is imperative that you have your own copy with you so that you become proficient with the
Specification and associated design aides. After the 3rd class period, it is expected you will have your
texts with you in every class. It may take 5-7 business days for your Wood Design Package to be
delivered; therefore, please order it as soon as possible. Instructions will be provided on purchasing
procedures.
Other References:
        Minimum Design Loads for Buildings and Other Structures, ASCE 7-16, American Society of
        Civil Engineers, Reston, VA, 2016. (Portions of this document will be made available for
        determination of wind and seismic loads)
Course Website:
Course information can be found on Canvas (https://courses.utexas.edu/).
Information that will be posted includes course reading, homework assignments and solutions, video
examples, surveys, and other items. Refer to this website on a regular basis.


There is a Piazza discussion board tool that you can access from the toolbar on the left side of the screen
in Canvas. You can post and respond to questions (and you can post anonymously). I can post replies or
“endorse” replies from other students. The quicker people post questions and responses, the quicker
everyone will benefit from the collective knowledge of classmates and instructors. I prefer you all to use
Piazza for posting questions, rather than emailing the instructor directly. If all students are actively
posting and answering questions from one another, everyone can benefit from this resource.
Course Description and Learning Objectives:
ARE 362L introduces students to fundamental concepts in the design of wood structures. This course
focuses on the behavior and design of simple wood structural systems including the gravity system
(tension members, columns, and beams), the lateral system (horizontal diaphragms, shear walls, and
beam-columns), and connections.
By the end of the course, you should be able to:
    • Apply provisions and design aides found in the National Design Specification for Wood
        Construction (NDS) and its supplement.
    • Apply the LRFD design method consistently to evaluate and design structural wood members.
    • Describe basic behavior and failure modes for simple structural wood members and connections.
    • Design structural wood elements and subassemblages for vertical and lateral loads, including
        tension members, compression members, beams, beam-columns, horizontal diaphragms, shear
        walls, and connections.
Topics: (and approximate number of lectures per topic)
    1. Wood Buildings & Design Loads (4)
                Framing; Loads on structures; Design philosophies: ASD vs. LRFD; Behavior of
                structures under load (gravity, wind, & seismic).
    2. Material Properties of Wood (2)
                Lumber grading; Wood products (Glued Laminated Timber; Cross Laminated Timber)
    3. Beam Design (4)
                Flexure, shear, deflections, bearing
    4. Members Subjected to Pure Axial and Combined Bending and Axial (4)
                Tension members; Tension + bending; Columns; Built-up columns; Compression +
                bending
    5. Structural Panels (6)
                Plywood; Oriented strand board; Sheathing loads; Diaphragms; Shear walls
    6. Connections (6)
                Nailed connections; Bolts and lag bolts; Connection details
Grading:        Exam I                         20%
                Exam II                        20%
                Homework                       15%
                Project                        15%
                Final Exam                     30%


        Final averaged grades:         > 90% A
        (using +/- grading system)     > 80% B
                                       > 70% C
                                       > 60% D
                                       < 60% F*
        * Exception: To receive a passing grade, your exam average must be 60 or above.
        The +/- grade cut-offs will be determined based on the actual grade distribution.
The exams will be “open code” (e.g. you will be able to use the NDS texts). The midterm exams will be
scheduled outside of regular class hours so that we can arrange for a larger classroom. Tentative dates
and times for exams are below. (Actual dates or times may change. At least one week notification will
be given for exam dates.)
        Exam I – October 9, 2019, 7-9pm
        Exam II – November 20, 2019, 7-9pm
The Final Exam will be during the regularly scheduled exam period (Saturday, Dec 14, 7-10 pm)
There is a “gray area” for several points below a specified numerical grade cutoff for letter grades. If
you are in one of these gray areas, your letter grade may be “bumped up” based on your improvement
over the semester and your participation in class and group work. For example, if you have an average
of 89, you may receive an A- if you have shown improvement throughout the course and have
participated in class and online (Piazza) discussions.
Homework: Homework problems will be assigned regularly to reinforce and practice topics learned in
the course. There will be approximately 9-10 homework assignments throughout the semester.
Homework is due at the beginning of the specified class period. Late homework (turned in after the
beginning of class) will not be accepted and will receive a zero. If you are unable to attend a class
period when homework is due, contact the instructor as soon as possible (before the class period) to
make arrangements to submit your homework to receive credit. Your lowest homework grade will be
dropped at the end of the semester for determination of your final grade. There are also opportunities to
receive extra credit on homework assignments as described below.
The goals of the homework assignments and the project are: (1) to learn and practice the concepts by
solving the given problems and (2) to communicate your approach and results to someone else. For this
reason, homework grades will be based on correctness of the solution and quality of the presentation of
the calculations. I want your homework submissions to reflect real-world engineering practice, where
your submission to a client or a building official should be clear, concise, and easy to follow. Another
engineer, who is not in this course, should be able to follow your work and understand the results.
Detailed solutions of the homework problems will be posted to Canvas after the assignments have been
submitted. You can use these example solutions to check your process.


Homework submittal guidelines are:
   • Submitted work must be done on engineering paper and/or printed out neatly from the computer.
   • Show your calculations in a neat and logical fashion. You are encouraged to use computational
       tools (e.g., Excel, Matlab, MathCAD) for calculations, especially when similar repeated
       calculations are required in an assignment; however, at least one example calculation should be
       shown to demonstrate how values are being calculated by the spreadsheet or program and to
       verify their accuracy.
   • Clearly state any assumptions made when solving a problem.
   • Drawings and sketches should be neat; use a straightedge or computer software.
   • Show all relevant labels and units in your calculations, sketches, or plots.
   • Clearly indicate your final answer (underline or box the final answer).
Homework assignments will generally be graded out of 20 points:
       18-20 points: Neatly done; organized; mathematically accurate; good synthesis of
           concepts/principles; all problems worked.
       16-18- points: Neatly done; organized; some mathematical inaccuracies; good synthesis; all
           problems worked.
       14-16- points: Generally neat; generally organized; some mathematical inaccuracies; adequate
           synthesis, but needs improvement; all problems worked.
       12-14- points: Hastily done [looks copied], questionable organization; mathematically
           questionable; little synthesis; missing problem(s).
       <12 points: Generally incomplete; hastily done; no synthesis; missing problems.
Project: Students will work in groups of 2-3 on a project, where you will design and construct a
physical model to teach a concept from the course. Details of the project will be given in the first few
weeks of the semester. Multiple deliverables and check-ins will assigned periodically throughout the
semester.
Extra Credit: Students will have multiple opportunities to receive extra credit throughout the semester.
Additional extra credit opportunities may arise throughout the semester and will be announced in class
and posted on Canvas.
   • #TimberMember: Students can post photos they take of real life examples of wood structures.
       Each post must be accompanied by a caption relating the photo to something learned in the
       course to receive credit. Selfies are encouraged but not required. Photos can be posted on Piazza
       (use #timbermember) or on Twitter (use #timbermember and @Clayton_UT).
   • Songs as a Learning Aid: Students can work individually or with a group (of up to 4) to receive
       extra credit for creating and performing a song or rap related to topics learned in the course.
       Many people are better able to learn and remember new material when they hear it through song;
       and many engineering students have the creativity to create such songs. You will perform the
       song or rap for the class and get them excited about a course topic. Example videos:
       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hzJWdfzqiNE
       https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cuJP4kdi6Og


Attendance: The course material is primarily taught through lectures and in-class demonstrations and
examples. Therefore, attendance to all class periods is highly encouraged and critical to your success in
the course.
Missed Exams: Makeup exams will not be given without prior approval from the instructor. Please
contact the instructor as soon as possible if you are unable to attend a scheduled exam.
Example Videos: To give you additional opportunities to practice course concepts outside of class, I
will post videos of myself solving example problems on Canvas. I welcome any feedback you may have
to improve these video examples.
Academic Integrity: While group cooperation and discussion on homework is encouraged, copying is
cheating and will be punished by assigning a 0.0 for the total homework grade. Copying homework
problems will only hurt you on the exams, since you will be missing out on opportunities to practice
solving problems. See information below regarding UT’s academic dishonesty policy.
Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Because such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on scholastic
dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For additional information on these items, see the Dean of Students’
website and University General Information Catalog at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ and
http://catalog.utexas.edu/general-information/appendices/appendix-c/student-discipline-and-conduct/.
Copying and distributing lecture materials: Students do not have the right to copy, record, and/or
distribute the course materials for outside use unless the instructor expressly grants permission in writing.
These materials include but are not limited to course notes, exams, videos, and homework solutions.
Consulting with the Instructor: You are strongly encouraged to discuss academic or personal
questions with the instructor during office hours or by email.
Course Evaluation: An evaluation of the course and instructor will be conducted at the end of the
semester using the approved UT Course/Instructor evaluation forms.
Drop policy: From the 1st through the 12th class day, an undergraduate student can drop a course via the
web and receive a refund, if eligible. From the 13th through the university’s drop deadline, a student may
Q drop a course with approval from the Dean, course instructor, and departmental advisor.
Students with Disabilities: The University of Texas at Austin provides, upon request, appropriate
academic accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact the
Division of Diversity and Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-
6259 (voice) or 410-6644 (video phone) or http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.


Inclusivity Statement: I consider this classroom to be a place where you will be treated with respect,
and I welcome individuals of all ages, backgrounds, beliefs, ethnicities, genders, gender identities,
gender expressions, national origins, religious affiliations, sexual orientations, ability – and other visible
and nonvisible differences. All members of this class are expected to contribute to a respectful,
welcoming and inclusive environment for every other member of the class.
Preferred Name/Pronoun: Professional courtesy is important with respect to individuals and topics
dealing with differences of race, culture, religion, politics, sexual orientation, gender, gender identity,
disability, and nationality. Class rosters are provided to the instructor with the student’s legal name. I
will gladly honor your request to address you by an alternate name or gender pronoun. Please advise me
of this early in the semester so I may make appropriate changes to my records.
Personal Safety and Security: The following recommendations regarding emergency evacuation from
the Office of Campus Safety and Security, 512-471-5767, http://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/:
   •   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate
       buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement requires exiting and
       assembling outside.
   •   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may
       occupy. Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
       building.
   •   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during the first
       week of class.
   •   In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
   •   Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire Dept., The
       University of Texas at Austin Police Dept., or Fire Prevention Services office.
   •   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures can be
       found at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/safety/emergency-terms
   •   If you have concerns about another individual’s behavior, please contact the Behavior Concerns
       Advice Line (BCAL): 512 – 232-5050 (http://operations.utexas.edu/units/csas/bcal.php)
   •   Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC): (https://www.cmhc.utexas.edu/index.html)
       Crisis Line 512-471-CALL (2255)
