Creativity & American Culture
ADV 316 (06235), TR 11am-12:15pm
Instructor: Robert J. Lewis
Office: BMC 4.380
email: roblewis@utexas.edu
Office Hours: F 3:00 pm - 5:00 pm
Rationale: This course exists to familiarize students with the creative process,
theories of culture from both a social-scientific and humanities-based
perspective, and to apply these understandings to human expression in the
United States and elsewhere. The course is useful for creators of entertainment,
advertising, or other media content, or anyone who wants to have a basic grasp
of previous literature on American culture. Description from course catalog: “A
cross-disciplinary view of the creative process and creative products. The
conceptual core of film, fine arts, advertising, architecture, and literature.”
Course Objectives:
Specific Learning Objectives:
By the end of this course, students will:
•   Have knowledge of multiple theoretical viewpoints on American culture and
    creativity, and from fundamentally different approaches to its study.
•   Know about specific (historical and current) constraints and enablers of
    creativity in the U.S. and elsewhere on various different domains, including
    those listed in the course description above.
•   Be able to apply this knowledge to understand the origins and evolution of
    newly encountered cultural artifacts in the U.S.
Format and Procedures:
There will be three exams. Final exam is not cumulative but it is scheduled
during the final exam time slot (see below for specific time/date). Grades will be
determined by performance on exams, the five in-class essays, the YouTube
assignments, and the research assignment. In most cases, students are
expected to do the assigned readings before coming to class.


Tentative Course Schedule: ** This syllabus schedule represents my current
plans and objectives. As we go through the semester, those plans WILL change
to enhance the class learning opportunity (this is especially true in this class, as
cultural events during the semester can influence content). Such changes,
communicated clearly, are not unusual and should be expected. Exam dates
and grading procedures will not change.
 Schedule
 Week 1     Jan 22                                                                   Lecture 1, 2
            Read: Lears on Fables of Abundance
 Week 2     Jan 29                                                                   Lecture 3, 4
            Read Csikszentmihalyi on creativity and culture
 Week 3     Feb 5                                                                    Lecture 5, 6, 7
            Read: Orientalism, Smith, culturalist theories
 Week 4     Feb 12                                                                   Lecture 8, 9, 10
            Read: WEIRD people, social science viewpoints
                                                                                     Lecture 11, Rev
 Week 5      Feb 19. (review day on Tues; no class Thurs.)
                                                                                     Wednesday (bri
 Week 6     Feb 26. (Exam 1, Tues.)                                                  Lecture 1
            Read: Medium is the Message and futurism in media theory
 Week 7     March 5                                                                  Lecture 2
            Read: Perfectionist Project, Lears on critical theory
 Week 8     March 12                                                                 Lecture 3
            Read: Gladwell Diffusion, Rogers on the diffusion of culture
 Week 9     March 19 (SPRING BREAK WEEK)                                             Lecture 4
            Read: Conquest of Cool, Salon Irony & Advertising article
                                                                                     Lecture 6, Revie
 Week 10     March 26 (Exam 2, Thurs)
                                                                                     Wednesday (bri
 Week 11     April 2 (no class Thurs)                                                Lecture 1
            Read: Levine Wallowing in Sex (ads for condoms, beer, and )
 Week 12 April 9                                                                     Lecture 2, 3
            Read: Culture Jamming, No Logo (cultural resistance to advertising)
 Week 13 April 16 (no class Wed. or Fri.)                                            Lecture 4
 Week 14 April 23                                                                    Lecture 5
            Read: Lessig - Free Culture, Ch. 1 (culture & copyright)
 Week 15 April 30                                                                    Lecture 6, 7
            Read: Crockett on social media and political culture, Enlightenment


             Now – Pinker, Is the world getting better or worse?
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must
miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in order to
observe a religious holy day, I will give you an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Course Readings/Materials:
•   All readings are posted to Canvas.
Use of Canvas in class
In this class I use Canvas—a Web-based course management system with
password-protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu (Links to an external
site.)Links to an external site. —to distribute course materials, to communicate
and collaborate online, to post grades, and to submit assignments. You can find
support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday through
Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Grading Procedures:
•   Three exams * 100 = 300
•   Five in-class essays * 10 = 50
•   Research studies participation * 10 = 30
•   One YouTube video 20 = 20
•   Total points in class = 400
 Letter         Number
 Grade          Grade (%)


 A              94-100
 A-             90-93.99
 B+             87-.89.99
 B              83-86.99
 B-             80-82.99
 C+             77-79.99
 C              73-76.99
 C-             70-72.99
 D+             66-69.99
 D              63-66.99
 D-             60-62.99
In-class activities:
•   There will be five in-class essay activities worth 10 points each. The lecture
    days for these in-class activities will be chosen randomly, so coming to class
    is important in order to complete them.
•   Free pass rules (Caution! Some people find this complicated but it's
    not.): You will get one “free pass” to miss one of the in-class essays and
    have the chance to complete a make-up in-class essay at the end of the
    semester. You only get one free pass for the entire semester, so use it
    wisely. If you wish to use your free pass, you must email the TA or
    me beforethe missed class period begins to inform us that you would like to
    use your free pass. You must explicitly state that you would like to use your
    free pass, or else you will be responsible for the missed points. Once you’ve
    done that you no longer have a free pass whether there’s an essay that day
    or note. Provided that we have such an email from you before the class


    period begins, even if it is one minute before our class period, you may use
    your free pass for that day. Once you have used your free pass you may not
    use it again that semester, even if no in-class activity was assigned for that
    day. To use your free pass and actually get credit, you have to be at the last
    lecture where I administer the make up. So having a free pass does not
    ensure that you get credit. It just allows you to get credit if you attend the
    final lecture.
Academic Integrity
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery,
freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of
the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty,
trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
Each student in this course is expected to abide by the University of Texas
Honor Code. [See the UT Honor Code above.] Any work submitted by a
student in this course for academic credit will be the student's own work.
Collaboration is allowed only for the in-class activities assigned in this course.
Should copying occur, both the student who copied work from another student
and the student who gave material to be copied will both automatically receive a
zero for the assignment. Penalty for violation of this Code can also be extended
to include failure of the course and University disciplinary action.
During examinations, you must do your own work. Talking or discussion is not
permitted during the examinations, nor may you compare papers, copy from
others, or collaborate in any way. Any collaborative behavior during the
examinations will result in failure of the exam, and may lead to failure of the
course and University disciplinary action.
Other University Notices and Policies
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students
•   All students should become familiar with the University's official e-mail
    student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep the
    University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are
    expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay


    current with University-related communications, recognizing that certain
    communications may be time-critical. It is recommended that e-mail be
    checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
    policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available
    at http://www.utexas.edu/its/help/utmail/1564 (Links to an external
    site.)Links to an external site..
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic
accommodations should contact Services for Students with Disabilities (SSD) at
(512) 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (video phone). Faculty are not
required to provide accommodations without an official accommodation letter
from SSD.
•   Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in
    class is not accessible (e.g., instructional videos need captioning, course
    packets are not readable for proper alternative text conversion, etc.).
•   Please notify me as early in the semester as possible if disability-related
    accommodations for field trips are required. Advanced notice will permit the
    arrangement of accommodations on the given day (e.g., transportation, site
    accessibility, etc.).
Contact Services for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-
329-3986 (video phone) or reference SSD’s website for more disability-
related
information: http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/for_cstudents.php (
Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
