                  PUBLIC COPY – DETAILED SYLLABUS ON CANVAS
ANS 361-32 Spring 2019                                                   Dr. Chiu-Mi Lai
Lost in Translation:
History of Chinese Language and Translation
MWF 1-2 pm
Global Cultures
This course carries the Global Cultures flag. Global Cultures courses are designed to increase your
familiarity with cultural groups outside the United States. You should therefore expect a substantial portion
of your grade to come from assignments covering the practices, beliefs, and histories of at least one non-
U.S. cultural group, past or present.
[All lectures, discussion and readings in English.]
          [This course is open to all students – no previous background in Chinese language, culture or
linguistics is required.]
          Against the backdrop of China’s prominent international status and increasing
global interest in the Chinese language, this course will delve into an in-depth study of
the Chinese language and culture, including discussion of Chinese regional cultures and
dialects. Course emphasis will be given to the study of the modern Chinese language,
with consideration given to the language spoken in China, Hong Kong, and Taiwan.
Cultural and political contexts of these geopolitical entities will be explored in order to
understand emerging differences of all that falls under the common nomenclature of
“Chinese.” Lectures and discussions will focus on the cultural, social, historical, and
political background against which the Chinese language has evolved and continues to
evolve. Of significance will be assessment of the increasing influence of usage of the
English language and the Internet in China and Taiwan.
          Given China’s increased foreign interaction, this course will also include a
discussion of the history of translation of the Chinese language into different languages,
In this context, translation theories and approaches will be studied and discussed.
          Students will engage in a final project that will apply translation theory to
practice. This final project will be: 1) a translation project from a foreign language
into English; or 2) a comparison of different English-language translations of the same
original language source.
NOTE: This is not a course for training in translation or interpretation.
Course Topic Sections:
     Section I – The Chinese Language (China, Hong Kong, Taiwan), Dialects,
          Minority Languages of China
     Section II – Language and Culture: Language Attitudes, Cultural Usage and
          Habits
     Section III – Translation Theories and Approaches, Global Influence of English
                                                                                                            1


Final Course Grade based on:
      There is a class attendance policy
      There is no final exam in this course.
I.      15% Class discussion, participation, and preparation, including informal in-
        class and online (Canvas) response writing
II.     50% Reading and Discussion Questions (“response quizzes” on lectures,
        readings, discussion) (2/15, 3/13, 4/12)
III.    10% One Oral Presentation/Lead Discussant Work on Section II topics (Week
        7: 3/4-3/8)
IV.     25% Final Project Report and translation, on translation theory and practice (5-
        7 pages) and Oral Presentation on Final Project (due 5/10)
Required Text:
S. Robert Ramsey, The Languages of China (Princeton 1987)
Recommended:
Jerry Norman, Chinese (Cambridge, 1988)
Morry Sofer, The Global Translator's Handbook (Taylor Trade Publishing, 2013)
Reading Selections on Canvas include:
Peter W. Culicover and Elizabeth V. Hume, Basics of Language for Language Learners
John DeFrancis, The Chinese Language – Fact and Fantasy
Edwin Gentzler, Contemporary Translation Theories. Revised 2nd Ed. (Topics in
        Translation, 21)
Charles N. Li and Sandra A. Thompson, Mandarin Chinese – A Functional Reference Grammar
Lydia Liu, ed. Tokens of Exchange: The Problem of Translation in Global Circulations
        (Post-Contemporary Interventions)
Jerry Norman, Chinese
S. Robert Ramsey, The Languages of China (Princeton 1987)
Morry Sofer, The Translator’s Handbook, 6th Revised Edition (Translator's Handbook)
Lawrence Venuti, The Translator’s Invisibility: A History of Translation. 2nd Ed.
Recommended for Chinese-English Translation:
Far East Chinese-English Dictionary, 45th ed. (Far East Co., 1992)
Oxford Chinese Dictionary -- English-Chinese Chinese-English, 1st ed. (2010)
Pocket Oxford Chinese Dictionary -- English-Chinese Chinese-English, 4th ed. (2009)
Paul W. Kroll, A Student’s Dictionary of Classical and Medieval Chinese (Brill, 2014)
Doug Leshan, A Handbook of English-Chinese Translation (Commercial Press 2002)
                                                                                        2


                                    COURSE EXPECTATIONS
         This course will be graded on the Plus/Minus system.
         No assignments will be accepted after the last day of term. Your final course
          grade will be based on work completed up to this date.
         There is no written final exam for this course.
         Laptop/Tablet Use Policy – Laptops/Tablets may ONLY be used for your
          designated presentation day and for designated final project days
         Any Other Electronic Devices Use Policy – All devices must be turned off
          during class.        Any use of these devices, including texting, websurfing, etc. will
          lead to dismissal from class (and marked as an absence for that day). Repeat
          offenders will result in a filing of a report of academic problems.
         There is a class attendance policy for this course.
          Quality class discussion is vital for success in this course and thus attendance is
incumbent for such participation. As well, class attendance is vital for lectures (on
background on cultural, historical, and linguistic contexts) and for discussion of language
learning and translation concepts, all of which cannot be replaced by reading outlines or
notes online. There is no make-up for in-class writing and oral presentation/lead
discussant work.
ATTENDANCE POLICY – More than 5 unexcused absences, your final class
discussion/participation grade will result in a failing grade.
It is your responsibility to inform me regarding extenuating circumstances.
          More than 10 absences will result in a failing grade for the course.
     Religious Holidays – Religious holy days sometimes conflict with class and examination schedules.
     If you miss an examination, work assignment, or other project due to the observance of a religious holy
     day you will be given an opportunity to complete the work missed within a reasonable time after the
     absence. It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin that you must notify each of your
     instructors at least fourteen days prior to the classes scheduled on dates you will be absent to
     observe a religious holy day.
     I.       Class discussion, participation and “preparedness.” (15%)
          Discussion is essential for an understanding of the materials. Both oral and
written forms of expression in-class (informal writing) are emphasized in this course.
Be prepared to lead with discussion questions and/or observations for each class session.
Come to class with at least two observations to discuss. Students will be designated as
“lead discussants” for some readings. Be prepared to expand on discussion questions
and/or observations for class discussion days, including discussion following Section I
and II panel presentations. You may be called upon at any point during class lectures
and discussion days to share your observations or understanding of the lectures and
assigned readings.
                                                                                                           3


          Informal Writing*
    *There is no make-up for in-class informal writing.
    Informal “free-writing” and “list-writing” will jumpstart many discussions. I
strongly encourage you to be on time for class as some of the informal writing will take
place at the beginning of class for only a few minutes. These will be collected and read
and given points, and will be tabulated toward your class discussion and preparation
grade.
Writing and Oral Presentations
    Writing and oral presentations are two of the most effective ways to brainstorm about
ideas and to communicate our ideas in an in-depth manner. In addition to informal and
formal writing assignments, there will be oral presentation assignments.
           On matters of research and exploration of topics, make use of the UT library, including
            resources tailored for undergraduate students. Website:
            http://www.lib.utexas.edu/students/
           On matters of writing at any stage, I encourage you to consult with me and/or make liberal
            use of the University’s Writing Center. http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc
    II.     Reading and Discussion Questions (50%)
There is NO make-up of Reading and Discussion Questions (DQ)
DQ Dates: DQ 1 2/15, DQ 2 3/13, DQ 3 4/12
         Reading/Discussion Questions are based on the material covered in lectures, class
discussion, and assigned reading, each one is worth 100 points. One DQ will be given
per Section, and within each DQ there will be a set of discussion questions. At the start
of class, you will be expected to develop these discussion questions into concise but
thoughtful responses. You are not expected to be exhaustive or comprehensive in
response. The DQs are open-book and open notes (no electronic access) so it would be
helpful to take good class notes and to review lectures along the way.
         Some questions will be factually-based, some will be geared toward your
response to lecture and class discussion topics, assigned readings, and student panel
presentations. These discussion question responses are exercises in developing your
ideas and observations. I would like you to regard all informal writing as “thinking”
drafts, therefore you are NOT expected to provide a “thesis” or formal introductions or
conclusions.       Rather, the focus is on critical thinking and analysis in written form, and
evaluation will be based on a focused response in CONTENT.
         Evaluation will consider factual accuracy, quality of discussion, and a semblance
of organization and clarity in discussion.
                                                                                                       4


    III.     Oral Presentation on Section II Topics (10%)
           See CANVAS for Oral Presentation Guidelines
            ONE Powerpoint Presentation on your assigned Panel topic (3-5 minute
             presentation, depending on group size). Topics are based on assigned
             secondary sources (book chapters or journal articles)
            Please sign up on Canvas/People/Groups (Week 3 2/6, after 12th class day)
            Each student is responsible for an individual presentation but you are expected
             to coordinate the Panel presentations with your fellow panelists, including the
             submission of a merged presentation file by classtime of your presentation
             day.
Panel Groups: Section II: Language and Culture
Week 7 3/4, 3/6, 3/8: Language and Cultural Habits (Peter W. Culicover and Elizabeth
V. Hume, Basics of Language for Language Learners: on “thinking and acting” like a
native speaker)
The process of preparing an oral presentation of one’s ideas is an integral part of
developing ideas and refining observations. A prepared oral presentation is an excellent
exercise in abstracting the essence of one’s ideas, basically “getting to the point,” and
supporting one’s point with meaningful examples from the assigned text.
Your presentation will be evaluated on Content and Oral Presentation. You will be
assessed on oratory skills and a well-spoken and well-timed presentation will greatly
contribute to a communication of your ideas. As well, oral presentations and leading
discussion are always good practice for something you will be called upon to do at some
point in your life and career, long after you leave the classroom.
Content          Quality of discussion of selected topic (including assimilation assigned
                 reading, lectures and discussion), expression of ideas and opinions in
                 response to designated source
Oral Presentation Organization, clarity of expression of ideas and opinions,
                 “mechanics” of presentation (within time limit, articulate delivery of
                 presentation), effective use of Powerpoint presentation, effectiveness of
                 lead discussant work
    IV.      Final Project (25%)
             See CANVAS for worksheet, writing “template”
        Formal Final Project Report – on Translation Project (20%)
        Project proposals (1 paragraph description and sources) due by class Week 13
         Monday 4/15. (Late proposals will result in a half grade deduction of Written
         Presentation grade of Final Project paper.)
        Subsequent individual consultations with instructor may be required.
        Class will meet in small working groups on projects Weeks 13-14
        Final project presentations Weeks 15-16
                                                                                            5


One 5-7 page (.doc/.docx/pdf format, double-space) Written Translation Project
Report – all projects must meet with instructor approval.
Final project reports must be submitted by Friday 5/10 11:59 p.m. on Canvas/
Assignments. No late assignments will be accepted.
       Oral Presentation on Final Project – Weeks 15-16 (5%)
Powerpoint Presentations on final projects will be between 3-5 minutes. (See guidelines
on Canvas.) There is no make-up for missed presentations.
       Translation project – application of translation theory and practice
TWO PROJECT CHOICES:
    1. The translation project is a translation of a short work or excerpt into English, from
        Chinese or another foreign language (with instructor approval). Included in this written
        report would be a technical discussion of the translation approach applied, with a brief
        overview of the selected translation theory.
        OR
    2. The translation project may also be a comparison of two English translations of
        the same original language work (in any language).
        Bibliography required (Citation Guidelines on Canvas.) Plagiarism will not be
tolerated and consequences will include failure of assignment and may lead to failure of
the course.
        I expect you to proof your work carefully and to hand in final drafts with minimal
errors in spelling, punctuation, and grammar. Your paper will be assessed two grades,
equally evaluated on the following:
Content                 Quality of discussion and selected topic (including assimilation of
        research, background reading, discussion, lectures), expression of ideas and
        opinions, observations, etc. Quality of analysis of translation theory or practice.
Written Presentation             Organization, clarity of expression of ideas and opinions,
        writing mechanics and proper usage of English (e.g. spelling, punctuation, and
        grammar), proper citation usage
                                                                                                 6


                                  SCHEDULE OUTLINE
     All readings are in Posted on CANVAS.
     Assigned reading must be done by Monday’s Lecture
     Lecture outlines, notes, etc. can be found under CANVAS/Files
     Forum for in-class writing and discussion           In-class discussion will include
      informal writing and reading of informal writing (to be collected).
     Reading and Discussion Questions (DQ) will be written at the start of class. No late
      submissions, including being late to class, accepted for credit.
Weeks 1-4 (1/23)       Section I – The Chinese Language as Case Study
     Introduction to the Chinese Language, Dialects, Minority Languages
     DQ 1 2/15
Weeks 5-8 (2/18)       Section II – Language and Culture
     Panel Group Presentations (Week 7: 3/4, 3/6, 3/8)
     Language Attitudes and Cultural Habits
     Language Learning and Culture
     Case Study in Language Attitudes: American and Chinese “Refusal Strategies”
     DQ 2 3/13
                   [Week 9 (3/18)            Spring Break – no classes]
Week 10-14 (3/25) Section III – Translation Theories and Approaches
   Translation Theories and Approaches
   Influence of English and Western Culture
   Case Study: The Harry Potter series in Chinese Translation (China and Taiwan)
   DQ 3 4/12
 Approval of Final Project Proposal – short proposal with list of sources due by class time
  Monday 4/15. Late proposals will result in a half grade deduction of Written Presentation
  grade of Final Project paper.
 4/19-4/29: Small group work on translation projects (organized by language or topic)
Weeks 15-16 (4/29) Oral Presentations of Final Projects
     5/1-5/8 Final Project presentations
     5/10 Writing Day – no class session; instructor available in office
      FINAL PROJECT REPORTS DUE BY 11:59 P.M. FRIDAY 5/10 ON
      CANVAS/ASSIGNMENTS. No LATE assignments will be accepted
                                                                                             7


Use of Canvas
This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a password-protected site is
created for each course. Canvas can be used to distribute course materials, to communicate and
collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to take online quizzes and surveys.
You will be responsible for checking the Canvas course site regularly for class work and announcements.
As with all computer systems, there are occasional scheduled downtimes as well as unanticipated
disruptions. Notifications of these disruptions will be posted on the Canvas login page. Scheduled
downtimes are not an excuse for late work. However, if there is an unscheduled downtime for a
significant period of time, I will make an adjustment if it occurs close to the due date.
Canvas is available at http://canvas.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400
Monday through Friday 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
The UT Library
The UT Library offers resource help and many services.       The following link is for Undergraduate Students:
     Website: http://www.lib.utexas.edu/students/
The Undergraduate Writing Center
The Undergraduate Writing Center provides individual, professional advice on all aspects of writing to UT
undergraduates on a drop-in basis or by appointment.
          Writer’s Advice Line: free and open to everyone.
          Email your brief query or call at 475-VERB.
     Website: http://www.utexas.edu/cola/centers/uwc
IMPORTANT INFORMATION ON UNIVERSITY POLICIES
The University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom, leadership,
individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the University is expected to uphold these
values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and community.
University Electronic Mail Notification Policy
(Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students)
All students should become familiar with the University’s official e-mail student notification policy. It is
the student’s responsibility to keep the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address.
Students are expected to check e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with
University-related communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text of this
policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
In this course e-mail will be used as a means of communication with students. You will be responsible for
checking your e-mail regularly for class work and announcements. Note: if you are an employee of the
University, your e-mail address in Canvas is your employee address.
Documented Disability Statement
Any student with a documented disability who requires academic accommodations should contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at 471-6259 (voice) or 1-866-329-3986 (Video Phone) as soon as possible to
request an official letter outlining authorized accommodations. See Website below for more information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
                                                                                                            8
