                                                             ACC 287.5 (#02670 & 02665)
                                                    PERFORMANCE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
                                                       SPRING 2020 – JANUARY 21 THROUGH MARCH 5
Instructor                  Brian Lendecky
Class Times                 MW 10:00-12:00 in RRH 4.408 (unique #02670)
                            MW 12:00-2:00 in RRH 4.408 (unique #02665)
Office                      CBA 4M.210 (note my office is NOT in Rowling Hall)
Office Hours                MT 2:45-3:45 in my office, MW at 1:50 in the classroom, and by appointment
Phone                       512-232-9343 (but e-mail is best way to contact me)
E-Mail                      Brian.Lendecky@mccombs.utexas.edu
Course Page                 Canvas
Course Objectives
Performance Management and Control equips managers with accounting information and tools they need to plan
and control (evaluate) personnel and operations of the firm. This course provides a framework that facilitates a
better understanding of when and why managers need specific types of accounting information to both facilitate
their decisions and influence the decisions of their employees. In this class we will discuss two general topics:
performance management information systems and management control systems. These two general topics are
briefly described below and in more detail in the class schedule.
Performance Management Information Systems:
Performance management information systems provide information about the benefits and costs of the goods and
services sold by the firm to help facilitate the short-term operational and long-term strategic decisions of
managers. We will discuss and apply principles which will guide our evaluation and design of performance
management information systems. Thus, we will learn techniques to enhance the usefulness of accounting and
other information for these decisions. Moreover, we will apply these techniques to facilitate short-term operational
and long-term strategic decisions.
Managerial Control Systems:
Managerial control systems is the use of accounting information in the control and coordination of individuals and
organizational units. During this portion of the course, we will explicitly recognize that individuals respond to
methods used to evaluate and reward their performance. The purpose of this portion of the course is to identify
systems that have widespread use, examine the motivation and theoretical underpinnings for that use, and
identify how and when the misuse of these systems leads to dysfunctional outcomes for the firm. In doing so, we
will consider both financial and non-financial measures of performance.
The legendary former CFO of Cisco Systems, Larry Carter, said “From a management and fiduciary role, I do not
want to lose control. But we also want to continue to move at a rapid pace. The traditional answer to growth is
more controls but the bureaucracy then slows you down. How do you stay at the pace of a start up?” Our goal
will be to establish a firm grounding in proven measurement techniques while also addressing Carter’s concern:
knowing what we need to know for decision-making and control without excessively constraining the organization.
From Poets & Quants, 8/6/17, “2017 MBAs to Watch: Michael Sarraille, University of Texas at Austin”
Q: What was your favorite MBA Course and what was the biggest insight you gained about business from it?
A: Performance Management and Control taught by Professor Brian Lendecky. It reinforced the importance of
cost accounting, profitability performance, and the need to implement a balanced scorecard performance
management system in all industries. It was by far my favorite class…”


Brian Lendecky                          ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                              page 2
Required Materials
Teaching materials include a mix of case studies, articles, and textbook readings.
Textbook: Horngren’s Cost Accounting: A Managerial Emphasis, 16th Edition, by Datar, and Rajan, (Pearson,
2018). There are four copies of the textbook at the PCL Library (two 2-hour reserve and two 24-hour reserve).
If you would like to purchase your own copy of the book, you can do so via VitalSource. VitalSource is an eBook
platform that students can use to view the eBook on their smartphones, tablets, and desktop/laptop computers.
The online purchase price direct to student is $69.99 for a 180-day VitalSource subscription to the eBook. The
online purchase link is https://www.pearson.com/store/p/horngren-s-cost-accounting-a-managerial-
emphasis/P100002583866/9780134475998
Course pack: Contains all cases, articles, and other readings required for the course and can be purchased in the
copy center in Rowling Hall by the Moontower Café.
Additional material: Additional teaching materials including class notes, homework questions and solutions, etc.,
can be found on Canvas under the appropriate class session. The class schedule for this course is also posted
on Canvas.
Course Requirements and Grading
Your grade in the course will be determined as follows:
     In-Class Quizzes                     46%         (There are 13 total quizzes*)
     Final Exam                           54%         (Thursday evening March 5)
                                         100%
* Lowest quiz is dropped.
* Second lowest quiz is worth 2%.
* Highest eleven quizzes are worth 4% each
The MBA Programs Committee approved the following target grade distribution for all Core and Flex Core
courses: A (4.00) 25%, A- (3.67) 20%, B+ (3.33) 15%, B (3.00) 35%, B- or below (2.67 or lower) 5%. This grade
point average is approximately 3.42. This course uses that target distribution as a guideline for establishing final
grades.
There will be no opportunity to raise your course grade by doing “extra credit” work after the end of, or during, the
semester. Incompletes will be given only in the rarest of circumstances and according to university policy.
A passing grade in a graduate course is a C or above. A grade of C- or below is a failing grade. FYI – last year I
assigned three grades of C+ or C and a couple years ago I assigned a grade of C-.
Description of Requirements
Quizzes
All quizzes are individually completed and are closed case, article, computer, and notes. A quiz will be given at
the beginning of every class, except the first class. Each quiz will last approximately 5-10 minutes. There are
thirteen quizzes in total. Each quiz will cover the cases and articles (but NOT the textbook readings) assigned for
the current class session. If there are no cases or articles due that day, the quiz will solely be an attendance quiz.
No make-up quizzes will be given. The only exception will be if you miss a quiz due to a severe illness or other
emergency, and provide prompt notification and proof of emergency to Student Emergency Services
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/). They will require proof of emergency and will provide me official
acknowledgement of the emergency. However, I have final authority to determine if your absence is excused.
Once Student Emergency Services and I agree that your absence is excused, you will have an opportunity to take
an alternative quiz during my office hours. Please come see me if you have any questions about this policy.
Please note that NO make-up quizzes will be given for recruiting, job-search, and/or interview related absences.
If you are late to class, you will not be able to take the quiz during the break or at the end of class. If you leave
class after taking the quiz but before the end of class, without prior permission, I reserve the right to discard your
quiz, resulting in a quiz grade of 0.


Brian Lendecky                          ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                              page 3
If you miss a quiz, but arrive to class within the first hour of class you will get 75% of the lowest quiz score that
day (of those who took the quiz). It is your responsibility to come find me and notify me during the break or
immediately after class that you were in fact present.
You MUST come to the class section in which you are officially registered to receive credit for a quiz,
unless you’ve made prior arrangements with me.
Exam
The exam will be on Thursday evening March 5 and is closed case, article, book, computer, and notes. The
exam will be individually-completed. You will need to bring a calculator to the exam, which may be your financial
calculator. You may NOT use any calculator that stores text, which of course includes phones, tablets, or
computers.
The exam will embrace all course content as covered in the assigned pages from the textbook, homework
problems, cases, articles, class notes, and class discussions. I will post a practice exam. Severe illness or other
emergencies are the only valid reasons for missing the exam, both of which I require verification from the office of
the Dean of Students and Student Emergency Services. See the same policy under “Quizzes” above.
“Homework”
Homework problems will help you confirm your understanding of the key topics. The homework problems and
solutions are posted on Canvas. The homework problems are not collected nor graded.
The purpose of the homework is to allow you to master the material. Although often intuitive in class, you will not
really “get” these concepts and calculations unless you stumble through them on your own. Trying to solve the
homework problems will be a good way to reinforce your knowledge of the material and to prepare for the exam.
If you need help with a homework problem after looking at the solution on Canvas, please feel free to see me.
Based on my past inquiries to student’s who have performed poorly on the Final Exam, the biggest
reason is not keeping up with the homework in a timely fashion.
Grading Questions or Appeals
If you feel there exists a grading error on any of the quizzes or exam or if you feel you need to bring to my
attention other facts or circumstances that might affect the grade for any quiz or exam, you will have two weeks
from the date the assignment grade is posted on Canvas to take such action and have the matter resolved. Be
aware, however, that grading errors can occur in both directions—errors can make grades too high as well as too
low. Therefore, if you request a regrading, your entire assignment will be re-graded, and all grading errors will be
corrected. By requesting a re-grade, you accept the possibility that your grade may go either up or down. Please
do not wait until the end of the course, once you realize you may need additional points, to take this action
(unfortunately by then it will be too late).
Copyright
Use of Class Materials - the materials used in this class, including, but not limited to, exams, quizzes, class
notes, and homework assignments are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized copying of the class
materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary actions being taken against the
student. Additionally, the sharing of class materials (including, but not limited to group or individual test banks,
Facebook/Slack pages, etc.) without the specific, express approval of the instructor may be a violation of the
University's Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty, which could result in further disciplinary
action. This includes, among other things, uploading class materials to websites for the purpose of sharing
those materials with other current or future students (examples – Couse Hero, private Facebook pages,
Slack, etc.).
Class Recordings - Electronic Class Recordings are Prohibited without my express consent - with the exception
of the students who are permitted to do so as part of a reasonable accommodation received by Services for
Students with Disabilities, students may not electronically record class. This prohibition includes the use of audio
and video recordings. If you ask for my express consent to record class and it is given, such recordings may only
be used for your personal educational use and may not be distributed to other persons. Any student who violates
these limitations is subject to discipline under Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules. If you need to record a
particular class session you must ask me specifically before class.


Brian Lendecky                           ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                 page 4
Laptop, tablet, and other electronic devices policy
A 2017 study by McCombs marketing professor Adrian Ward showed that having your phone present (even when
it’s turned off!) takes up some of your brain power. Other recent studies, see the New York Times article later in
this syllabus, have shown that using computers in class leads to worse performance. So, although this is probably
not a popular policy, during class there will be no computer use, and your phone should only be used for urgent
messaging needs or emergency purposes. I will provide paper copies of the class notes outline for each
class.
An exception to this policy is I will allow an iPad or similar tablet that lie flat. You must sit in the first or second
row and I must be able to see the screen flat on the table.
E-mail and Canvas
I will frequently communicate with the class with announcements and guidance via email. I will use the email
addresses that are supplied to me on Canvas. If you need to update your email address with the University go to
your UT Direct page and, under personal info/all my addresses, change your email address.
Any outside-of-class announcements that I make (e.g., corrections or clarifications of items discussed in class,
syllabus changes, assignment changes, etc.) will be sent to you via e-mail through Canvas. It is possible that
substantial content will be posted on Canvas or sent via e-mail. It is your responsibility to regularly check your e-
mail and the class Canvas site.
Discussion Board on Canvas
In Canvas under “Discussions” I have created a discussion board to answer questions about course content
(clarification of class notes, questions about homework problems or practice exam questions, etc.).
If you have any questions on any of our course content please post them here. Discussion boards, such as this,
enable all students to get equal access to useful information that comes from students’ questions and responses
or conversations with professors. Posts to this discussion board are strongly preferred to e-mails. If you wish you
can receive an e-mail when posts are added to this discussion board by subscribing to the discussion board by
clicking on the “ribbon”.
McCombs Classroom Professionalism Policy (Official)
The highest professional standards are expected of all members of the McCombs community. The collective class
reputation and the value of the Texas MBA experience hinges on this. You should treat the Texas MBA
classroom as you would a corporate boardroom.
Faculty are expected to be professional and prepared to deliver value for each and every class session. Students
are expected to be professional in all respects.
The Texas MBA classroom experience is enhanced when:
• Students arrive on time. On time arrival ensures that classes are able to start and finish at the scheduled
      time. On time arrival shows respect for both fellow students and faculty and it enhances learning by reducing
      avoidable distractions.
• Students display their name cards. This permits fellow students and faculty to learn names, enhancing
      opportunities for community building and evaluation of in-class contributions.
• Students minimize unscheduled personal breaks. The learning environment improves when disruptions
      are limited.
• Students are fully prepared for each class. Much of the learning in the Texas MBA program takes place
      during classroom discussions. When students are not prepared they cannot contribute to the overall learning
      process. This affects not only the individual, but their peers who count on them, as well.
• Students attend the class section to which they are registered. Learning is enhanced when class sizes
      are optimized. Limits are set to ensure a quality experience. When section hopping takes place some classes
      become too large and it becomes difficult to contribute. When they are too small, the breadth of experience
      and opinion suffers.
• Students respect the views and opinions of their colleagues. Disagreement and debate are encouraged.
      Intolerance for the views of others is unacceptable.
• Phones and wireless devices are turned off. We’ve all heard the annoying ringing in the middle of a
      meeting. Not only is it not professional, it cuts off the flow of discussion when the search for the offender


Brian Lendecky                          ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                page 5
     begins. When a true need to communicate with someone outside of class exists (e.g., for some medical need)
     please inform the professor prior to class.
My additions to the McCombs Classroom Professionalism Official Policy
- Your experience is important to me and to the class learning that will take place. Some of our topics will be very
discussion based with no “right” or “wrong” answer. Because of this, your unique background will serve as a
sounding board for how to deal with these topics. It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and
perspectives should feel encouraged to lend their input, and that the diversity that students bring to this class be
viewed as a resource, strength, and benefit. If the tenor of our class discussions does not reflect your point of
view, I expect that you will speak up and respectfully challenge the direction of the conversation. It will benefit the
learning of the class and contribute to developing a more nuanced–indeed better–strategy for influence in the
workplace.
- I would like to add the following to the bullet point above “Students respect the views and opinions of their
colleagues”… I continue to work against implicit bias and appreciate your help too!
Research on classroom bias
Soraya Chemaly, Time, 12 February 2015
“The impact of unconscious teacher bias is long understood and well-documented. This new research confirms
decades of work done by Myra and David Sadker and Karen R. Zittleman. Through thousands of hours of
classroom observations, the Sadkers and Zittleman identified specific ways in which implicit and stereotypical
ideas about gender govern classroom dynamics. They, as others have, found that teachers spend up to two
thirds of their time talking to male students; they also are more likely to interrupt girls but allow boys to talk over
them.”
Leadership and this Course
The Texas MBA program is designed to develop influential business leaders. The MBA Program has identified
four fundamental and broad pillars of leadership: knowledge and understanding, communication and
collaboration, responsibility and integrity, and a worldview of business and society. By helping ensure you and
the people you lead have the appropriate information and the right incentives to make value-increasing decisions,
this course enhances your knowledge and understanding of how to manage and lead an organization. In doing
so, this course highlights how accounting information works together with the integrity and personal
responsibilities of team members to overcome a fundamental difficulty of collaborative decision making (i.e., team
members often do not have the same incentives and objectives). You will be put into small groups often to work
on calculations and during case discussions when we are trying to figure out “what should we do?” which will
further enhance your collaboration and communication skills. Finally, you will apply this knowledge by developing
and communicating solutions to “real world” cases that span across a multitude of industries.
Academic Dishonesty
I have no tolerance for acts of academic dishonesty. Such acts damage the reputation of the school and the degree
and demean the honest efforts of the majority of students. The minimum penalty for an act of academic dishonesty
will be a zero for that quiz or exam.
The responsibilities for both students and faculty with regard to the Honor System are described on
http://mba.mccombs.utexas.edu/students/academics/honor/index.asp and on the final pages of this syllabus. As
the instructor for this course, I agree to observe all the faculty responsibilities described therein. During Orientation,
you signed the Honor Code Pledge. In doing so, you agreed to observe all of the student responsibilities of the
Honor Code. If the application of the Honor System to this class and its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your
responsibility to ask me for clarification.
Scholastic dishonesty includes, but is not limited to: copying tests or quizzes, representing (copying) the work of
another person as one’s own or allowing another person to represent your work as their own, using or
having on your desk unauthorized material or aids to complete a quiz or exam (e.g., cheat sheets, solutions,
graphing or programmable calculators, cell phones, etc.).
IT’S NOT WORTH IT! ALL acts of academic dishonesty receive significant penalties and are reported to Student
Judicial Services and attach to your record.
Specific acts of scholastic dishonesty I have reported students to Student Judicial Services for (and some have
ultimately been expelled for) include:
- while taking an exam or quiz, looking at your neighbor’s exam or quiz.


Brian Lendecky                           ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                           page 6
- while taking an exam or quiz, allowing your neighbor to look at your exam or quiz (see the underlined and
bolded sentence in the paragraph above).
                                                Important Notifications
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives will be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs will be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be
comfortably expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength, and benefit. Please let me know right away if this
ever is not the case.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, or other assignment in order to
observe a religious holy day, and you notify me appropriately, you will be given an opportunity to complete the
missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Privacy in Canvas
Information in Canvas is protected by your UTEID login. Please be aware that if I teach multiple sections of this
course I will use a merged Canvas site for all sections. This will allow students in other sections to see that you
are enrolled in the course and send you email from within Canvas. However, they will not actually learn your email
address and no other personal data will be revealed through Canvas. If you have any concerns, please contact
the ITS Help Desk at 512-475-9400 for help removing your name from the view of other students.
Title IX Reporting
Title IX is a federal law that protects against sex and gender-based discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual
assault, sexual misconduct, dating/domestic violence and stalking at federally funded educational institutions. UT
Austin is committed to fostering a learning and working environment free from discrimination in all its forms. When
sexual misconduct occurs in our community, the university can:
      1. Intervene to prevent harmful behavior from continuing or escalating.
      2. Provide support and remedies to students and employees who have experienced harm or have become
          involved in a Title IX investigation.
      3. Investigate and discipline violations of the university’s relevant policies.
For more information about reporting options and resources, visit titleix.utexas.edu or contact the Title IX Office at
titleix@austin.utexas.edu.


Brian Lendecky                        ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                           page 7
The New York Times
BUSINESS DAY
Laptops Are Great. But Not During a Lecture or a Meeting.
By SUSAN DYNARSKI NOV. 22, 2017
Step into any college lecture hall and you are likely to find a sea of students typing away at open, glowing
laptops as the professor speaks. But you won’t see that when I’m teaching. Though I make a few exceptions, I
generally ban electronics, including laptops, in my classes and research seminars.
That may seem extreme. After all, with laptops, students can, in some ways, absorb more from lectures than
they can with just paper and pen. They can download course readings, look up unfamiliar concepts on the fly
and create an accurate, well-organized record of the lecture material. All of that is good.
But a growing body of evidence shows that over all, college students learn less when they use computers or
tablets during lectures. They also tend to earn worse grades. The research is unequivocal: Laptops distract from
learning, both for users and for those around them. It’s not much of a leap to expect that electronics also
undermine learning in high school classrooms or that they hurt productivity in meetings in all kinds of
workplaces.
Measuring the effect of laptops on learning is tough. One problem is that students don’t all use laptops the same
way. It might be that dedicated students, who tend to earn high grades, use them more frequently in classes. It
might be that the most distracted students turn to their laptops whenever they are bored. In any case, a simple
comparison of performance may confuse the effect of laptops with the characteristics of the students who
choose to use them. Researchers call this “selection bias.”
Researchers can solve that problem by randomly assigning some students to use laptops. With that approach,
the students who use laptops are comparable in all other ways to those who don’t. In a series of experiments at
Princeton University and the University of California, Los Angeles, students were randomly assigned either
laptops or pen and paper for note-taking at a lecture. Those who had used laptops had
substantially worse understanding of the lecture, as measured by a standardized test, than those who did not.
The researchers hypothesized that, because students can type faster than they can write, the lecturer’s words
flowed right to the students’ typing fingers without stopping in their brains for substantive processing. Students
writing by hand had to process and condense the spoken material simply to enable their pens to keep up with
the lecture. Indeed, the notes of the laptop users more closely resembled transcripts than lecture summaries.
The handwritten versions were more succinct but included the salient issues discussed in the lecture.


Brian Lendecky                         ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                             page 8
Even so, it may seem heavy-handed to ban electronics in the classroom. Most college students are legal adults
who can serve in the armed forces, vote and own property. Why shouldn’t they decide themselves whether to
use a laptop? The strongest argument against allowing that choice is that one student’s use of a laptop harms
the learning of students around them. In a series of lab experiments, researchers at York University
and McMaster University in Canada tested the effect of laptops on students who weren’t using them. Some
students were told to perform small tasks on their laptops unrelated to the lecture, like looking up movie times.
As expected, these students retained less of the lecture material. But what is really interesting is that the
learning of students seated near the laptop users was also negatively affected.
The economic term for such a spillover is a “negative externality,” which occurs when one person’s consumption
harms the well-being of others. The classic negative externality is pollution: A factory burning coal or a car using
gasoline can harm the air and environment for those around it. A laptop can sometimes be a form of visual
pollution: Those nearby see its screen, and their attention is pulled toward its enticements, which often include
not just note-taking but Facebook, Twitter, email and news.
These experiments go only so far. They may not capture positive effects of laptops in real classrooms over the
course of a semester, when students use their typed notes for review and grades are at stake. But another study
did just that. At the United States Military Academy, a team of professors studied laptop use in an introductory
economics class. The course was taught in small sections, which the researchers randomly assigned to one of
three conditions: electronics allowed, electronics banned and tablets allowed but only if laid flat on desks,
where professors could monitor their use. By the end of the semester, students in the classrooms with laptops
or tablets had performed substantially worse than those in the sections where electronics were banned.
You might question whether the experience of military cadets learning economics is relevant to students in
other settings — say, community college students learning Shakespeare. But we’d expect the negative effects of
laptops to be, if anything, less at West Point, where all courses are taught in small sections, than it is at
institutions with many large lectures. Further, cadets have very strong incentives to perform well and avoid
distractions, since class rank has a major impact on their job status after graduation.
The best way to settle this question is probably to study laptop use in more colleges. But until then, I find the
evidence sufficiently compelling that I’ve made my decision: I ban electronics in my own classes. I do make one
major exception. Students with learning disabilities may use electronics in order to participate in class. This does
reveal that any student using electronics has a learning disability. That is a loss of privacy for those students,
which also occurs when they are given more time to complete a test. Those negatives must be weighed against
the learning losses of other students when laptops are used in class.
Students may object that a laptop ban prevents them from storing notes on their computers. But smartphones
can snap pictures of handwritten pages and convert them to an electronic format. Even better, outside class,
students can read their own handwritten notes and type them, if they like, a process that enhances learning.
The best evidence available now suggests that students should avoid laptops during lectures and just pick up
their pens. It’s not a leap to think that the same holds for middle and high school classrooms, as well as for
workplace meetings.
Susan Dynarski is a professor of education, public policy and economics at the University of Michigan. Follow her
on Twitter: @dynarski. A version of this article appears in print on November 26, 2017, on Page BU4 of the New
York edition with the headline: Take Notes With Pen and Paper? It Can Be Done.


Brian Lendecky                       ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                        page 9
Brian Lendecky, CPA, MPA (Brian.Lendecky@mccombs.utexas.edu)
Distinguished Senior Lecturer, Department of Accounting
Brian Lendecky is a Distinguished Senior Lecturer in the Department of Accounting at The University of
Texas at Austin. He joined the department in 2006 and teaches Financial Accounting and Managerial
Accounting in the following programs: Undergraduate, MPA, Full-Time MBA, Executive MBA, Houston MBA,
Dallas / Ft. Worth MBA, Austin Evening MBA, MS in Information Technology Management, and McCombs
Executive Education. Brian also teaches Financial Methods for Lawyers in the School of Law. He taught for
numerous years in the Mexico City MBA program and also taught the Tax Practicum course, the latter
winning a 2008 Governor’s Volunteer Award from Governor Perry and a 2011 Tower Award. Brian has
taught at the ESCP-EAP European School of Management in Paris, the VSE School of Economics in Prague,
and the Chinese University of Hong Kong. He has also led MBA Global Trips to Panama, Colombia, and
South Africa. Brian Lendecky started his career at PriceWaterhouseCoopers and has subsequently
managed accounting departments in the food manufacturing, energy, & medical supplies manufacturing
industries. He has also provided consulting services in numerous industries the past fourteen years.
Brian has received numerous teaching awards including the 2014 Texas Society of CPAs Outstanding
Accounting Educator Award, Mexico City Executive MBA Outstanding Faculty Award (2019, 2018, 2017,
2016, 2015, & 2014), Fall 2018 Texas MBA at Houston Faculty Honor Roll, Fall 2016 Evening MBA Faculty
Honor Roll, 2013 Hank and Mary Harkins Foundation Award for Effective Teaching in Undergraduate
Classes, 2011 Master in Professional Accounting (MPA) Council’s Outstanding Accounting Faculty Award,
Spring 2011 Best Faculty Award from the Alpha Kappa Psi business fraternity, and the 2010 CBA
Foundation Advisory Council Award for Teaching Innovation. He was nominated by the Faculty Affairs
Committee of the Senate of College Councils and the Undergraduate Business Council for the Professor of
the Year Award for 2009. He has served on the MPA Program Committee since 2010. Brian is a licensed
CPA in the State of Texas and is a proud alumnus of the McCombs School’s #1 ranked MPA program.
Brian and his wife Stephanie have been married ten years and have five kids. Stephanie is a Sales Executive
for Gartner Inc. and is finally a Longhorn. She is currently a member of the Executive MBA Class of 2021!
Their kids are an entrepreneur who owns his own bookkeeping business (25), the starting center on Rice
University’s football team (21), a high school senior who currently holds his high school’s all-time bench
press record (17), a 2nd grader who told his brother he was rooting for UT when Rice and UT played in
September because he has been a Longhorn fan longer than a Rice fan (8), and a daughter whose future
boyfriends’ fifth biggest concern is meeting her dad (5). In his spare time Brian loves to travel with his
family and is an avid sports fan and poker player. He has played in the World Series of Poker three times
and has made a World Poker Tour final table.


Brian Lendecky                               ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                   page 10
Honor Code Purpose
Academic honor, trust and integrity are fundamental to The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business
community. They contribute directly to the quality of your education and reach far beyond the campus to your overall standing
within the business community. The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business Honor System promotes
academic honor, trust and integrity throughout the Graduate School of Business. The Honor System relies upon The
University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct (Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on Student Service and Activities) for
enforcement, but promotes ideals that are higher than merely enforceable standards. Every student is responsible for
understanding and abiding by the provisions of the Honor System and the University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct.
The University expects all students to obey the law, show respect for other members of the university community, perform
contractual obligations, maintain absolute integrity and the highest standard of individual honor in scholastic work, and observe
the highest standards of conduct. Ignorance of the Honor System or The University of Texas Student Standards of Conduct is
not an acceptable excuse for violations under any circumstances.
The effectiveness of the Honor System results solely from the wholehearted and uncompromising support of each member of
the McCombs School of Business community. Each member must abide by the Honor System and must be intolerant of any
violations. The system is only as effective as you make it.
Faculty Involvement in the Honor System
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business Faculty's commitment to the Honor System is critical to its
success. It is imperative that faculty make their expectations clear to all students. They must also respond to accusations of
cheating or other misconduct by students in a timely, discrete and fair manner. We urge faculty members to promote
awareness of the importance of integrity through in-class discussions and assignments throughout the semester.
Expectations Under the Honor System
Standards
If a student is uncertain about the standards of conduct in a particular setting, he or she should ask the relevant faculty
member for clarification to ensure his or her conduct falls within the expected scope of honor, trust and integrity as promoted
by the Honor System. This applies to all tests, papers and group and individual work. Questions about appropriate behavior
during the job search should be addressed to a professional member of the Career Management Office. Below are some of
the specific examples of violations of the Honor System.
Lying
Lying is any deliberate attempt to deceive another by stating an untruth, or by any direct form of communication to include the
telling of a partial truth. Lying includes the use or omission of any information with the intent to deceive or mislead. Examples
of lying include, but are not limited to, providing a false excuse for why a test was missed or presenting false information to a
recruiter.
Stealing
Stealing is wrongfully taking, obtaining, withholding, defacing or destroying any person's money, personal property, article or
service, under any circumstances. Examples of stealing include, but are not limited to, removing course material from the
library or hiding it from others, removing material from another person's mail folder, securing for one's self unattended items
such as calculators, books, book bags or other personal property. Another form of stealing is the duplication of copyrighted
material beyond the reasonable bounds of "fair use." Defacing (e.g., "marking up" or highlighting) library books is also
considered stealing, because, through a willful act, the value of another's property is decreased. (See the appendix for a
detailed explanation of "fair use.")


Brian Lendecky                                ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                  page 11
Cheating
Cheating is wrongfully and unfairly acting out of self-interest for personal gain by seeking or accepting an unauthorized
advantage over one's peers. Examples include, but are not limited to, obtaining questions or answers to tests or quizzes, and
getting assistance on case write-ups or other projects beyond what is authorized by the assigning instructor. It is also cheating
to accept the benefit(s) of another person's theft(s) even if not actively sought. For instance, if one continues to be attentive to
an overhead conversation about a test or case write-up even if initial exposure to such information was accidental and beyond
the control of the student in question, one is also cheating. If a student overhears a conversation or any information that any
faculty member might reasonably wish to withhold from the student, the student should inform the faculty member(s) of the
information and circumstance under which it was overheard.
Actions Required for Responding to Suspected and Known Violations
As stated, everyone must abide by the Honor System and be intolerant of violations. If you suspect a violation has occurred,
you should first speak to the suspected violator in an attempt to determine if an infraction has taken place. If, after doing so,
you still believe that a violation has occurred, you must tell the suspected violator that he or she must report himself or herself
to the course professor or Associate Dean of the McCombs School of Business. If the individual fails to report himself or
herself within 48 hours, it then becomes your obligation to report the infraction to the course professor or the Associate Dean
of the McCombs School of Business. Remember that although you are not required by regulation to take any action, our Honor
System is only as effective as you make it. If you remain silent when you suspect or know of a violation, you are approving of
such dishonorable conduct as the community standard. You are thereby precipitating a repetition of such violations.
The Honor Pledge
The University of Texas at Austin McCombs School of Business requires each enrolled student to adopt the Honor System.
The Honor Pledge best describes the conduct promoted by the Honor System. It is as follows:
"I affirm that I belong to the honorable community of The University of Texas at Austin Graduate School of Business. I will not
lie, cheat or steal, nor will I tolerate those who do."
"I pledge my full support to the Honor System. I agree to be bound at all times by the Honor System and understand that any
violation may result in my dismissal from the McCombs School of Business."
The following pages provide specific guidance about the Standard of Academic Integrity at the University
of Texas at Austin. Please read it carefully and feel free to ask me any questions you might have.


Brian Lendecky                               ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                    page 12
Excerpts from the University of Texas at Austin Office of the Dean of Students website
(http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/acint_student.php)
The Standard of Academic Integrity
A fundamental principle for any educational institution, academic integrity is highly valued and seriously regarded at The
University of Texas at Austin, as emphasized in the standards of conduct. More specifically, you and other students are
expected to "maintain absolute integrity and a high standard of individual honor in scholastic work" undertaken at the
University (Sec. 11-801, Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities). This is a very basic expectation that is further
reinforced by the University's Honor Code. At a minimum, you should complete any assignments, exams, and other scholastic
endeavors with the utmost honesty, which requires you to:
     •    acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts;
     •    complete your assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing
          them;
     •    follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your academic discipline; and
     •    avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of yourself or another student.
For the official policies on academic integrity and scholastic dishonesty, please refer to Chapter 11 of the Institutional Rules on
Student Services and Activities.
What is Scholastic Dishonesty?
In promoting a high standard of academic integrity, the University broadly defines scholastic dishonesty—basically, all conduct
that violates this standard, including any act designed to give an unfair or undeserved academic advantage, such as:
     •    Cheating
     •    Plagiarism
     •    Unauthorized Collaboration
     •    Collusion
     •    Falsifying Academic Records
     •    Misrepresenting Facts (e.g., providing false information to postpone an exam, obtain an extended deadline for an
          assignment, or even gain an unearned financial benefit)
     •    Any other acts (or attempted acts) that violate the basic standard of academic integrity (e.g., multiple submissions—
          submitting essentially the same written assignment for two courses without authorization to do so)
Several types of scholastic dishonesty—unauthorized collaboration, plagiarism, and multiple submissions—are discussed in
more detail on this Web site to correct common misperceptions about these particular offenses and suggest ways to avoid
committing them.
For the University's official definition of scholastic dishonesty, see Section 11-802, Institutional Rules on Student Services and
Activities.
Unauthorized Collaboration
If you work with another person on an assignment for credit without the instructor's permission to do so, you are
engaging in unauthorized collaboration.
     •    This common form of academic dishonesty can occur with all types of scholastic work—papers, homework, tests
          (take-home or in-class), lab reports, computer programming projects, or any other assignments to be submitted for
          credit.
     •    For the University's official definitions of unauthorized collaboration and the related offense of collusion, see Sections
          11-802(c)(6) & 11-802(e), Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities.
Some students mistakenly assume that they can work together on an assignment as long as the instructor has not
expressly prohibited collaborative efforts.


Brian Lendecky                               ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                  page 13
     •   Actually, students are expected to complete assignments independently unless the course instructor indicates
         otherwise. So working together on assignments is not permitted unless the instructor specifically approves of any
         such collaboration.
Unfortunately, students who engage in unauthorized collaboration tend to justify doing so through various
rationalizations. For example, some argue that they contributed to the work, and others maintain that working
together on an assignment "helped them learn better."
     •   The instructor—not the student—determines the purpose of a particular assignment and the acceptable method for
         completing it. Unless working together on an assignment has been specifically authorized, always assume it is not
         allowed.
     •   Many educators do value group assignments and other collaborative efforts, recognizing their potential for developing
         and enhancing specific learning skills. And course requirements in some classes do consist primarily of group
         assignments. But the expectation of individual work is the prevailing norm in many classes, consistent with the
         presumption of original work that remains a fundamental tenet of scholarship in the American educational system.
Some students incorrectly assume that the degree of any permissible collaboration is basically the same for all
classes.
     •   The extent of any permissible collaboration can vary widely from one class to the next, even from one project to the
         next within the same class.
     •   Be sure to distinguish between collaboration that is authorized for a particular assignment and unauthorized
         collaboration that is undertaken for the sake of expedience or convenience to benefit you and/or another student. By
         failing to make this key distinction, you are much more likely to engage in unauthorized collaboration. To avoid any
         such outcome, always seek clarification from the instructor.
Unauthorized collaboration can also occur in conjunction with group projects.
     •   How so? If the degree or type of collaboration exceeds the parameters expressly approved by the instructor. An
         instructor may allow (or even expect) students to work together on one stage of a group project but require
         independent work on other phases. Any such distinctions should be strictly observed.
Providing another student unauthorized assistance on an assignment is also a violation, even without the prospect of
benefiting yourself.
     •   If an instructor did not authorize students to work together on a particular assignment and you help a student
         complete that assignment, you are providing unauthorized assistance and, in effect, facilitating an act of academic
         dishonesty. Equally important, you can be held accountable for doing so.
     •   For similar reasons, you should not allow another student access to your drafted or completed assignments unless
         the instructor has permitted those materials to be shared in that manner.
Plagiarism
Plagiarism is another serious violation of academic integrity. In simplest terms, this occurs if you represent as your
own work any material that was obtained from another source, regardless how or where you acquired it.
     •   Plagiarism can occur with all types of media—scholarly or non-academic, published or unpublished—written
         publications, Internet sources, oral presentations, illustrations, computer code, scientific data or analyses, music, art,
         and other forms of expression. (See Section 11-802(d) of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for
         the University's official definition of plagiarism.)
     •   Borrowed material from written works can include entire papers, one or more paragraphs, single phrases, or any
         other excerpts from a variety of sources such as books, journal articles, magazines, downloaded Internet documents,
         purchased papers from commercial writing services, papers obtained from other students (including homework
         assignments), etc.
     •   As a general rule, the use of any borrowed material results in plagiarism if the original source is not properly
         acknowledged. So you can be held accountable for plagiarizing material in either a final submission of an assignment
         or a draft that is being submitted to an instructor for review, comments, and/or approval.
Using verbatim material (e.g., exact words) without proper attribution (or credit) constitutes the most blatant form of
plagiarism. However, other types of material can be plagiarized as well, such as ideas drawn from an original source
or even its structure (e.g., sentence construction or line of argument).


Brian Lendecky                               ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                       page 14
      •    Improper or insufficient paraphrasing often accounts for this type of plagiarism. (See additional information on
           paraphrasing.)
Plagiarism can be committed intentionally or unintentionally.
      •    Strictly speaking, any use of material from another source without proper attribution constitutes plagiarism, regardless
           why that occurred, and any such conduct violates accepted standards of academic integrity.
      •    Some students deliberately plagiarize, often rationalizing this misconduct with a variety of excuses: falling behind and
           succumbing to the pressures of meeting deadlines; feeling overworked and wishing to reduce their workloads;
           compensating for actual (or perceived) academic or language deficiencies; and/or justifying plagiarism on other
           grounds.
      •    But some students commit plagiarism without intending to do so, often stumbling into negligent plagiarism as a result
           of sloppy notetaking, insufficient paraphrasing, and/or ineffective proofreading. Those problems, however, neither
           justify nor excuse this breach of academic standards. By misunderstanding the meaning of plagiarism and/or failing to
           cite sources accurately, you are much more likely to commit this violation. Avoiding that outcome requires, at a
           minimum, a clear understanding of plagiarism and the appropriate techniques for scholarly attribution. (See related
           information on paraphrasing; notetaking and proofreading; and acknowledging and citing sources.)
By merely changing a few words or rearranging several words or sentences, you are not paraphrasing. Making minor
revisions to borrowed text amounts to plagiarism.
      •    Even if properly cited, a "paraphrase" that is too similar to the original source's wording and/or structure is, in fact,
           plagiarized. (See additional information on paraphrasing.)
Remember, your instructors should be able to clearly identify which materials (e.g., words and ideas) are your own
and which originated with other sources.
      •    That cannot be accomplished without proper attribution. You must give credit where it is due, acknowledging the
           sources of any borrowed passages, ideas, or other types of materials, and enclosing any verbatim excerpts with
           quotation marks (using block indentation for longer passages).
Plagiarism & Unauthorized Collaboration
Plagiarism and unauthorized collaboration are often committed jointly.
By submitting as your own work any unattributed material that you obtained from other sources (including the contributions of
another student who assisted you in preparing a homework assignment), you have committed plagiarism. And if the instructor
did not authorize students to work together on the assignment, you have also engaged in unauthorized collaboration. Both
violations contribute to the same fundamental deception—representing material obtained from another source as your own
work.
Group efforts that extend beyond the limits approved by an instructor frequently involve plagiarism in addition to unauthorized
collaboration. For example, an instructor may allow students to work together while researching a subject, but require each
student to write a separate report. If the students collaborate while writing their reports and then submit the products of those
joint efforts as individual works, they are guilty of unauthorized collaboration as well as plagiarism. In other words, the students
collaborated on the written assignment without authorization to do so, and also failed to acknowledge the other students'
contributions to their own individual reports.
Multiple Submissions
Submitting the same paper (or other type of assignment) for two courses without prior approval represents another
form of academic dishonesty.
You may not submit a substantially similar paper or project for credit in two (or more) courses unless expressly authorized to
do so by your instructor(s). (See Section 11-802(b) of the Institutional Rules on Student Services and Activities for the
University's official definition of scholastic dishonesty.)
You may, however, re-work or supplement previous work on a topic with the instructor's approval.
Some students mistakenly assume that they are entitled to submit the same paper (or other assignment) for two (or
more) classes simply because they authored the original work.


Brian Lendecky                              ACC 287.5: Performance Management and Control                                   page 15
Unfortunately, students with this viewpoint tend to overlook the relevant ethical and academic issues, focusing instead on their
own "authorship" of the original material and personal interest in receiving essentially double credit for a single effort.
Unauthorized multiple submissions are inherently deceptive. After all, an instructor reasonably assumes that any completed
assignments being submitted for credit were actually prepared for that course. Mindful of that assumption, students who
"recycle" their own papers from one course to another make an effort to convey that impression. For instance, a student may
revise the original title page or imply through some other means that he or she wrote the paper for that particular course,
sometimes to the extent of discussing a "proposed" paper topic with the instructor or presenting a "draft" of the paper before
submitting the "recycled" work for credit.
The issue of plagiarism is also relevant. If, for example, you previously prepared a paper for one course and then submit it for
credit in another course without citing the initial work, you are committing plagiarism—essentially "self-plagiarism"—the term
used by some institutions. Recall the broad scope of plagiarism: all types of materials can be plagiarized, including
unpublished works, even papers you previously wrote.
Another problem concerns the resulting "unfair academic advantage" that is specifically referenced in the University's definition
of scholastic dishonesty. If you submit a paper for one course that you prepared and submitted for another class, you are
simply better situated to devote more time and energy toward fulfilling other requirements for the subsequent course than
would be available to classmates who are completing all course requirements during that semester. In effect, you would be
gaining an unfair academic advantage, which constitutes academic dishonesty as it is defined on this campus.
Some students, of course, do recognize one or more of these ethical issues, but still refrain from citing their authorship of prior
papers to avoid earning reduced (or zero) credit for the same works in other classes. That underlying motivation further
illustrates the deceptive nature of unauthorized multiple submissions.
An additional issue concerns the problematic minimal efforts involved in "recycling" papers (or other prepared assignments).
Exerting minimal effort basically undercuts the curricular objectives associated with a particular assignment and the course
itself. Likewise, the practice of "recycling" papers subverts important learning goals for individual degree programs and higher
education in general, such as the mastery of specific skills that students should acquire and develop in preparing written
assignments. This demanding but necessary process is somewhat analogous to the required regimen of athletes, like the
numerous laps and other repetitive training exercises that runners must successfully complete to prepare adequately for a
marathon.
