               NTR W374C – PRACTICUM IN COMMUNITY DIETETICS
                NTR W374P – ADVANCED PRACTICUM IN DIETETICS
                                     Summer, 2019
Course Description:
Practicum in Community Dietetics
Students will gain experience in community nutrition settings, participate in the
development and completion of a business plan and complete the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) Challenge assignment.
Advanced Practicum in Dietetics
Culminating experience in the practice of dietetics in the area of Pediatric Nutrition
and/or Adult Nutrition. Students will reflect on personal & professional development
and prepare materials (ePortfolio) that will assist in seeking an entry-level position in
dietetics
Instructors:
         Monica Milonovich, MS, RD, LD                          Diane Papillion MPH, RD
 Office: GEA
                                                     Office: GEA 30D Email: d.papi@utexas.edu
 30B Email: mmilonovich@utexas.edu
 Office: 512-471-0637 Cell: 512-373-2798             Office: 512-232-6161 Cell: 512-779-8109
Objectives:    Upon completion of these courses, students should demonstrate:
1. Professional standards of behavior
2. Personal and professional growth
3. Effective written and verbal communication
4. Appropriate positive attitude and service orientation
5. Cooperation as an effective team player
6. Familiarity with community nutrition opportunities
7. Performance in accordance with the Code of Ethics for the Profession of Dietetics.
8. Participation in professional activities.
9. Use of current technologies for information and communication activities.
10. Self-assessment used to evaluate interest in and aptitude for dietetic practice in
    specialty area of interest.
Schedule:


First three days and last three days of the course period are spent on campus. The
time between are various rotations at various locations in a community or specialty
environment.
Rotation dates/times
Each rotation is different. On average, you are expected to be working 40-hour work
weeks (similar to your preceptor’s schedule). Your daily start and finish times will vary
and are at the discretion of your preceptor.
July 4 (working, holiday, special project) is to the discretion of the preceptor you are
        th
scheduled with that time.
Evaluation: Will be based on successful completion of assigned rotations as well as
course assignments and activities.
  Performance Evaluation: (60%)
                           First Impression- submit an initial impression the first day of each new
                           rotation to Canvas by 11:59PM.
                           Self Evaluation – Each student will submit a weekly reflection to Canvas
  Due the first day of a
                           by Friday, 11:59PM. Include activities accomplished, evaluating
  new rotation and every
                           achievement of competencies and establishing short-term goals for
  Friday of the rotation.
                           improvement.
                           All students will have 3 – 7 submissions depending on the number of
                           placements per semester.
                           Preceptor Evaluation Form – Your preceptor should complete a formal
                           evaluation of competency using the Supervised Practice Evaluation
  At the end of each
                           Form. Submit the form on Canvas on the last day of each rotation by
  rotation
                           11:59PM.
                           Self Evaluation Form- Complete the Summer Self Evaluation Form and
                           submit on Canvas on the last day of each rotation by 11:59PM.
  At the end of the        Faculty Evaluation The Professional Rubric will be used to evaluate you
  summer course            overall performance this summer.
  Assignments and Activities 40%:
                           SNAP Challenge Assignment: Nutrient analysis, food cost summary
  Due July 8
                           and paper reflecting on experience.


                              RDN Advocacy/Business Plan: Development and presentation of
 Due August 14
                              Business Plan to support RDN Advocacy for target population
                              ePortfolio: Include examples of projects you have completed throughout
                              your educational experience preparing you to be a registered
                              dietitian. Include recognition of strengths and needs for continued
 Due August 14                learning. You are required to attend a minimum of six professional
                              meetings during your CPD experience (three semesters) and have four
                              hours of meaningful volunteer experiences throughout your CPD
                              experience. Include documentation and reflection of these experiences
                              in your ePortfolio. You are NOT required to comment on all the
                              CRDs. The CRDs give you guidance into better understanding that you
                              are prepared to be a registered dietitian.
 Due August 14                Oral Reports: 15-minute presentation on three of your summer
                              experiences. The experience will be assigned as will the group you will
                              work with.
Coordinated Program Policies Students must be familiar with and follow both
program and practice facility policies. During the practicum students should pay
particular attention to the CPD policies regarding:
•   Requirements for Completion of Program
•   Eligibility/Availability for Supervised Practice
•   Attendance
•   Academic and Professional Honesty
•   Confidentiality of Information
•   Non-discrimination
•   Dress Requirements
Attendance
Realizing that students may occasionally have an unavoidable absence, students are
allowed up to 4 hours of personal leave during the summer sessions. Personal leave
will be assessed in 1-hour blocks. If the personal leave occurs during an on-campus
workshop day, all activities/assignments must be made-up. Make-up time may be
required for absence during assigned time in a practice facility. Regardless of make-
up, a penalty of a letter grade may be assessed to the course grade for each additional
4 hours of absence. No personal leave time can be used on the last day of class.
Students who have a communicable disease are not allowed in healthcare or
foodservice operations or potentially in any other environments. Absence due to


illness will not result in a grade penalty provided the student seeks medical care
promptly. The need for make-up will be at the discretion of the course instructor
depending on the duration of absence and impact on achievement of required
competencies.
If you have questions about how the absence policy applies to you, please see the
course instructor or program director.
