The University of Texas at Austin Department of Middle Eastern Studies
                                  ARA 621L Intensive Arabic IV
                                          ‫اﻟﺴﻨﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻧ*ﺔ‬+ ‫اﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌ()*ﺔ‬
                                                                    ً          ً
                                    ?A @ ‫ﻢ إ< اﻟﺼﻒ اﻟﺜﺎ‬98 ‫أﻫﻼ وﺳﻬﻼ‬
For instructor and TA names, office location & office hours, and email please see
Canvas.
IMPORTANT INFORMATION FOR THIS CLASS:
     •    CELL PHONES, TABLETS AND COMPUTERS OFF EXCEPT WHEN PERMITTED BY
          INSTRUCTOR.
     •    LATENESS AND USING ENGLISH WITHOUT PERMISSION WILL AFFECT YOUR
          PERFORMANCE AND YOUR GRADE.
     •    ALL WRITTEN AND TYPED ASSIGNMENTS MUST BE DOUBLE-SPACED AND LEGIBLE.
     •    WE EXPECT TO BE INFORMED OF ABSENCES BEFORE CLASS BEGINS. NO GUM PLEASE.
     •    Beverages are permitted. In Arab culture, if you bring food, you must offer to share it.
          J
                                           : ‫ اﻟﻜﺘﺐ واﻟﻤﻮاد اﻟﺪراﺳﯿﺔ‬: ‫أ‬
                                                                 .‫ﻌﺔ اﻟﺜﺎﻟﺜﺔ‬c‫? – اﻟﻄ‬A @ ‫ﻛﺘﺎب اﻟ]ﺘﺎب اﻟﺠﺰء اﻟﺜﺎ‬    •
                                                                                                     @
                                 http://www.alkitaabtextbook.com :‫ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ اﻟ]ﺘﺎب‬fA ‫ﺴﺠ*ﻞ‬d‫اﻟ‬                          •
   https://talkabroad.com : ‫ﻚ ﻟﻤﺪة ﻧﺼﻒ ﺳﺎﻋﺔ‬ust ‫ﻼم ﻣﻊ‬q‫ ﻟﻠ‬TalkAbroad ‫ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ‬fA @ ‫ﺴﺠ*ﻞ‬d‫اﻟ‬                              •
                                            arabicdictionary.byu.edu ‫{ﻤﻜﻦ اﺳﺘﺨﺪام ﻫﺬا اﻟﻘﺎﻣﻮس‬                     •
                                                                                                  "‫ﻣﻮﻗﻊ "„ﺎﻧﻔﺲ‬    •
                                                         •A ‫ﺎﻟﻌ()*ﺔ وﻣﻮاﻗﻊ اﻟﺘﻮاﺻﻞ اﻻﺟﺘﻤﺎ‬8 ‫ﺎر‬c‫ﻣﻮاﻗﻊ اﻷﺧ‬           •
                                                                                                       .......... •
                                                : ‫ أھﺪاف اﻟﻔﺼﻞ‬: ‫ب‬
‫ﻢ اﻟﺘﻌﺮف ﻋ” „ﻞ‬9‫{ﻤﻜﻨ‬        .‫ﺔ‬u‘‫ اﻟﻠﻐ‬proficiency ‫ اﻟ]ﻔﺎءة‬fA @ <A‫اﻟﻮﺻﻮل ا< اﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮى اﻟﻤﺘﻮﺳﻂ اﻟﻌﺎ‬                     •
‫ﻼم واﻟﻘﺮاءة واﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع‬q‫اﻟ‬    fA @ ‫ﺎﻟﻤﺴﺘﻮى اﻟﻤﺘﻮﺳﻂ‬8 ‫ﺎت ﻋ” ﻫﺬا اﻟﻤﻮﻗﻊ )اﻗﺮأوا اﻟﻘﺴﻢ اﻟﺨﺎص‬u‘‫اﻟﻤﺴﺘ‬
 https://www.actfl.org/sites/default/files/pdfs/public/ACTFLProficiencyGuidelines2012_FINAL.pdf:(‫ﺔ‬8‫واﻟ]ﺘﺎ‬
                                              ‫ﺪون ﻣﺸﺎ¦ﻞ اﻟﻘﻮاﻋﺪ‬8 ‫ ﻟﻐﺔ ﺳﻠ*ﻤﺔ وﻣﻔﻬﻮﻣﺔ‬fA @ ‫ﺔ‬8‫ﻼم واﻟ]ﺘﺎ‬q‫اﻟ‬            •
            ‫ة ®ﺴﺎﻋﺪﻧﺎ ﻋ” اﻟﻔﻬﻢ‬ª-‫اﺗ*ﺠ*ﺎت ﻛﺜ‬ª«‫ ﻣﻮاﺿﻴﻊ درﺳﻨﺎﻫﺎ وﻧﺪرﺳﻬﺎ واﺳﺘﻌﻤﺎل إﺳ‬fA @ ‫ﻗﺮاءة ﻣﻘﺎﻻت‬                   •
                                                                                 ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻤﺎع واﻟﻔﻬﻢ اﻟﻌﺎم واﻟﺪﻗﻴﻖ‬     •
                                                                             @
                                                     :‫? ﻣﺜﻞ‬A µ ‫ اﻟﻌﺎﻟﻢ اﻟﻌﺮ‬fA ‫ ﻋ” ﺟﻮاﻧﺐ ﺛﻘﺎﻓ*ﺔ‬ª±° ‫اﻟﺘﻌﺮف أ‬        •
                                                                                 ‫ﻦ‬u(‫ اﻟﻤﻌﺎ{ﺪة ﻋ” اﻵﺧ‬o
                                                                         ‫ﺎء واﻷﺑﻨﺎء‬8‫¸ اﻵ‬  @ - ‫ اﻟﻌﻼﻗﺎت ﺑ‬o


                                                                  ‫ﺎب اﻟﻬﺠﺮة وﻣﺸﺎ¦ﻠﻬﺎ‬c‫أﺳ‬         o
                                                                  ‫ اﻟﺜﻘﺎﻓﺔ اﻟﻌ()*ﺔ‬fA @ ‫اﻟﺴﻔﺮ‬    o
                                                               ‫*ﺔ‬º‫ اﻟﺪﻳ‬ª-‫*ﺔ وﻏ‬º‫اﻷﻋ*ﺎد اﻟﺪﻳ‬      o
                   ( expectations ) : ‫ اﻟﺘﻮﻗﻌﺎت ﻣﻦ اﻟﻄﻼب ﻓﻲ ھﺬا اﻟﻔﺼﻞ‬: ‫ج‬
                                      ‫ﺎﻟﻠﻐﺔ اﻟﻌ()*ﺔ ﻓﻘﻂ ﻣﻨﺬ دﺧﻮل اﻟﺼﻒ ﺣ«½ اﻟﺨﺮوج ﻣﻨﻪ‬8 ‫ﻼم‬q‫اﻟ‬       •
                                                           ‫ﻞ „ﻞ ﺻﻒ‬c‫ اﻟﺒ*ﺖ ﻗ‬fA @ ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد اﻟﻤﻤﺘﺎز‬  •
                                          ‫ اﻟﻮﻗﺖ اﻟﻤﺤﺪد‬fA @ ‫ﻞ وﺗﻘﺪ{ﻤﻬﺎ‬9‫ﺄﻓﻀﻞ ﺷ‬8 ‫ﺎت‬c‫ﺔ اﻟﻮاﺟ‬8‫ﻛﺘﺎ‬     •
                                                       ‫ اﻟﻮﻗﺖ اﻟﻤﺤﺪد‬fA @ ‫ﺎت و®ﺴﻠ*ﻤﻬﺎ‬8‫ﺗﺼﺤﻴﺢ اﻟ]ﺘﺎ‬  •
                                  ‫ﻼم‬q‫ﺎت واﻟ‬c‫ اﻟﻮاﺟ‬fA @ ‫ﻠﻤﺎت اﻟﺠﺪ{ﺪة واﻟﻘﻮاﻋﺪ اﻟﺠﺪ{ﺪة‬q‫اﺳﺘﺨﺪام اﻟ‬   •
                                                  ‫ﺌﺔ اﻟﺼﻒ ﻣﻊ اﻟﺰﻣﻼء‬È‫ﺎﻟﻌﻼﻗﺔ اﻟﺼﺤ*ﺔ ﻟﺒ‬8 ‫ام‬ª@ « ‫اﻻﻟ‬  •
                                       : ‫ اﻟﺪرﺟﺎت اﻟﻨﮭﺎﺋﯿﺔ‬: ‫د‬
                               ٪١٥                        ‫ اﻟﺼﻒ‬fA @ ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ‬        •
                               ٪١٥                                                  ‫ﺎت‬c‫اﻟﻮاﺟ‬  •
                               ٪١٥                                                   ‫ﺎت‬8‫اﻟ]ﺘﺎ‬ •
                               ٪١٠                                ‫ﺎرات ﻋ” „ﺎﻧﻔﺲ‬c‫اﻻﺧﺘ‬          •
                                ٪٥            TalkAbroad ‫ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ‬ªµ‫ﻚ ﻋ‬ust ‫ﻼم ﻣﻊ‬q‫اﻟ‬               •
                               ٪١٥                                                ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت‬   •
                                ٪٥                                                    ‫اﻟﺘﻘﺪ{ﻢ‬ •
                                ٪٥                                      ÎA ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﺸﻔ‬       •
                               ٪١٥                                        ?A Ï ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﻨﻬﺎ‬  •
                                    : ‫ ﻣﻌﻠﻮﻣﺎت ﻋﻦ اﻟﺪرﺟﺎت‬: ‫ھـ‬
                                                                                      d
                                                                ٪١٥ ‫ اﻟﺼﻒ‬ce ‫اﻻﺳﺘﻌﺪاد واﻟﻤﺸﺎرﻛﺔ‬
   •    We will all speak only Arabic from the time we enter the classroom unless explicit
       permission is given to use English. Use of English without permission will lower your
       participation grade by at least 1 point for the day. Laptops and cell phones not permitted
       in class unless specifically permitted for a particular activity.
   •   Stay focused on the task at hand. If you run out of things to say, raise your hand.
   •   Your pronunciation and grammatical accuracy when speaking will be noted, and you
       must work actively at maintaining/improving them.
   •   Please do your best to inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as possible
       before the class you will miss. This helps considerably in planning for daily class activities.
       If you’re having a bad day for any reason and are not prepared, come to class anyway,
       and let us know at the start of class. Your participation grade will be rewarded for honesty
       and penalized for dishonesty.
   •
Attendance Policies:
     •   If you are absent from class you will receive a “0” for that day’s participation. Your lowest
         3 grades for participation will be dropped when calculating your final grade at the end
         of the semester.


    Ø More than ten absences—whatever the reason—will result in an "F" for the
         course. This is a department policy and no exceptions will be made.
      •    Please inform your instructor by email of absence as soon as possible before—not
           after—the class you will miss. The absence will not be excused but informing your
           instructor of an absence helps considerably in planning for daily class activities.
   Tardiness Policy
   Arriving late to class is disruptive, so please make every effort to be in class and ready to start
   working when class begins. Participation points will be deducted for tardiness. If you arrive
   more than 20 mins. late for class you will receive a “0” for that day’s class participation and
   it will count as an absence in applying the absence policy. For each 5 minutes that you are
   late, 1 points will be deducted from your participation grade.
   Classroom Conduct Policies:
      •    Use of cell phones is not permitted. Turn your cellphone off completely when in class.
      •    Please do not chew gum in class.
                                                                                          ٪١٥ ‫اﻟﻮاﺟﺐ‬
    •    You know that daily homework and preparation for class is essential and will require 2-3
         focused hours outside of class for every class period. If you find yourself regularly
         exceeding these time expectations, please let us know. Assignments are to be turned in
         at the beginning of class. Late assignments will not be accepted.
    •    On each homework assignment, please write your name and HW number and please
         double-space (write on every other line) your homework assignments.
    •    Practicing vocabulary out loud in context, including verb conjugations in all tenses and
         using plurals, is part of daily homework.
    •    Homework assignments will be graded on a scale from 1 to 5. You earn full credit for work
         that is on time, complete, creative, uses lots of vocabulary and especially verbs, and
         displays your best effort. We reserve the right not to accept sloppy or careless work and
         to make you redo it before grading it.
    •    Your lowest 3 homework grades will be dropped for purposes of grade calculation.
    •    We encourage you to study and brainstorm together while doing homework assignments,
         but participation must be equal, and each student must hand in her/his own paper.
         Copying homework someone else did is a violation of the Honor Code.
    •    Note that the assigned homework at the companion website is required homework.
         Failure to complete the online portion(s) of the homework will result in points being
         deducted from your homework grade.
IMPORTANT: Using the answer key of Al-Kitaab in doing homework assignments is a
violation of the UT Honor Code and will be treated accordingly.
                                                                          ٪١٥ ‫ﺎت وﺗﺼﺤ~ﺤﻬﺎ‬z‫ﺘﺎ‬y‫اﻟ‬
    •    Writing is essential not only for activating vocabulary and structure, it is also an important
         strategy for improving your speaking proficiency as well, IF you pay attention to accuracy


     and push yourself to use a wide range of vocabulary and grammatical constructions.
•     You will do 2 types of writing: an informal blog (approximately 2 to 3 blogs), and formal
     essays and their corrections (approximately 6 essays)
•    Submission of essays: Essays will be only accepted they are submitted on time, on paper,
     and in class. Essays submitted via email will NOT be accepted or corrected. All drafts
     should be typed in large font with double spacing so your instructor can make comments.
     Please include a word count on all of your essays.
                                                                     ٪١٠ ‫ „ﺎﻧﻔﺲ‬ƒ‫اﻻﺧﺘ•ﺎرات ﻋ‬
•    You will take a number of online quizzes this semester. These quizzes may take a variety
     of shapes- fill in the blank, simple translation, and they will not be announced ahead of
     time. You are responsible for keeping up with and reviewing vocabulary and grammar
     on a regular basis and should expect a quiz on any given class period. Because quizzes
     will be taken online, you must have a laptop or tablet with you daily. No make-ups on
     quizzes will be allowed.
                                                  ٪٥ TalkAbroad ‫•ﻚ ﻋ“’ ﻣﻮﻗﻊ‬Ž• ‫ﻼم ﻣﻊ‬‰‫اﻟ‬
•    You will complete one TalkAbroad assignment, which will require that you have a 30
     minute conversation with a native Arab speaker. More information will be provided
     soon.
                                                                                ٪١٥ ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎﻧﺎت‬
  •   We plan to have 4 tests this semester. Exact tests dates will be announced on your
      homework schedule. If you think you will miss a test, contact your instructor as soon as
      possible. Requests for make-ups will be considered on a case-by-case basis.
                                                                                       ٪٥ ‫اﻟﺘﻘﺪ–ﻢ‬
  •   Skit: You and a partner will prepare one skit (8-10 minutes) and present it in class
      together. Further information about the skit's format and evaluation will be provided
      soon.
                                                                            ٪٥ ™e ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﺸﻔ‬
   • Each student will have an oral interview in Arabic in the model of an OPI with the
      instructor in the instructor's office (each individual interview will be no more than 30-
      minutes in length). The instructor will provide all the information about the interview
      and how to prepare for it, and how it will be evaluated, at least two weeks in advance.
      https://www.languagetesting.com/oral-proficiency-interview-opi
                                                                            ٪١٥ ›e œ ‫اﻻﻣﺘﺤﺎن اﻟﻨﻬﺎ‬
    •         The final exam will be administered on during the final exams period in May. You
    are expected to take the final during the uniform scheduled time. It will be comprehensive
    and it will test your overall proficiency and accuracy in all skills.


                               Correction Code for ‫ﺔ واﻟﻮاﺟ•ﺎت‬z‫ﺘﺎ‬y‫اﻟ‬
                                                               ( ‫ﺔ‬c‫ ﻣﻨﺎﺳ‬ª-‫ﻠﻤﺔ ) ﻏ‬q‫ اﻟ‬fA @ ‫ﻠﺔ‬9‫م = اﻟﻤﺸ‬
                                                                              ‫ ﺻﺤﻴﺢ‬ª-‫و = اﻟﻮزن ﻏ‬
                                         (‫ﺟﻤﻊ‬+‫ ﻣﻔﺮد‬،‫ﻣﺆﻧﺚ‬+‫ ﻣﺬﻛﺮ‬،‫ ال‬:‫ اﻟﻘﻮاِﻋﺪ )ﻣﺜﻼ‬fA @ ‫ﻠﺔ‬9‫ق = ﻣﺸ‬
                                                                         ‫ﻠﻤﺔ‬q‫ﺔ اﻟ‬8‫ ﻛﺘﺎ‬fA @ ‫ﻠﺔ‬9‫ك = ﻣﺸ‬
                                                                      ‫ ﺻﺤﻴﺢ‬ª-‫ح ج = ﺣﺮف اﻟﺠّﺮ ﻏ‬
                                                                 (connector) ‫ر = ﺗﺤﺘﺎج ا< اﻟﱠ()ﻂ‬
                                 ‫ﻠﻢ ﻣﻊ أﺳﺘﺎذ أو ﻣﻌ*ﺪ ﻋﻨﻬﺎ‬9‫ ﺗ‬،‫ ؟ = ﻟﻢ ﻧﻔﻬﻢ اﻟﻔﻜﺮة‬ð (squiggly line)
Academic Integrity:
All students 1) with an Arabic-speaking parent or 2) who have had schooling in an Arabic-speaking
country or 3) who have undertaken any formal study of Arabic other than at UT prior to
enrollment in this course must take the departmental placement examination for Arabic before
beginning their study of Arabic at UT. Failure to do so constitutes an act of academic dishonesty.
Final Grade Calculation and Grade Policies:
 Number        Letter      Number        Letter        Number          Letter         Number          Letter
                          87 - 89.9        B+         77 – 79.9           C+         67 – 69.9          D+
 94 - 100         A
                          84 - 86.9        B          74 – 76.9           C          64 – 66.9          D
90 – 93.9        A-       80 – 83.9        B-         70 – 73.9           C-         60 – 63.9          D-
                                                                                             (Below 60% = F)
•    Grades on the border between two letter grades (89.9 for example) may or may not be
     rounded up to the next higher letter grade. This is at the instructor's discretion and will be
     considered on a case-by-case basis.
•    Exam grades are usually a good indicator of how you will do on the final and of your overall
     ability to use the material we are studying. If you are not doing well on quizzes/tests, talk to
     your instructor to get suggestions for strategies to improve your performance.
•    In order to continue to the next level of Arabic, you must have a grade of C or better. If you
     take the course Pass/Fail, you may not register for the next level of Arabic. No Incompletes
     will be given for this course. Auditing is not permitted.
This syllabus is subject to change. However, any changes will be brought to the attention
of students in writing via e-mail communication and also verbally in class.
The following are important UT policies and regulations that apply to this course:


UT Honor Code: The UT Honor code is in effect in this class. Submitting any assignment or exam
that is not your own, or that you did not participate fully in doing, is a violation of that code. If
you have any questions about the Honor Code, please ask.
Religious Holidays: A student who misses classes or other required activities, including
examinations, for the observance of a religious holy day should inform the instructor as far in
advance of the absence as possible, so that arrangements can be made to complete an
assignment within a reasonable time after the absence.
Disabilities: Students with disabilities who require special accommodations need to get a letter
that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Office of
the Dean of Students (471-6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). This letter should be presented to the instructor in each course at the beginning of the
semester and accommodations needed should be discussed at that time. Five business days
before an exam the student should remind the instructor of any testing accommodations that will
be       needed.               See       website       below          for     more        information:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/ssd/providing.php
Use of Canvas: This course uses Canvas, a Web-based course management system in which a
password-protected site is created for each course. You are responsible for checking the Canvas
course site regularly for class work and announcements. Canvas is available at
http://courses.utexas.edu. Support is provided by the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400 Monday
through Friday 8 am to 6 pm.
Use of E-mail for Official Correspondence to Students: All students should become familiar with
the University's official e-mail student notification policy. It is the student's responsibility to keep
the University informed as to changes in his or her e-mail address. Students are expected to check
e-mail on a frequent and regular basis in order to stay current with University-related
communications, recognizing that certain communications may be time-critical. It is
recommended that e-mail be checked daily, but at a minimum, twice per week. The complete text
of this policy and instructions for updating your e-mail address are available at
http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.html.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns
about another individual’s behavior. This service is provided through a partnership among the
Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee
Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-
5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Q drop Policy: The State of Texas enacted a law limiting the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). Senate Bill 1231: “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of


higher education may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped
courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another institution of higher
education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping more than that number.”
Emergency Evacuation: The following are recommendations regarding emergency evacuation
from the Office of Campus Safety and Security,512-471-5767, http://www.utexas.edu/safety/ :
     §   Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to
         evacuate buildings when a fire alarm is activated. Alarm activation or announcement
         requires exiting and assembling outside.
     §   Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
         Remember that the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the
         building.
     §   Students requiring assistance in evacuation shall inform their instructor in writing during
         the first week of class.
     §     In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
     §     Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by the following: Austin Fire
         Department, The University of Texas at Austin Police Department, or Fire Prevention
         Services office.
     §   Link to information regarding emergency evacuation routes and emergency procedures
         can be found at: www.utexas.edu/emergency
Prohibition of Sexual Discrimination, LGBTQ Discrimination, Sexual Harassment, Sexual Assault,
Sexual Misconduct, Interpersonal Violence, and Stalking
It is the policy of The University of Texas at Austin (“University”) to provide an educational and
working environment for its students, faculty, and staff that is free from sex and gender
discrimination, sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence
(including domestic violence and dating violence), and stalking. In accordance with federal and
state law, the University prohibits discrimination on the basis of sex and gender and prohibits
sexual harassment, sexual assault, sexual misconduct, interpersonal violence, and stalking.
The       full     policy    statement      on     this     issue     can      be      found      here:
https://www.policies.utexas.edu/policies/prohibition-sexual-discrimination-sexual-
harassment-sexual-assault-sexual-misconduct
Students in need of assistance for this type of issue or any other personal emergency or crisis
should the Police and the Dean of Students via these resources and links:
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/resourceslinks.php
Campus Carry:
     1. The open carry of handguns is not allowed on the campus. Therefore, if you ever see a
         gun, do not attempt to question or approach the carrier, but immediately CALL 911. Police
         are trained to handle this situation.


      2. There are several areas of campus in which the concealed carry of handguns is prohibited,
          including some portions of residence halls. Individuals with a license to carry are
          responsible for knowing the locations that exclude concealed handguns and to plan their
          daily activities carefully.
      3. License holders must carry their handguns on or about their person at all times while on
          campus. "About" the person means that a license holder may carry a handgun – holstered
          – in a backpack or handbag, but the backpack or handbag must be close enough that the
          license holder can grasp it without materially changing position. The holster must
          completely cover the trigger area and have enough tension to keep the gun in place if
          jostled.
      4. All license holders must think through the activities of their day. There may be times when
          the consequence of your activities may preclude carrying on a given day. For example, if
          you are going to a Rec Sports area, have a class that requires role playing, rolling, or
          spinning or contact with other students, you might expose the handgun. Remember that
          there is no storage on campus except in a privately owned vehicle.
      5. Many people on campus have strong viewpoints about the new law, and we understand
          those passions. However, regardless of your opinion about the legislation, you are
          required to follow the laws laid out by the State of Texas, and the policies of The University
          of Texas at Austin. We also ask that everyone show respect toward other members of the
          university community who have different views.
A Final Note: Principles for In-Class Work
There can be no language without community. In our class community, respect for each other at
all times will ensure a positive and fruitful learning experience. We will spend at least 75% of class
time in small group or pair activities so that each one of you gets the maximum possible time to
participate and practice. During these activities, the instructor plays the role of personal trainer.
Learning a language is a lot like going to the gym: the personal trainer guides you, but you have
to do the work to get the benefit.
Please keep in mind the following principles for group work:
       § Help and encourage your colleagues, and accept help from them: each of you can learn
       with and from everyone else.
       § Work with different people on a regular basis.
       § Come prepared. Don’t be someone who slows down colleagues by not being able to fully
       participate in the work. If you are not prepared for class let your instructor know beforehand
       and s/he will arrange for you to learn by listening on that day.
       § Stay focused on the task at hand and do not rush to finish. Most activities are designed
       to elicit creative play with vocabulary and structures on which we are working.


§ If you do the minimum, you will get only minimum benefit and may slow your colleagues’
progress as well. Take advantage of class time by pushing yourself to be creative and say and
write as much as you can.
                                            ً
    £‫ﻢ ﺟﻤ~ﻌﺎ ﻓﺼﻼ دراﺳ~ﺎ ﻣﻔ~ﺪا وﻣﻤﺘﻌﺎ‬‰‫ ﻟ‬Ÿd‫ﻧﺘﻤ‬
