                               THE BUSINESS OF SPORTS MEDIA
                                     ADV 348S, PR 348S, J 348G
                                  SYLLABUS & COURSE OUTLINE
                                               FALL 2018
                                 Thursdays, 4:00p.m.-7:00 p.m.
                                 Location: BUR 116(Burdine Hall)
                     Instructor: Mark S. Pannes, B.S. UT, J.D. Fordham Law
                                    Telephone: (512) 471 2431
                                         Cell phone (512) 222.7464
                                  E-Mail: mpannes@utexas.edu
Office Hours and location
Before or after class by appointment; other times by appointment as our mutual
schedules allow; my office is located on the third floor of CMB (Room 3.110) for drop in.
Special Recurring Guest Lecturers\Collaborators this semester:
•   Michael Cramer, Senior Fellow, Center for Sports Communications and Media (CSCM), BA
    University of Albany, JD Marquette
•   Bryan Perez, Teaching Fellow, CSCM, BA UT; JD\MBA, Stanford; President and CEO of
    AXS
                                     College of Communication
                                   University of Texas at Austin
                                    Title: The Business of Sports Media
                               Course number: ADV 348S; J 348G; PR 348S
    Description:       This course will examine the many facets of the business of sports related
                       media including over the air television, cable, satellite TV, print, radio, social
                       media and internet based, the business models that each of these types of
                       media use, the challenges to such models and the changes that are likely in
                       the future and the impact of such media on sports presentation and
                       development, professional franchises, colleges and conferences and the
                       consumer. It will trace the historical development of sports as social
                       phenomenon and the essential role that media has played in shaping and
                       building its role in domestic society and international relations.
                       The course is designed to provide students with a basic understanding of how
                       the business of sports media operates both as a business generating revenue
                       and content and as a provider and disseminator of information and critique.
                       The course will be primarily lecture and discussion of key topics and issues


                           involved with the business of sports media with various guest speakers from
                           sports\media entities that have an impact in this area.
    Objectives:            The student who successfully completes this course will ideally be able to:
         1.     Understand the reasons for the growth of sports as key part of American society and
                culture, and the central role that media has played in that growth.
         2.     Apply basic terminology and fundamental theories/principles of the sports and sports
                media industries.
         3.     Understand how sports and the media can shape political discussion and political
                behavior
         •      Identify and understand the key role that sports and the media has played in
                American society.
         •      Develop your own theories on the use of sports and the media as a means for
                future social change and the implications of such power and ability by these
                institutions.
COURSE OUTLINE
Approach:
    This course will be comprised of fourteen (14) sessions plus exam week with each individual
    session being approximately three hours (3.0) in length. Due to the length of each class, the
    course will be designed to include a mixture of lecture by the principal instructor and guests,
    group discussion, periodic quizzes and other in-class challenges.
Class Preparation:
    1. It is expected that each student will be prepared to participate in lively, intelligent and
         professional discussion. This includes listening respectfully to all.
    2. Reading assignments and homework must be done prior to attending class so that
         everyone will benefit from an in-depth discussion of issues.
    3. All written assignments are to be typed. Spelling, grammar, and punctuation must be of
         professional or business standard. You must use a recognized citation standard when
         referencing the works of others in your written submissions.
    4. All cell phones and pagers will be turned off prior to class. Laptops are permitted but such
         privileges may be rescinded in the discretion of the instructor if laptops are used for other
         than class use.
Attendance:
    Students are expected to attend every class which is critical to the success of the course. As
    noted below, a large part of your grade will come from in class activities. Students are to be
    prepared to start the class session on time.
    If for some reason you are unable to attend class, the student is expected to inform the
    instructor via email prior to class.


    Being absent or late for class may result in a reduction of your grade for the course. If a
    student misses a class for any reason, it is the responsibility of the student to be informed of
    the materials covered during the class. Each student is encouraged to find a “class buddy”
    who can share information, handouts, and assignments.
Academic Integrity and Standards:
    Students are expected to uphold the highest standards of academic honesty and integrity in all
    course activities and assignments. It is expected that there shall be no deception regarding the
    representation made by the student of his/her preparation, participation, or performance.
    Plagiarism is a form of fraud. Proper acknowledgement makes the difference. Plagiarism is
    presenting another person’s work as though it is one’s own. Plagiarism is the presentation of a
    sequence of words, from another writer, quoted without quotation marks and presented as one’s
    own work. It is crucial that acknowledgement of sources be accurate and complete. This
    includes citations of all sources on written assignments. The instructor uses various tools to
    determine if plagiarism has occurred.
    The remainder of the course requirements and policies relating to cheating and plagiarism are
    subject to the standard policies and procedures for all UT-Austin students as established by UT-
    Austin.
    .
University of Texas Honor Code
The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning, discovery, freedom,
leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is expected
to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
community.
Documented Disability Statement
The University of Texas at Austin provides upon request appropriate academic
accommodations for qualified students with disabilities. For more information, contact Services
for Students with Disabilities at
471-6259 (voice) or 232-2937 (video phone). Also, see
http://www.utexas.edu/diversity/ddce/ssd/
Use of Canvas in Class
In this class we use Canvas — a web-based course management system with password-
protected access at http://courses.utexas.edu —to distribute course materials, to communicate
and collaborate online, to post grades, to submit assignments, and to give you online quizzes
and surveys. You can find support in using Canvas at the ITS Help Desk at 475-9400, Monday
through Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m., so plan accordingly.
Feedback Statement (to encourage students to respond to your requests for their
feedback) and University Course Evaluations
During this course, I will be asking you to give me feedback on your learning in informal as well
as formal ways, including through anonymous surveys about how my teaching strategies are


helping or hindering your learning. It’s very important for me to know your reaction to what we’re
doing in class, so I encourage you to respond to these surveys (including completing university
course evaluations), ensuring that together we can create an environment effective for teaching
and learning.
Use of E-Mail for Official Correspondence to Students
Email is recognized as an official mode of university correspondence; therefore, you are
responsible for reading your email for university and course-related information and
announcements. You are responsible to keep the university informed about changes to your e-
mail address. You should check your e-mail regularly and frequently—I recommend daily, but at
minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of which
may be time-critical. You can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating your e-mail
address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to
the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work
assignment, or a project to observe a religious holy day or for travel related thereto, I will give
you an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL)
If you are worried about someone who is acting differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns
Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns about another individual’s behavior. This service
is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and
Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and The University of
Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
Emergency Evacuation Policy
Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to evacuate and assemble
outside when a fire alarm is activated, or an announcement is made. Please be aware of the
following policies regarding evacuation:
     • Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of the classroom and the building. Remember that
        the nearest exit door may not be the one you used when you entered the building.
     • If you require assistance to evacuate, inform me in writing during the first week of class.
     • In the event of an evacuation, follow my instructions or those of class instructors.
Do not re-enter a building unless you’re given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the
UT Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office
Q drop Policy
The State of Texas has enacted a law that limits the number of course drops for academic
reasons to six (6). As stated in Senate Bill 1231:
            • “Beginning with the fall 2007 academic term, an institution of higher education
                may not permit an undergraduate student a total of more than six dropped
                courses, including any course a transfer student has dropped at another
                institution of higher education, unless the student shows good cause for dropping
                more than that number.”
You can find advice, models, templates, and other resources for designing your course syllabus
on the DIIA website at http://www.utexas.edu/academic/diia/
NOTE:


Moody College Writing Support Program
The Moody College Writing Support Program, located in BMC 3.322,
https://moody.utexas.edu/students/moodywriting offers one-on-one assistance without charge to
students seeking to improve their professional writing in all fields of communication. We have
specialists in Journalism, RTF, CSD, CMS, and PR and Advertising. In addition, we offer
workshops to strengthen core writing skills in each field and to inspire students to strive for
excellence. Students may book half-hour appointments on our website or drop in for assistance
during all stages of the writing process.
Grading and Evaluation:
Grading is cumulative throughout the semester. Every point counts toward the final grade. Individual
assessment will be based on attainment of up to 100 points with the number of points assigned to
each means of grading and method of evaluation as listed below. These points may be modified
slightly over the course of the semester. For example, a point may be added to the Midterm and a
point subtracted from Quizzes. Point totals are as follows:
          Written Assignments                                       12% (12points)
           In Class Quizzes                                          24% (24 points)
           Midterm Exam                                              29% (29 points)
           Final Exam                                                20% (20 points)
           Final Take Home question                                  15% (15 points)
Periodic Written Assignments are due as assigned. The specifics of each assignment will be
discussed in class and\or on Canvas but will generally be focused on current issues\news involving
sports media as presented in the current issue of the Sports Business Journal. Each assignment may
require the student to consider outside sources to perform an analysis of the question presented. An
analysis is not a reiteration of the remarks by the author. An analysis is a concise, cogent reflection
clearly articulated and supported with examples, and connected to course-related theories. These
analyses are to be one to two pages in length, 600 words, maximum, appropriately referenced. Each
writing submitted for credit in this class will be judged not only on reasoning and content but on the
quality of the writing style and grammar as well. Late assignments may be turned in after discussion
with and receipt of the approval of the instructor or the Teaching Assistant but the maximum grade
that may be received for a late assignment is one half the credits. All such writings shall be submitted
through Canvas. Grades will generally be posted to Canvas within two weeks of assignment
submission by students.
In Class Quizzes. We will have periodic (4-6) Quizzes in Class dealing with assigned readings
and SBJ weekly readings. Notice will not normally be given of such quizzes. Additional details
to be discussed in class.
The Final Take Home Question. Students will be asked to draw upon the various course readings,
SBJ articles and other material used or assigned and in class discussions and lectures to express an
understanding of a topic or topics involving the business of sports media. The final assignment will be
a maximum of 750 words. The standards set out above for Periodic Written Assignments shall
apply here as well.
Mid Term Exam. A Midterm exam shall be given between weeks 7 and 9. It will consist of a
number of some combination of multiple choice, true\false, short answer and similar type questions
and will cover material assigned and lectures given through the date of the exam.


Extra credit. Extra credit lectures or other extra credit opportunities may be available and will be
posted and\ or discussed in class.
NOTE: You accumulate points over the course of the semester by completion of all of the
above graded activities. Maximum points available equal 100 (plus any extra credit). If you
miss any of the graded activities or fail to complete or submit them, the points associated
with those activities are forfeited and as such, will impact your final grade.
Grading
Under the plus/minus grading system of the university, grades will be calculated using accumulated
points from graded activities as follows:
  Semester-long Accumulated Points (Includes Extra Credit Points)                      Grade
  100-93                                                                               A
  92.9-90                                                                              A-
  89.9-87                                                                              B+
  86.9-83                                                                              B
  82.9-80                                                                              B-
  79.9-77                                                                              C+
  76.9-73                                                                              C
  72.9-70                                                                              C-
  69.9-67                                                                              D+
  66.9-63                                                                              D
  62.9-60                                                                              D-
  59.9-0                                                                               F
Required Reading Materials
There will be a Coursepak that is available for this course. It contains mandatory readings. It will be
available by Thursday, 6th September, 2018 at the latest at Jenn’s on Dean Keeton and Guadalupe.
Students will also be expected to familiarize themselves with current relevant news and events
regarding the business sports media as news breaks. As such, it is strongly recommended that
students read the New York Times and the Wall Street Journal on an active basis. Further, The
Sports Business Journal (SBJ) is a mandatory weekly read (starting in week 3) and is an
invaluable source of current information. Details will be given about SBJ in class or in a posted
Announcement in Canvas.
We will begin using SBJ in the second week of class so you must subscribe or have SBJ available
before your second class. Articles and material of current interest to a topic being discussed in class
will be assigned periodically throughout the semester.


Course Plan
Important Note re: Class Prep/Readings:
We have significantly reduced the amount of SYLLABUS LISTED course readings for the
2nd half of the semester. Frankly, the industry is moving so fast and the topics are so
relevant and fast-evolving that we will be posting the readings closer to the semester
mid-way point. This may result in a second Coursepak, or a series of linked articles
(TBD).
We may also publish Links WEEKLY for the next class, so please check in regularly to
ensure you are up to date on course prep.
Session 1 (30th August)
Orientation to class/Review Syllabus; Introduction to the basics of the Business of Sports
Media (Mark Pannes w/ Bryan Perez via Skype)
          •   Review Assignments; Grading criteria and presentations as well as expectations
          •   Review Coursepak and additional resource materials
          •   Discussion of other relevant, current materials and their use in and relationship to the
              course;
          •   Introduce Teaching Fellows Michael Cramer and Bryan Perez and discuss their
              involvement in the course
          •   A peak at how sports media dollars drive sports
          •
          •   Readings for session: Article LINK posted in Canvas: "The Year in Sports Media:
              2017"
Session 2 (6th September)
Continuation of Basics of Sports Media (Mark Pannes)
          • Introduction to Over the Air (or Broadcast TV) Television and relationship to sports
          • The History of Sports Media
          • Introduce the beginnings of and key concepts in TV generally such as Retransmission
              Consent and relationship to sports media
          • Ratings and Share; Importance
          •    Other government\League rules such as Blackout policy
          •
          • Readings for Session: Coursepak: Rushin, “There and Back”
          • “
Session 3 (13th September)
Introduction to Cable and Satellite TV and the emergence of Digital Platforms (Mark Pannes)
          •   The origins of Cable and Satellite TV
          •   Impact on the Business of Sports Media
          •   The business models of cable and satellite TV operations
          •
    Readings for this session: Coursepak: Article: Ourand, “Cable Vision: Kay Kaplowitz” + TBD


Session 4 (20th September)
National Networks, Niche Networks and new national networks (Michael Cramer)
           • The Rise and Dominance of ESPN
           • Fox Sports 1…Can it challenge ESPN?
           • NBC Sports, CBS Sports and Turner Sports: Niche players or real competitors?
           • HBO and Showtime. Real competitors?
           • Yahoo Steaming NFL in 2015
           •
           • Readings for this session: Coursepak: Articles: Wier: Why ESPN is Failing,
               Ourand, “Taking the Pulse of ESPN: Thompson: “ESPN’s Plan to Dominate the Post-
               TV World”
Session 5 (27th September)
Regional Sports Networks (RSN’s): Part 1 (Bryan Perez)
         •   Review the history of regional sports broadcasts
         •   Discuss evolution of the business model from the POV of three parties – Teams,
             Networks and TV Distributors (both Over the Air and Cable/Satellite)
         •   ESPN and the acquisition of Fox Regional Networks
         •   Discuss Houston Astros/ Houston Rockets efforts with Comcast and challenges as
             example of team owned RSN’s and the pros and cons of startup and operation of same
         •   Orioles\Nationals issue
             RSN’s: Part 2 – the Rise of the Cable and Satellite Companies
         •   Discuss Cable vs. Satellite competitive advantages/disadvantages
         •   Los Angeles Lakers/Time Warner Cable transaction
         •   Los Angeles Dodgers TV deal as new form of franchise valuation and resulting impact
         •    Los Angeles Clippers deal as TV driven; valuation of sports teams and the media
         •   AT&T\Direct TV Merger. What does it mean to consumers and sports business?
         •   Readings for this Session: Coursepak articles: Ourand: The Numbers Don't Lie.
             When Lebron Signs, Local RSN Wins. Bucholtz “Fox Executives Discussing Buying
             Back RSNs from Disney”
Session 6 (4th October)
League and Conference Owned Sports Networks: Which is the best\correct model? Is there a
correct model (Bryan Perez)?
           •   Discussion of the launch and growth NFL Network, MLB Channel and the NBA
               Network
           •   The NHL and MLBAM
           •   Discussion of the business models of each and the pros and cons of same
           •   Fallout from the LHN: College football restructure
           •   The economics of college football and ESPN
           •   The SEC Channel: Learning from and improvement upon LHN
           •   Readings for this session: Coursepak articles: Staples: Why WWE Network Deal
               Could Signal a Way Forward for College Football; ESPN/College Football Trilogy of
               Articles by Eder, Sandomir and Miller.


Session 7 (11th October)
The curious case of the Longhorn Network. (Michael Cramer with a Guest Speaker: TBD)
           •   Discuss the formation of LHN.
           •   The LHN as a business from the standpoint of ESPN, the Consumer, The Cable
               Operator and UT: Who gets what?
           •   Alternatives to the LHN. Was this good for either party?
           •   Tiered Rights agreements
           •   Readings for this session: Coursepak articles: License Agreement between UT and
               ESPN and IMG
Second half of Class: MIDTERM EXAM
Session 8 (18th October)
Overview of the largest Sports Media companies; Rights Agreements; The Importance of
sports TV content; Radio (Mark Pannes)
        .    Discuss the proliferation of Rights Agreements
         • National Rights Agreements: The parties to these agreements
         • Packaging of Rights Agreements; out of market packaging
         • Major sports and Minor sports. Are all helped by rights deals?
         • Radio as a continued force in sports media
         •   Readings for this session: Coursepak articles: “TV is King”; Ourand, “Big Leagues
             Still Have Most Leverage in Media Rights Deals”, Adgate, “The Sports Bubble is Not
             Bursting”, Coursepak Radio Section articles
Session 9 (25th October)
The Industry Players
           • A discussion of the personalities who run the biggest media companies in the world of
               sport and how their decisions and relationships impact individual sports, competitions,
               and, fan bases.
           •
             • Readings for this session: to be posted
Session 10 (1st November)
The Rise of Athlete-Directed Media
             • Readings for this session: to be posted
Session 11 (8th November)
eSports as an (THE?) Emerging Media Powerhouse (Bryan Perez)
             • Readings for this session: to be posted
Session 12 (15th November)
Global sports: Not just an American model (Mark Pannes)
             •    Introduction to sports around the globe outside of the big four North American
                  leagues.
             •    Discussion of global media companies: Dominance of News Corp generally
             •    The Olympics


              •    The largest global media properties
              •    League media deals: Collective vs individual club selling
              •    Media and sports teams’ valuations: Premier league as case study
              •    EU anti-trust rulings impact on nation by nation selling
              •    Cross pollination of sports by region/culture and the role media plays
              •    Readings for this session: to be posted
Session 13 (29th November)
The Future of the Business of TV; The Impact on Sports Media (Messrs. Pannes, Cramer and
Perez)
Going “a la carte” with pay TV; the internet as an unbundler\
            • If the bubble bursts, the impact on sports
            • The economics of pay TV
            • Comcast and its ambitions; failed deal with Time Warner
            • Readings for this session: to be posted
New distribution channels for sports programming
           • Review alternate distribution channels and potential conflicts with traditional media
           • Rise of mobile and its effect on TV viewership and the in-venue experience
           • Google, Netflix, Apple, You Tube and the challenge to TV
           • Netflix as case study
           •     Reading for this session: none (review prior readings)
Session 14 (6th December)
Wrap-up and conclusions (Mr. Cramer Show You NO One Does It Like Dear Old Dad)
               •   Review of material issues
               •   Discussion of key terms in the business of sports media
               •   Review key topics in sports media
FINAL EXAM IN CLASS
There will be a FINAL TAKE HOME QUESTION due about a week after last class (see
Assignments and Grading above)
