        PSY 333D: Introduction to Developmental Psychology (#81850)
                              On Demand Version, Summer 2020
Instructor: Dr. Jessica Church-Lang
Office: Seay Building (SEA) 2.216 [currently Zoom appointments only]
Office Hours: Wednesdays 10am-12pm (CST) or by appointment
Email: church@austin.utexas.edu
 Teaching Assistants:
 Estrella Thomas, Zoom office hours: Wednesdays 12-1 (CST) or by appointment
 Shaden Powell, Zoom office hours: Mondays 6-7pm (CST) or by appointment
 TA Email: onlinepsy333dta@austin.utexas.edu
 “Only where children gather is there any real chance of fun” ~Mignon McLaughlin
 Please note that this is the Online version of the PSY333D course.
 You will be viewing this class online (from the comfort of your own home, or other COVID-19-
 free space) rather than in-person. This course is self-paced, with exams at the times described
 in the course schedule. This course will release weekly sets of videos “modules” for you to
 watch on your own schedule. It is very important that you treat logging into the course
 website the way you would treat attending a traditional course held in a classroom.
 A substantial component of your grade will be determined by your completion of online exams
 and quizzes, as well as your participation in Canvas assignments. You will be able to email
 the TAs or professors any questions you have as you complete the course.
 Course Objectives
     1. To introduce you to the field of developmental psychology.
     2. To provide you with the skills and information necessary to be a critical consumer of
        research and media reports regarding children and their development.
     3. To help you apply research in developmental psychology to real world concerns and
        your own experiences.
 Course Overview
 The primary goal of this course is to examine the cognitive, social, and emotional growth of
 children, and the various factors (e.g., genetics, parenting, peer groups, schooling, culture, and
 the media) that influence development. Prominent theories of child development and research
 methods used in developmental psychology are reviewed. Throughout the course, you will be
 encouraged to consider both theoretical and practical questions, with a strong emphasis on
 how research data can inform answers to those questions.
 ***PLEASE ALSO NOTE: You cannot receive credit for both PSY 304 and PSY 333D.
 If you have already taken PSY304, you should drop this course now!
 If you are not on the roster but think you should be, email the Psychology Undergraduate
 Advising Office (psy-undergrad@utexas.edu) to ask why. The last day to add/drop without
 penalty or special dispensation is June 9th, 2020. Students "late-added" will require the Dean's
 signature.
                                                  1


Course Materials & Website
Syllabus, readings, assignments, and updates will be posted on Canvas.
Texts: There is no book for this course. All required readings will be posted on Canvas.
Exams, Quizzes and Discussions may refer to the readings.
Canvas class website: To get to everything associated with the class, go to:
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1280811. You can enter directly at this URL or
through Canvas (https://utexas.instructure.com/). To log into Canvas and the class website,
you will need your UTEID and password. Once you reach the class website, you can navigate
to other areas.
Please make sure that you view these before the first day of class.
Some of the most important features of the Canvas website include:
  1. Homepage – The homepage will have links to the Course Syllabus, the test stream
     webpage, the live Video Stream of the lectures, information regarding technical questions
     and other important information. On the left-hand side of each page of the Canvas
     course site are navigation tabs to all parts of the website, including the Syllabus.
  2. Assignments – The Response Assignments can be uploaded to this page.
  3. Modules – The Modules page includes links to the Assignments, Readings, Lecture video
     archives and other course documents. PDF versions of the lecture slides will be posted
     shortly after each class.
  4. Piazza – A valuable discussion board for asking after-class questions about course
     logistics and content. Weekly participation point discussions will take place on Piazza.
Required internet-enabled device: All students are required to have access to an internet-
enabled laptop or desktop computer. Tablets and smartphones are not supported. Your
computer should have enough battery life to last an entire class period and meet the following
requirements:
  ○ Laptop or desktop computer
  ○ Modern and updated operating system (MacOS or Windows)
  ○ Chrome (highly recommended), Safari or Firefox
  ○ 5Mbps internet connection speed (check your speed here)
Tips for the best class experience:
  o    Close all unnecessary browser windows and tabs and programs
       •   Streaming music (Pandora, Spotify, etc.)
       •   Social media sites
       •   Youtube or other video sites
       •   Online/Offline Gaming
  o    Clear the browser's cache before class (here's how)
  o    Check your computer is free of viruses, malware, and spyware (UT recommendations)
Need additional help?
    • Look for "Online Course Tech Support" in the left navigation menu of your Canvas
        course.
                                                 2


Course communication
You are always encouraged to communicate with the TAs and Professor. Come to Zoom office
hours or send an email to set up a 1-on-1 appointment. Most course information can be found
on Canvas.
Please note that all online interactions in Canvas will be saved and stored. All information
will be kept for educational and general academic research. Any research or data sharing with
other researchers will involve de-identifying the data, including the removal of names,
UTEIDs, email addresses, or other information. To further ensure that your information is
secure, please do not include identifying information in your online interactions with others.
The TAs and professor will often post announcements in Canvas. Click on “Account” and then
the “Settings” link in the upper-left corner of your Canvas page, to adjust your email address.
You can also update your notification preferences from the “Notifications” link also found in
“Account”. This will allow you to receive email updates whenever course Announcements are
made, or when assignments and grades are posted.
For technical support, please email gatewaytechsupport@austin.utexas.edu or click on the
“Help” button on the Canvas home page.
For questions about the course material or logistics, you should use the Piazza discussion
board. This is a Q&A wiki platform that you can access from within Canvas (via a link on the
left menu or the Home Page) or directly at
https://utexas.instructure.com/courses/1280811/external_tools/52119. There are also Android and
iPhone apps for Piazza. By posting questions here, everyone in the class will benefit from
seeing the answers. Although the TAs will be Monitoring Piazza to answer questions and
contribute to discussions, you are also encouraged to answer each other’s questions as much as
possible. Notable contributions towards assisting other students may be awarded extra credit.
If you have a specific, personal or grade-related question, please email your TA at
onlinepsy333dta@austin.utexas.edu or your professor at church@austin.utexas.edu
Please do NOT use the Inbox feature within Canvas for any communication.
Please allow 24 hours for a response from your TA or professor via email or Piazza
Please remain professional in all class communications. We expect that you will treat
the teaching team and each other with the same respect and civility on line that you would if
you were conversing with them in person. Please refrain from using profanity or any
euphemisms for profanity. Please do not bait other commenters or personally attack them.
Please do not use sarcasm in a way that can be misinterpreted negatively. Please remain on
topic. In short, please respect the right of your colleagues to ask questions and discuss their
opinions about the subject matter. If you are caught violating these ground rules, you will be
shut out of the online discussion or piazza thread and will be notified of your first offense. A
second offense will result in a 2-point reduction to your final grade. A third offense will result
in a 3-point reduction to your final class grade and permanent exclusion from all future online
discussions and piazza access, restricting your ability to gain more points.
                                                  3


Evaluation of Student Performance
There are 200 points possible in this course.
Exams: There will be 5 non-cumulative exams offered on Thursdays during the course.
        June 11 (5-6pm CST)
        June 18 (5-6pm CST)
        June 25 (5-6pm CST)
        July 2 (5-6pm CST)
        July 9 (5-6pm CST)
All five exams will be worth 40 points each, and be a combination of multiple choice and short
answer. The best 4 grades will be counted toward the final grade. Thus, the lowest
score will be dropped. Once you begin an exam, you will have 60 minutes to complete it. If
you miss an exam, that will be your “dropped” exam score if you take all 5 tests. Only in rare
cases will alternate exam times be allowed at the teaching team’s discretion. It is
possible to earn 160 exam points.
All exams will be taken online, in Canvas, and be in multiple-choice format. Your knowledge
of all forms of course material may be assessed. This includes any of the information from the
readings, lectures and videos presented. The exams will assess both conceptual knowledge
and factual information. Exams are all closed-book. You can take the exam from almost
anywhere with a high-speed internet connection, as long as it is in a quiet, secure, and
distraction-free setting. Consulting printed, audio or other digital sources during the exam
will be considered cheating. If you feel that an exam question was unclear or contained an
error, you should email the TAs at onlinepsy333dta@austin.utexas.edu immediately after
class to alert them to the problem. If it is determined the question was in error, the exam
question will be regraded or dropped. In no circumstances will this lower anyone’s score.
No make-up exams will be offered except in critical situations and/or medical or family
emergencies (as defined by Student Emergency Services at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php). Should you
experience a personal crisis of this nature, you must notify the professor at least one hour
BEFORE the exam and must submit a ‘class absence notification request form’ with
supporting documentation to Student Emergency Services within 48 hours. Remember, that if
you miss an exam for any other reason (or are unable to meet the requirements above), we
drop one score.
Response assignments: You will be required to complete 2 brief responses from a set of
prompts. One will be due June 22nd, and the other due July 6th. The prompts for each
assignment will be posted on Canvas. Your response assignment will be graded primarily on
the quality of your ideas and your ability to integrate the information presented in class and
in the readings to the topic. Appropriate APA citations are required and plagiarism
will not be tolerated. Response assignments will be submitted on Canvas. Please note that 1
full point (out of 12) will be deducted from your writing assignment grade if it is turned in
late. An additional 2 points will be deducted for every 24 hours after the assignment due date.
Participation: For each week of material, 3 discussion topics will open on Piazza. Engage
with at least one discussion topic each week for 4 weekly points. You must respond prior to
that week’s exam for credit. Credit will not be given for limited comments like “I agree” or
                                                  4


 “same”. Credit will be given for thoughtful comments that relate to class material, own
 experience, or your own additional research on the topic. The lowest participation score will be
 dropped.
 All assignments in this course may be processed by TurnItIn, a tool that compares submitted
 material to an archived database of published work and other submitted papers in this course
 to check for potential plagiarism. Other methods may also be used to determine if paper or
 assignment is the student’s original work. Regardless of the results of any TurnItIn
 submission, the faculty member, sometimes in consultation with Student Judicial Services,
 will make the final determination as to whether or not a paper has been plagiarized. You will
 receive a zero on this assignment if it is discovered that your paper (or any non-referenced
 portion thereof) has been plagiarized from another student or any other source.
 The Undergraduate Writing Center (UWC) is an excellent resource for getting feedback on
 drafts of your papers in advance. The UWC offers writing assistance by appointment or on a
 drop-in basis. Contact them by phone or email (512) 471-6222; coordinator@uwc.utexas.edu.
 Also see http://www.uwc.utexas.edu/
 Grading summary: It is possible to earn 200 total points for the course. Your points will
 continually be updated and posted in Canvas’s grade center. Final grades including a decimal point of
 0.5 or higher will be rounded up. Final letter grades will be assigned according to the following scale:
       A = 93-100%      185-200 points                           C = 73-76%      145-152 points
       A- = 90-92%      179-184 points                           C- = 70-72%     139-144 points
       B+ = 87-89%      173-178 points                           D+ = 67-69%     133-138 points
       B = 83-86%       165-172 points                           D = 63-66%      125-132 points
       B- = 80-82%      159-164 points                           D- = 60-62%     119-124 points
       C+ = 77-79%      153-158 points                           F = <60%        118 points or less
Assessment                                                     Percentage of grade
Exams (best 4, at 40 points each = 160 points)                        80
2 Response assignments (12 points each = 24 points)                   12
Piazza Participation (best 4 weeks, 16 points possible)                8
Total (200 points)                                                   100
Grading policy: No grade adjustments will be made in person. All challenges to exam or
benchmark questions (e.g., the wording appears ambiguous to you or you don't understand why a
certain answer option isn't also marked as correct) or writing assignment grades must be
submitted to the TA email onlinepsy333dta@austin.utexas.edu with a clear explanation within
48 hours after grades are posted. There will be no exceptions to this rule.
Incomplete grades will be given in extremely rare and extraordinary circumstances. Per
University policy, an incomplete cannot be assigned simply to give a student the opportunity to
improve their grade. Indeed, incompletes are disallowed if a student does not have a passing
grade on the work completed. Incompletes can only be considered when a student hasn’t finished
required assignments for a significant, documented reason other than lack of effort (i.e., for any
of the crisis/emergency situations listed at
http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/emergency/absencenotificationrequest.php).
                                                     5


General Policies
Policy on Academic Integrity: By taking this class, you agree to abide by the University of
Texas regulations concerning cheating. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are
learning, discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each
member of the university is expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust,
fairness, and respect toward peers and community. At a minimum, this requires that you 1)
acknowledge the contributions of other sources to your scholastic efforts 2) complete your
assignments independently unless expressly authorized to seek or obtain assistance in preparing
them 3) follow instructions for assignments and exams, and observe the standards of your
academic discipline and 4) avoid engaging in any form of academic dishonesty on behalf of
yourself or another student.
You will be required to sign an endorsement of the UT honor code at the start of each exam.
Cheating on writing assignments or exams undermines the opportunity to learn. Students who
violate University rules on academic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties, including
the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since such
dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University, policies on
academic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, please visit the Student
Conduct and Academic Integrity website at: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct.
In order to avoid inadvertently violating these rules, it is imperative that you do not share your
UT EID with anyone else and that you refrain from recording or sharing any exam, or other
assessment material in any format. You must also not accept another student’s UTEID or
consult any material shared by another student who has taken this course, or its equivalent, in
the past. If you observe others cheating, you are honor bound to contact the TAs or
professor.
Religious Holy Days: By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least
14 days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an
examination, an assignment, or a project in order to observe a religious holy day, I will give you
an opportunity to complete the missed work.
Students with Disabilities: If you are a student with a disability, or think you may have a
disability, and need accommodations, please contact Services for Students with Disabilities
(SSD). You may refer to SSD's website for contact and more information:
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/. If you are already registered wth SSD, please deliver your
Accommodation Letter to me as early as possible in the semester so we can discuss your
approved accommodations.
I am committed to creating an accessible and inclusive learning environment consistent with UT
policy and federal and state law. Please let me know if you experience any barriers to learning so
that I can work with you to ensure you have equal opportunity to participate fully in this course.
Please notify me as quickly as possible if the material being presented in class is not accessible.
Student Disclosures of Sexual Violence. Federal law, Title IX, and UT policy prohibit
discrimination, harassment, and violence based on sex and gender, including sexual harassment,
domestic violence, dating violence, stalking, and/or any form of sex or gender discrimination.
                                                    6


Faculty and staff on campus are considered mandatory reporters. This means that if you disclose
a personal experience as a UT student, the course instructor and TAs are required to notify UT's
Title IX Office. While we will protect your information to the greatest extent we can, we are
mandated to report sexual misconduct and crimes to help improve campus safety.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): If you are worried about someone who is acting
differently, you may use the Behavior Concerns Advice Line to discuss by phone your concerns.
This service is provided through a partnership among the Office of the Dean of Students, the
Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance Program (EAP), and
The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or visit
https://besafe.utexas.edu/behavior-concerns-advice-line.
Course schedule and readings. The syllabus posted in Canvas should be considered the
definitive current version and should be checked regularly as it may change. It is your
responsibility to keep track of any changes to the schedule and/or assignments announced
throughout the semester.
   DATE                 TOPIC                         READING
   WEEK 1:              Day 1: Introduction and       http://www.ted.com/talks/alison_gopnik_what_d
   June 4th-June 11th   Key Themes                    o_babies_think.html; syllabus
                        Day 2: Methods and the        Chapter 1
                        Media
                        Day 3: Genetics and Family    Genetics chapter excerpt
                        Studies
                        Day 4: Building a Brain
                        Day 5: Plasticity and Our     Perception chapter excerpt
                        Senses
                        Day 6: Learning to Move
                        and Moving to Learn
   THURSDAY             EXAM #1
   June 11
   WEEK 2:              Day 7: Pregnancy              Abbot, 2015
   June 12th-18th
                        Day 8: Nutrition and Sleep
                        Day 9: Piaget                 Piaget Simply Psychology article
                        Day 10: Vygotsky              Lev Vygotsky Simply Psychology article
                        Day 11: Pint-size physicists  Object Permanence
   THURSDAY             EXAM #2
   June 18
                                                    7


WEEK 3:             Day 12: Baby Talk                Kuhl, 2004
June 19th-June 25th
                    Day 13: Baby Talk 2
June 22nd           RESPONSE                         See syllabus and Canvas for details
                    ASSIGNMENT 1 DUE
                    Day 14: Reading and math         7 things about preschool math
                    Day 15: Self-control             Try to resist over-interpreting article
                    Day 16: Emotional                Teaching your child feeling article
                    regulation
THURSDAY            EXAM #3
June 25th
WEEK 4:             Day 17: Childhood
June 26th-July 2nd  memories & sense of self
                    Day 18: Attachment               The Strange Situation reading
                    Day 19: Mindreading
                    minors
                    Day 20: Prosocial peewees        How do children decide what’s fair?
                    Day 21: Race and Gender          Children can ‘catch’ social bias
                    Identities
THURSDAY            EXAM #4
July 2nd
WEEK 5:             Day 22: Promises and             Screen Time Canadian Policy article
July 3rd - July 9th pitfalls of children’s digital
                    media
                    Day 23: The perpetual            Gershoff, 2013
                    pursuit of perfect parenting
                    practices
July 6th            RESPONSE                         See syllabus and Canvas for details
                    ASSIGNMENT 2 DUE
                    Day 24: The dangers of
                    discipline & the perils of
                    praise
                    Day 25: Teenagers & Risk         Teenage Brain
                    Taking
                    Day 26: The Big Takeaways
THURSDAY            EXAM #5
July 9th
                                                   8
