                                      THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN
                                     STEVE HICKS SCHOOL OF SOCIAL WORK
Course Number:             SW 385R                  Instructor’s name:       S. Rivaux, PhD, LMSW
Unique Number:             87600                    Office Number:           Online / SSW 3.104A
Semester:                  Summer 2020              Office Phone:            (512) 698.3831
Meeting Time:              T/Th 5:30-8:30 PM        Office Hours:            W 12:15-1:15 & by appointment
Meeting Place:             Online by Zoom           Instructor’s e-mail:     s_rivaux@austin.utexas.edu
                                       SOCIAL WORK RESEARCH METHODS
I. STANDARDIZED COURSE DESCRIPTION
This Foundation course is designed to help students gain an understanding of and appreciation for the use
of research as a tool for professional evidence-based practice. Students are introduced to the concepts and
skills underlying a systematic approach to social work research, including basic research terminology, the
scientific method in social work, the value of research in social work, research ethics and the social work
value base, problem formulation and conceptualization, measurement, research designs to evaluate
programs and practice, sampling, alternative quantitative and qualitative data gathering and analytic
techniques, and preparation and use of research reports. The emphasis in the course is on equipping
students with the research knowledge and skills they’ll need to engage in the evidence-based practice
process at all levels of social work practice. As part of that process, they will learn how to critically appraise
sources of scientific evidence and how the criteria for that appraisal will vary depending upon the purpose
of the research.
II. STANDARDIZED COURSE OBJECTIVES
Upon completion of this course, students will be able to:
1. Formulate answerable evidence-based practice research questions;
2. Efficiently conduct advanced searches of electronic bibliographic databases and other sources to find
     evidence bearing on evidence-based practice research questions;
3. Critically appraise sources of scientific evidence and explain how the criteria for that appraisal will vary
     depending upon the purpose of the research;
4. Discuss why research evidence needs to be integrated with practice expertise and idiosyncratic client
     preferences, circumstances and values in the evidence-based practice process;
5. Design evaluations as part of evidence-based practice;
6. Explain how both qualitative and quantitative research processes apply in evidence-based practice;
7. Define basic qualitative and quantitative research concepts and describe the basic principles of causal
     inference, and their relationship to the various types of research designs;
8. Describe key concepts in measurement bearing on evidence-based practice, such as sources of
     measurement error, reliability and validity, and measurement equivalence across cultures;
9. Find measurement instruments applicable to evidence-based practice, sources of evidence bearing on
     the suitability of those instruments for specific practice scenarios, and critically appraise those sources
     from the standpoint of measurement principles and cultural sensitivity;
                                                                          Social Work Research Methods, p. 1


10. Describe the logic of probability sampling procedures, issues in the use of non-probability sampling
      procedures, how sampling issues bear on conducting evidence-based practice research at mezzo and
      macro levels of practice, and the implications of sampling for appraising and integrating sources of
      evidence in guiding practice decisions; -
11. Describe how particular values and sensitivity to ethical issues influence the conducting of research;
12. Give examples of the issues that diversity (e.g., gender, ethnicity, culture, age, sexual orientation, race,
      class, and physical or mental ability) raises in the conduct of research and in appraising and utilizing
      research to guide practice decisions;
13. Critically appraise how social work commitment to equity and social justice influences and
      differentiates the social work research process.
III. EPAS COMPETENCIES
The Steve Hicks School of Social Work has been continuously accredited by the Council on Social
Work Education (CSWE) since 1952. In order to maintain our accreditation status, the UT SHSSW engages in
ongoing curriculum assessment to demonstrate compliance with CSWE’s Education Policies and
Accreditation Standards (EPAS).
Using a common evaluation instrument, this course measures the implementation of knowledge, skills,
values, and/or cognitive and affective processes to assess the following competencies:
Competency 4: Engage in Practice-informed Research and Research-informed Practice
Outcome 4.1: Use practice experience and theory to inform scientific inquiry and research
Outcome 4.2: Apply critical thinking to engage in analysis of quantitative and qualitative research methods
and research findings
Outcome 4.3: Use and translate research evidence to inform and improve practice, policy, and service
delivery
IV. TEACHING METHODS
The primary means of instruction will be informal lectures, in-class exercises in small groups, and class
discussions about the assigned reading. Students will be expected to have done the assigned reading
before class, to actively participate in class, and to collaborate with one another.
V. REQUIRED TEXTS, READINGS, AND OTHER MATERIALS
(Students are responsible for the material in the assigned readings whether or not the material is discussed
in class.)
Required text:
           Rubin, A. & Bellamy, J. (2012). Practitioners guide to using research for evidence-based practice (2nd
               edition). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
           This book is also available as an e-book through the publisher:
                http://www.wiley.com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-111823880X.html
Required statistics readings: This is not a statistics course and in-depth knowledge of statistics is not
      required to succeed in this course. However, basic conceptual understanding of statistics is critical to
      any research endeavor. Therefore, statistical tests and concepts may be included as part of course
                                                                          Social Work Research Methods, p. 2


     content. Students may use a statistics textbook to review these topics if they have one available or may
     refer to resource such as one of the following online, public-domain resources:
     Online Statistics Education: A Multimedia Course of Study (http://onlinestatbook.com/). Project
          Leader: David M. Lane, Rice University. Available: http://onlinestatbook.com/2/index.html
     UCLA Statistics Online Computational Resource: http://wiki.stat.ucla.edu/socr/index.php/EBook
     Swinscow (1997). Statistics at Square One: http://www.bmj.com/about-bmj/resources-
          readers/publications/statistics-square-one
     StatSoft: http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Elementary-Statistics-Concepts/button/1
Additional readings: Electronic copies of, or links to, other readings will be posted to Canvas during the
          semester. Students are responsible for checking the course site regularly for these.
Websites relevant to this course
     http://www.campbellcollaboration.org (meta analysis of the effects of interventions in the social,
          behavioral, crime and justice, and educational arenas)
     http://www.cochrane.org (meta analysis of the effects of health and mental health interventions)
     http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/pg/prac_guide.cfm (practice guidelines for psychiatrists for
          each psychiatric/mental/cognitive disorders)
     http://evidencebasedprograms.org Social programs that work
VI. COURSE REQUIREMENTS
The final course grade will be computed from grades on two exams (50%), one group proposal project
(20%), written assignments / in-class pop quizzes (20%), and class participation/attendance (10%). One
optional extra credit assignment will be offered (2%).
1. Two exams, one at midterm and one the final class day, will cover all materials assigned and/or discussed
     in this course. Each exam is worth 25% of the course grade.
2. Group written research proposal (no more than 18 double-spaced pages, page limits exclude title page,
     references and appendices) and class presentation: The proposal will be worth 20%. Students will work in
     teams to write a proposal for a research project on a program/service/intervention addressing a chosen
     problem. Note that page limits will be strictly adhered to and any pages beyond the allowable limit will
     not be considered in grading the project.
     The project will be completed in stages: (1) a concept paper, (2) a background and literature review, (3)
     meeting with the professor regarding methodology, and (4) the final proposal. Because learning to write
     about research is a process, only the final proposal paper will be graded. However, when assigning a
     grade, the instructor will include consideration of whether conscientious drafts were submitted and will
     use a ✓+, ✓, ✓- grading scale to provide feedback. Written feedback will be provided after each step of
     the process so students can improve their work before the final project is submitted for grading. Late
     submissions on any part of the project will be applied to the final grade for the project.
     Since group members will rely on each other to get a good grade on this project, it is very important that
     group members contribute actively and equally. Thus, with submission of the final paper, each student
     must also send the instructor a paragraph describing the contributions of each group member
     (themselves included) and assessing each member’s performance in producing the paper and
     presentation. The instructor reserves the right to grade individual group members commensurate with
     their contributions to the project. Should any individual not share sufficiently in the workload, the
     instructor may assign a lower grade to that student. Students are responsible for talking to the instructor
     if a group member is not participating equally in the project or is impeding the group process in any other
                                                                          Social Work Research Methods, p. 3


      way. Learning how to function effectively in workgroups is part of your learning process in this course and
      is a core learning objective of the group assignment.
 3. Short written assignments, applied research activities, and/or pop quizzes will occur during the semester,
      comprising 20% of the grade. One of these assignments will be providing a written peer review of
      another group’s research proposal. Other assignments may involve participating in research activities on
      actual research projects. Quizzes will be given at the beginning of class, therefore it is important to be
      present and arrive on time. There will be no make-ups for pop quizzes or in-class assignments.
 4. Class attendance, preparation, and participation (10%): It is important that social work practitioners take
      responsibility for their own continued learning and for acting in a professional manner. Thus, students are
      expected to maintain good attendance, to complete assigned homework / readings before the class
      meeting for which they are assigned, to compile questions regarding the material for class discussion, and
      to actively participate in both class discussions and group exercises.
      Students are expected to attend all classes and to arrive punctually. Coming late and/or leaving early by
      more than 15 minutes will be considered a “missed” class unless that student provides a reasonable
      reason for doing so and receives instructor permission in advance. While it is expected students will
      attend all classes if at all possible, the instructor realizes that absences are excusable in the event of
      unexpected emergencies, illness, medical appointments, university-sanctioned events, or religious
      holidays. Missing more than one class will adversely impact the attendance/preparation/participation
      portion of the final grade. Please inform the professor if you will be late or not attend class.
      In the event a class must be cancelled, students will be provided an assignment to help them work with
      the material for that day. Conscientious, thorough completion of such assignments will count as
      attendance for that class. Assignments that are not completed or are poorly completed will result in
      similar grade reductions as unexcused absences.
 5. Optional extra credit - Human subjects protections training (2%): Most social science research uses
      information about human subjects. Due to the potential for abuses in the research context, federal and
      university rules govern how research on human subjects can be conducted. All research about human
      subjects conducted at the University must be approved by an Institutional Review Board (IRB) before
      starting. The major goals of IRB review are to minimize risk to human subjects (beneficence), ensure all
      subjects consent to participate with full information about the project and its risks (autonomy), and
      promote equitable conduct of research (justice). Therefore, students who wish to better understand the
      processes – or who just want to earn an extra 2% - may take the human subjects protection course (CITI)
      at: www.utexas.edu/research/rsc/humansubjects/training/index.html. When you complete the course, a
      completion certificate will be presented. Turn this in to the instructor to receive credit. Keep a copy for
      yourself in case you need it later.
VII. GRADING
Accumulated points and grading scale
  94-100 = A        90-93.99 = A- 87-89.99 = B+ 84-86.99 = B             80-83.99 = B-    77-79.99 = C+
  74-76.99 = C 70-73.99 = C- 67-69.99 = D+ 64-66.99 = D                 60-63.99 = D-    <=59.999 = F
Grades will NOT be rounded up.
Please note that you will not earn credit for MSSW courses if your final grade falls below a ‘C’. You must earn
 a ‘C’ or above for credit to be given for the course.
                                                                             Social Work Research Methods, p. 4


VIII. COURSE POLICIES
    Canvas: The instructor uses Canvas (web-based, course-management systems with password-protected
    access) as the primary means of communicating with students. All course materials will be posted on the
    course’s site. The site may also be used to communicate and collaborate online, to post grades, to give
    online quizzes or surveys. Students are responsible for checking this site regularly for class announcements
    and for new postings. Support in using Canvas can be obtained from the ITS Help Desk by calling 475-9400
    between 8AM-6PM on Monday through Friday. Please plan accordingly.
    Late Assignment Policies: Except in the case of extreme emergencies, and then only with prior permission
    from the professor, late assignments will not be accepted without penalty. Students will lose 3 points for
    each day that an assignment is late. If the due date is a problem, then the student must contact the
    professor and negotiate another due date at least 48 hours PRIOR to the date specified in the course
    syllabus.
    Incompletes: Students are expected to complete all course work by the last day of class and to complete all
    assignments by the dates due. Only in emergency situations will an incomplete grade be given for a course
    and only when, prior to the emergency, the student has been in attendance and has done satisfactory work.
    If an incomplete grade should be assigned, there will be a written agreement with the instructor about
    when and how the work will be completed.
    Computer and Other Electronic Device Use Policy: Students are expected to use laptops and handheld
    computers in class for class-related purposes only. To engage in other types of computer use and/or
    electronics use (e.g., accepting or making phone calls, texting, surfing the net, etc.) is unprofessional and
    disruptive to the course. Thus, students who violate this policy may be asked to leave the classroom.
    Feedback on Learning: During this course the professor will ask students to provide feedback on their
    learning in informal as well as formal ways. It is very important for the professor to know the students’
    reactions to what is taking place in class, so students are encouraged to inform the professor on how her
    teaching strategies are helping or hindering student learning, ensuring that together the professor and
    students can create an environment effective for teaching and learning.
    Course and Instructor Evaluations: At the end of the semester, the instructor will use the standard Course
    Instructor Survey (CIS) provided by the University of Texas at Austin. The CIS provides a systematic, campus-
    wide method of evaluating courses and instructors. I hope that every student will complete the CIS.
    Although important, these evaluations are after-the-fact. Therefore, I strongly encourage you to provide
    input and feedback regarding the course during the semester so that together we can make this course of
    maximum benefit to you!
IX. UNIVERSITY POLICIES
 THE UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS HONOR CODE. The core values of The University of Texas at Austin are learning,
 discovery, freedom, leadership, individual opportunity, and responsibility. Each member of the university is
 expected to uphold these values through integrity, honesty, trust, fairness, and respect toward peers and
 community.
 DOCUMENTED DISABILITY STATEMENT. Any student who requires special accommodations must obtain a
 letter that documents the disability from the Services for Students with Disabilities area of the Division of
                                                                           Social Work Research Methods, p. 5


Diversity and Community Engagement (471- 6259 voice or 471-4641 TTY for users who are deaf or hard of
hearing). A student should present the letter to the professor at the beginning of the semester so that
needed accommodations can be discussed and followed. The student should remind the professor of any
testing accommodations no later than five business days before an exam. For more information,
visit: http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
PROFESSIONAL CONDUCT AND CIVILITY IN THE CLASSROOM. The professor expects students to act as
professionals in class. This means students should arrive on time for class, be prepared to participate in the
class discussion, and show respect for one another’s opinions. A course brings together a group of diverse
individuals with various backgrounds. Students are influenced and shaped by such factors as race, ethnicity,
gender, sex, physical abilities, religious and political beliefs, national origins, and sexual orientations, among
others. We expect to learn from each other in an atmosphere of positive engagement and mutual respect.
This atmosphere includes working intentionally to recognize and dismantle racism, sexism, heterosexism,
and ableism in the classroom. Social Work also deals with complex and controversial issues. These issues
may be challenging and uncomfortable, and it would be impossible to offer a substantive classroom
experience that did not include potentially difficult conversations relating to challenging issues. In this
environment, we will be exposed to diverse ideas and opinions, and sometimes we will not agree with the
ideas expressed by others. Nevertheless, the professor requires that students engage one another with
civility, respect, and professionalism.
UNANTICIPATED DISTRESS. Students may experience unexpected and/or distressing reactions to course
readings, videos, conversations, and assignments. If so, students are encouraged to inform the professor.
The professor can be responsive and supportive regarding students’ participation in course assignments
and activities, but students are responsible for communicating clearly what kind of support is desired. If
counseling is needed, students may contact a service provider of their choosing, including the UT
Counseling Center at 512-471-3515 or online at https://cmhc.utexas.edu/.
POLICY ON SOCIAL MEDIA AND PROFESSIONAL COMMUNICATION. Public social networks are not private.
Even when open only to approved or invited members, users cannot be certain that privacy will exist
among the general membership of sites. If social work students choose to participate in such forums, please
assume that anything posted can be seen, read, and critiqued. What is said, posted, linked to, commented
on, uploaded, subscribed to, etc., can be accessed and archived, posing potential harm to professional
reputations and prospective careers.
Social work students who use social media (e.g. Facebook, Twitter, Instagram) and other forms of electronic
communication (e.g. blogs) must be mindful of how their communication may be perceived by clients,
colleagues, faculty, and others. Social work students are expected to make every effort to minimize
material which could be considered inappropriate for a professional social worker in training. Because of
this, social work students are advised to manage security settings at their most private levels and avoid
posting information/photos or using any language that could jeopardize their professional image.
Students are asked to consider the amount of personal information posted on these sites and are obliged to
block any client access to involvement in the students’ social networks. Client material should not be
referred to in any form of electronic media, including any information that might lead to the identification
of a client or compromise client confidentiality in any way. Additionally, students must critically evaluate
any material that is posted regarding community agencies and professional relationships, as certain
material could violate the standards set by the School of Social Work, the Texas Code of Conduct for Social
Workers, and/or the NASW Code of Ethics.
                                                                           Social Work Research Methods, p. 6


Social work students should consider that they will be representing professional social work practice as well
as The University of Texas at Austin School of Social Work program while in the classroom, the university
community, and the broader area communities.
POLICY ON SCHOLASTIC DISHONESTY. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are
subject to disciplinary penalties, including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the
University. Since such dishonesty harms the individual, all students, and the integrity of the University,
policies on scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. For further information, the student may refer to
the Web Site of the Student Judicial Services, Office of the Dean of
Students: http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/sjs/.
USE OF COURSE MATERIALS. The materials used in this course, including, but not limited to exams, quizzes,
and homework assignments, are copyright protected works. Any unauthorized duplication of the course
materials is a violation of federal law and may result in disciplinary action being taken against the
student. Additionally, the sharing of course materials without the specific, express approval of the
professor may be a violation of the University’s Student Honor Code and an act of academic dishonesty,
which could result in further disciplinary action. This sharing includes, among other things, uploading class
materials to websites for the purpose of distributing those materials to other current or future students.
CLASSROOM CONFIDENTIALITY. Information shared in class about agencies, clients, and personal matters
is considered confidential per the NASW Code of Ethics on educational supervision and is protected by
regulations of the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (FERPA) as well. As such, sharing this
information with individuals outside of the educational context is not permitted. Violations of
confidentiality could result in actions taken according to the policies and procedure for review of academic
performance located in sections 3.0, 3.1, and 3.2 of the Standards for Social Work Education.
USE OF E-MAIL FOR OFFICIAL CORRESPONDENCE TO STUDENTS. Email is recognized as an official mode of
university correspondence; therefore, students are responsible for reading their email for university and
course-related information and announcements. Students are responsible for keeping the university
informed about a change of e-mail address. Students should check their e-mail regularly and frequently—
daily, but at minimum twice a week—to stay current with university-related communications, some of
which may be time-sensitive. Students can find UT Austin’s policies and instructions for updating their e-
mail address at http://www.utexas.edu/its/policies/emailnotify.php.
RELIGIOUS HOLIDAYS. By UT Austin policy, students must notify the professor of a pending absence at least
fourteen days prior to the date of observance of a religious holy day. If the student must miss a class,
examination, work assignment, or project in order to observe a religious holy day, the professor will give
the student an opportunity to complete the missed work within a reasonable time after the absence.
TITLE IX REPORTING. In accordance with Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972, the University of
Texas at Austin is committed to maintaining a learning environment that is free from discriminatory
conduct on the basis of sex https://titleix.utexas.edu/. Faculty, field instructors, staff, and/or teaching
assistants in their supervisory roles are mandated reporters of incidents of sex discrimination, sexual
harassment, sexual violence, stalking, dating violence, or any other forms of sexual misconduct. Students
who report such incidents will be informed of University resources. Incidents will be reported to the
University’s Title IX Coordinator. Further information, including student resources related to Title IX, may
also be found at https://titleix.utexas.edu/.
                                                                           Social Work Research Methods, p. 7


 CAMPUS CARRY POLICY. The University’s policy on concealed firearms may be found here:
 https://campuscarry.utexas.edu. You also may find this information by accessing the Quick Links menu on
 the School’s website.
 SAFETY. As part of professional social work education, students may have assignments that involve working
 in agency settings and/or the community. As such, these assignments may present some risks. Sound
 choices and caution may lower risks inherent to the profession. It is the student's responsibility to be aware
 of and adhere to policies and practices related to agency and/or community safety. Students should notify
 the professor regarding any safety concerns.
 BEHAVIOR CONCERNS ADVICE LINE (BCAL). If students have concerns about their behavioral health, or if
 they are concerned about the behavioral health of someone else, students may use the Behavior Concerns
 Advice Line to discuss by phone their concerns. This service is provided through a partnership between the
 Office of the Dean of Students, the Counseling and Mental Health Center (CMHC), the Employee Assistance
 Program (EAP), and The University of Texas Police Department (UTPD). Call 512-232-5050 or
 visit http://www.utexas.edu/safety/bcal.
 EMERGENCY EVACUATION POLICY. Occupants of buildings on the UT Austin campus are required to
 evacuate and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated or an announcement is made. Please be
 aware of the following policies regarding evacuation:
      ·     Familiarize yourself with all exit doors in the classroom and the building. Remember that the
          nearest exit door may not be the one you used when entering the building.
      ·     If you require assistance to evacuate, inform the professor in writing during the first week of class.
      ·     In the event of an evacuation, follow the professor’s instructions.
      ·     Do not re-enter a building unless you are given instructions by the Austin Fire Department, the UT
          Austin Police Department, or the Fire Prevention Services office.
X. COURSE SCHEDULE
The anticipated schedule of activities for this course is below. Reading due dates are the class for which the
reading is listed. The instructor reserves the option to modify the schedule if deemed necessary. References
to chapters are from the course textbook. Additional readings will be posted on Canvas.
   Date          Description                                               Text/Readings
   Class 1       Introduction to course                                    Read and be prepared to discuss Class
   6/4           Introduction to evidence-based practice and policy        1 readings from course website
                 Form teams for paper assignment                           Read description of
                 Discuss human subjects assignment                         www.campbellcollaboration.org and
                                                                           www.cochrane.org
   Class 2       Evidence-based social work practice and policy;           Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 1-3, Appendix B
   6/9           Philosophy and theory                                     Review statistical topics in text or
                                                                             online
                 Review basic statistical concepts: variables, levels of
                 measurement, sampling, descriptive v. Inferential
                 statistics, clinical v. statistical significance
                 HUMAN SUBJECTS OPTIONAL ASSIGNMENT DUE
   Class 3       Ethics and politics                                       Read and be prepared to discuss Class
   6/11          Culturally competent research                               3 articles from course website
                                                                         Social Work Research Methods, p. 8


           Criteria for inferring effectiveness
Class 4    Critically appraising experimental designs              Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 4 & 5
6/16                                                               Read and be prepared to discuss Class
           CONCEPT PAPER FOR RESEARCH PROPOSAL DUE                   4 articles from course website
Class 5    Critically appraising experiments and quasi             Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 5-6
6/18       experiments                                             Read and be prepared to discuss Class
                                                                     5 articles from course website
Class 6    Critically appraising time-series designs and single-   Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 7 and 12
6/23       case designs                                            Read and be prepared to discuss Class
           Monitoring client progress (single-case revisited)      6 articles from course website
           Review for first exam
Class 7    EXAM ONE (1.5 hour)
6/25       (Activity for rest of class time TBD)
           Mid-course evaluation
Class 8    Review exam                                             Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 8
6/30       Critically appraising systematic reviews and meta-      Read and be prepared to discuss Class
           analyses                                                  8 articles from course website
           PART ONE OF RESEARCH PROPOSAL DUE (TITLE
           PAGE, INTRODUCTION/BACKGROUND, LITERATURE
           REVIEW)
Class 9    Critically appraising non-experimental                  Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 9
7/2        quantitative studies.                                   Read and be prepared to discuss Class
           SCHEDULE GROUP MEETING W/PROFESSOR TO                     10 articles from course website
           BRAINSTORM PROPOSAL METHODOLOGY
Class 10   Non-experimental quantitative studies                   Class 10 readings from course website
7/7        continued
Class 11   Critically appraising qualitative studies               Class 11 readings from course website
7/9                                                                Robert Woods Johnson website on
                                                                   qualitative rigor
Class 12   Qualitative methods continued                           Class 12 readings from course website
7/14
Class 13   Critically appraising and selecting                     Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 11
7/16       assessment instruments                                  Class 13 readings from course website
Class 14   Bringing it all together – EBP in the field             Reread Rubin & Bellamy, Ch 12
7/21       PEER REVIEW DUE                                         Class 14 readings from website
Class 15   Course evaluation
7/23       Review for second exam
           Consultation on group projects
Class 16   EXAM TWO (1.5 hour)
7/28       Consultation on group projects
  ****FINAL RESEARCH PROPOSAL PAPERS AND ASSESSMENTS OF GROUP MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS ARE
                                         DUE BY FRIDAY 7/31 AT 5PM.
 THESE DOCUMENTS MUST BE SUBMITTED ELECTRONICALLY. BE SURE YOU GET A RETURN EMAIL FROM
                            ME, VERIFYING RECEIPT OF THE DOCUMENTS! ****
                                                                  Social Work Research Methods, p. 9


XI. BIBLIOGRAPHY
Online Statistics Education: A Multimedia Course of Study (http://onlinestatbook.com/). Project Leader:
         David M. Lane, Rice University. Available: http://onlinestatbook.com/2/index.html
Rubin, A. & Bellamy, J. (2012). Practitioners guide to using research for evidence-based practice (2nd
         edition). New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Swinscow (1997). Statistics at Square One: http://www.bmj.com/about-bmj/resources-
         readers/publications/statistics-square-one
StatSoft: http://www.statsoft.com/Textbook/Elementary-Statistics-Concepts/button/1
UCLA Statistics Online Computational Resource: http://wiki.stat.ucla.edu/socr/index.php/EBook
Other websites relevant to this course
     http://www.campbellcollaboration.org (meta analysis of the effects of interventions in the social,
         behavioral, crime and justice, and educational arenas)
     http://www.cochrane.org (meta analysis of the effects of health and mental health interventions)
     http://www.psych.org/psych_pract/treatg/pg/prac_guide.cfm (practice guidelines for psychiatrists for
         each psychiatric/mental/cognitive disorders)
     http://evidencebasedprograms.org Social programs that work
                                                                      Social Work Research Methods, p. 10
