                        Accounting 326 - Financial Reporting and Analysis – Spring 2019
Professor: Lale Guler                                       Office: CBA 4M.258
E-mail: Lale.Guler@mccombs.utexas.edu                Office Hours: M&W 3:00pm-4:00pm or by appointment
___________________________________________________________________________________
Overview
The course examines financial reporting issues, mainly from a user perspective. The objectives are:
(1) To learn about current U.S. financial reporting;
(2) To understand whether and how financial reporting captures the economics of transactions and events, and
(3) To learn how to reason about financial reporting problems as users do (i.e., to understand the relations
between financial statements, including footnotes, and journal entries).
Required Text
Intermediate Accounting, by Kieso, Weygandt, and Warfield, 16th edition with WileyPLUS access.
Prerequisites
Accounting 311 or 311H, and 312 or 312H, with a grade of at least C- in each; and Finance 357 or 357H.
Communication Channels
The class webpage is Canvas. Please check Canvas weekly for announcements, presentation materials, articles,
assignments, solutions to practice problems and other relevant information.
Course Format and Policies
Course Format
Class sessions will be a combination of lecture and discussion. Students should bring to each class session a printed
copy of that day’s PowerPoint slides (available on Canvas prior to each class). The material covered in-class will
follow the PowerPoint slides, which are designed to clarify and complement the text material. I suggest that you
work all of the recommended questions for each chapter which will be posted on Canvas. While there will be no
points allocated to solving recommended questions, there is a direct relation between working problems and
performing successfully on examinations.
Professionalism & Participation
I expect that you will at all times exhibit high standards of professionalism in this course. In the context of this
course, professionalism consists of:
-attending class,
-being on time for class,
-participating in class discussions in a professional and constructive way,
-being present (and not using any electronic devices),
-being respectful to others,
-communicating professionally in terms of content and appearance when composing e-mails,
-acting as a business professional.
You are expected to attend every class. Scheduling interviews and other appointments during class sessions is
unacceptable. Please arrange your personal schedules so that late arrivals and early departures are avoided. Repeated
walking in and out of class is distracting to your classmates and me and such behavior will not be tolerated. It is
critical to your success that you attend each class and take notes during the lectures. You should come to class
prepared, which means that you should have read the material. Students are not permitted to use laptops, ipads,


phones, and other devices with screens in class. Video or audio recording during class is not permitted without
prior approval.
Class attendance is important. You do not need to notify me unless your absence will be for an extended time.
Office hours are not a substitute for coming to class; accordingly, I will not go over the entire set of missed material
covered in class during office hours if you have missed class.
Exams
There will be three closed book exams in this course. Exams are 100% independent work. You are not permitted to
use any electronic communications devices during the exam. This explicitly includes cell phones, pagers,
computers, laptops, iPads, and other advanced electronic devices. I will consider it cheating if a cell phone or other
electronic communication device is used and/or visible during the exam. You are not permitted to copy or otherwise
reproduce the exams at any time. This includes taking pictures of the exam with your cell phone or other device
while taking the exam or when reviewing graded exams. All students are required to present proof of identification
at the time of the exam. As per school policy, exam papers will be retained for one year and then destroyed.
Grading Policy
Your overall course grade will be comprised of the following:
Exam 1                                    20%
Exam 2                                    30%
Exam 3                                    30%
Unannounced in-class quizzes              10%
Homework assignments                      10%
Total points                             100%
Final grades will be assigned on the basis of the following rubric:
   Total Points      Letter
   94-100            A
   90-93             A-
   87-89             B+
   84-86             B
   80-83             B-
   77-79             C+
   74-76             C
   70-73             C-
   67-69             D+
   64-66             D
   60-63             D-
   Less than 60      F
While the grading scale above will be used as a guideline, translation of the total points into a letter grade will
ultimately be based on the professor’s judgment. The letter grade will reflect each student’s performance relative
to the class and standards expected of UT students. I will impose a substantial grade penalty (one course grade per
incident) for those who distract other students through cell phone or laptop use during class.
                                                                                                                      2


Exams may include multiple-choice, short answer and computational questions. You may have 1-page (8.5” x
11”, front/back, your own handwriting) of notes for use during the exam, which must be turned in with your
exam. Electronically prepared exam notes will not be accepted. Any request for a re-grade must be made in
writing no less than two days and no more than seven days after the exam grades are available. The request must
state, in detail, the reason you believe the grade is in error. Requests that do not conform to this policy will not be
honored.
Extra Credit & Late Work
There are no extra credit opportunities in this class. Late work is not accepted without an approved excuse as verified
by the instructor.
Make-up Exams
Students must take all exams. Any missed exam must be approved through Student Emergency Services and
makeups will be given only in truly extraordinary circumstances (at my discretion). Makeup exams are given only
for excused absences, which must be determined, if possible, prior to the exam. Excused absences may be given
for verifiable medical or family emergencies. Written documentation must be provided to qualify for an “excused
absence”. The medical documentation must specifically state that you could not complete the exam on the day of
the exam due to your illness and must be signed by a licensed physician. Students who miss an exam without making
arrangements with me prior to the exam will receive a zero. All documentation evidencing your absence from an
exam is due within five business days of the missed exam and you must make up the missed exam within five
business days. If the documentation is not received within the five days and the exam is not completed within the
five day window, you will receive a grade of zero. The determination of an “acceptable” excuse is solely up to the
instructor’s discretion. Scheduling job interviews or other appointments for exam dates is unacceptable. It is solely
the student’s responsibility to communicate with the instructor regarding these issues and it is solely the student’s
responsibility to ensure that the instructor is receiving the communication and any documentation. The student
should use UT e-mail as the main form of communication. Also, the student must verify that the instructor has
received the appropriate documentation within the five day window. I do not guarantee that the level of difficulty
of the make-up exam will be comparable to the exam given at the scheduled time. I will determine the date and time
of the make-up exam, and you must make arrangements to take it at that time.
Submission of Homework Assignments through WileyPLUS
To gain access to your class, please register at the following class section URL:
wileyplus/class/676438
When you click on this link, you will be taken directly to our WileyPLUS class section, where you will log in if
you already have a WileyPLUS account, or if not you will be prompted to create one. Once that is done, you will
be taken to the e-commerce page to choose the type of access you prefer.
You must include your official UT e-mail address, and your name using only the English characters as part of
your registration to WileyPLUS.
Online homework assignments will be available at WileyPLUS every week on Wednesday. The homework will
be due on the following Monday. Given the fixed schedule of homework assignments, no e-mail announcement
will be sent regarding the homework assignments. It is your responsibility to check WileyPLUS website regularly.
Online homework assignments will be automatically graded by WileyPLUS Software. It is your responsibility to
successfully submit your homework assignment online. It is unlikely that WileyPLUS questions / grading
schemes are wrong. If you have questions regarding the grading of homework assignments through WileyPLUS,
please state the question in an e-mail to me within one week from the time that the homework assignment is due.
Questions regarding the grading of homework assignments through WileyPLUS that are submitted beyond one
week from the time the homework assignments is due will not be answered.
                                                                                                                       3


Having your homework assignments done by someone else is cheating, and any suspicious case will be forwarded
to the Dean of Students.
No make-up homework assignments will be offered for the missed homework assignments. If you miss the
deadline for an online homework submission, then your grade for that homework assignment is zero.
Important Student Tips for Using WileyPLUS
https://hub.wiley.com/community/support/wileyplus-v4
Technical support line: 1-877-586-0192
Unannounced In-class Quizzes
You will often be tested on the material covered in class through in-class quizzes. The dates of in-class quizzes will
not be announced in advance. Different class sections may be given quizzes on different dates. The number of in-
class quizzes will not be announced in advance. If you are absent when a quiz is given in class, then your grade for
that quiz is zero. No make-up quizzes are offered for the missed quizzes. No excuse reports will be accepted for the
missed quizzes. At the end of the semester when calculating your point-total, quizzes with three lowest scores will
be dropped.
Instructor’s Policy on Academic Integrity
Business professionals have important legal and ethical duties to investors, creditors and to non-investor
stakeholders who rely on their comments, analyses, forecasts and representations. Students in this course are
expected to act with personal integrity at all times. Academic dishonesty is incompatible with preparation for a
career as a responsible business professional. As such, academic dishonesty will not be tolerated in this course.
Any offenders will be subject to appropriate sanctions and discipline, a process which begins with a referral to Dean
of Students. For purposes of this course, the instructor will always seek a score of zero for any exam or assignment
in which the student has engaged in academic dishonesty. Information about the University’s policy on academic
integrity can be found on page 5.
Other Important Notes
This is a very demanding course. To succeed in this course you have to:
         1) Read the chapters in the book. This is critical; there are a lot of concepts covered in this course that
              you can only really grasp if you read the chapters of the book we cover. Just doing the homework is
              not enough.
         2) Work the recommended assignments listed at Canvas.
         3) Keep up with the course. This is a comprehensive course, and the material builds upon itself. In
              addition, much of the material is highly detailed. As a result, it is highly difficult to cram this material
              at the end. You should expect to study a minimum of 6 hours (outside of class) per week to pass the
              course.
                     You are expected to exert a high level of effort for learning the material.
                                             Get ready to be challenged.
                                                                                                                        4


                                                   University Policies
Students with Disabilities
Students with disabilities may request appropriate academic accommodations from the Division of Diversity and
Community Engagement, Services for Students with Disabilities, 512-471-6259,
http://diversity.utexas.edu/disability/.
Diversity and Inclusion
It is my intent that students from all diverse backgrounds and perspectives be well served by this course, that
students’ learning needs be addressed and that the diversity that students bring to this class can be comfortably
expressed and be viewed as a resource, strength and benefit to all students.
Religious Holy Days
By UT Austin policy, you must notify me of your pending absence at least fourteen days prior to the date of
observance of a religious holy day. If you must miss a class, an examination, a work assignment, or a project in
order to observe a religious holy day, you will be given an opportunity to complete the missed work within a
reasonable time after the absence.
Policy on Scholastic Dishonesty
The McCombs School of Business has no tolerance for acts of scholastic dishonesty. The responsibilities of
both students and faculty with regard to scholastic dishonesty are described in detail in the BBA Program’s
Statement on Scholastic Dishonesty at http://my.mccombs.utexas.edu/BBA/Code-of-Ethics. By teaching this
course, I have agreed to observe all faculty responsibilities described there. By enrolling in this class, you have
agreed to observe all student responsibilities described there. If the application of the Statement on Scholastic
Dishonesty to this class or its assignments is unclear in any way, it is your responsibility to ask me for
clarification. Students who violate University rules on scholastic dishonesty are subject to disciplinary penalties,
including the possibility of failure in the course and/or dismissal from the University. Since dishonesty harms
the individual, all students, the integrity of the University, and the value of our academic brand, policies on
scholastic dishonesty will be strictly enforced. You should refer to the Student Conduct and Academic Integrity
website at http://deanofstudents.utexas.edu/conduct/ to access the official University policies and procedures on
scholastic dishonesty as well as further elaboration on what constitutes scholastic dishonesty.
Campus Safety
Please note the following key recommendations regarding emergency evacuation, provided by the Office of
Campus Safety and Security. More info at: https://preparedness.utexas.edu/.
      Occupants of buildings on The University of Texas at Austin campus are required to evacuate buildings
         and assemble outside when a fire alarm is activated.
      Familiarize yourself with all exit doors of each classroom and building you may occupy.
      If you need evacuation assistance, inform the instructor in writing asap.
      In the event of an evacuation, follow the instruction of faculty or class instructors.
      Do not re-enter a building unless given instructions by Austin or UT police or fire authorities.
Behavior Concerns Advice Line (BCAL): 512-232-5050 or on-line.
In case of emergency, further information will be available at: http://www.utexas.edu/emergency.
                                                                                                                     5


                                  ACC 326 Spring 2019 Tentative Schedule
Week      Class Day     Chapter in            Topic                                             Assignment
                        Textbook                                                                & Homework
  1          1/23       Chapter 1             Introduction to the course, Syllabus,             Read the
                                              Financial Reporting Overview                      syllabus
  2          1/28       Chapter 2             Basic Assumptions and Principles of Financial     Syllabus quiz;
                                              Reporting                                         Hw 2 due
             1/30       Chapter 3             The Accounting Information System (Review)
  3           2/4       Chapter 4             Income Statement                                  Hw 3 due
              2/6
  4          2/11       Chapter 5             Balance Sheet and Statement of Cash Flows         Hw 4 due
             2/13
  5          2/18       Catch up / Review
             2/20       First Exam
  6          2/25       Chapter 19            Income taxes                                      Hw 5 due
             2/27
  7           3/4       Chapter 14            Long-Term Debt                                    Hw 6 due
              3/6
  8          3/11       Chapter 14            Long-Term Debt                                    Hw 7 due
             3/13
  9          3/25       Chapter 15            Stockholders’ Equity                              Hw 8 due
             3/27
 10           4/1       Catch up / Review
              4/3       Second Exam
 11           4/8       Chapter 16            Dilutive Securities and Earnings Per Share        Hw 9 due
             4/10                             (EPS)
 12          4/15       Chapter 16            Stock Compensation Plans                          Hw 10 due
             4/17
 13          4/22       Chapter 21            Leases                                            Hw 11 due
             4/24
 14          4/29       Chapter 17            Intercompany Investments and Derivatives          Hw 12 due
              5/1
 15           5/6
              5/8       Third Exam
         The descriptions and timelines (including assignment due dates and exam dates) contained
   in this syllabus are subject to change at the discretion of the Professor. Any change will be announced
                                      at the course homepage at Canvas.
                                                                                                               6
